AEC 105
1 hour
Student-Athlete Academic Support Seminar
This course is designed to prepare student-athletes for academic success at
Taylor University.  Information about essential skills for academic achievement
will be shared through lectures, small group discussion, homework assignments,
and guest speakers.  This seminar is required to earn credit in KIN 200Z Athletic
Participation.

AEC 140
1 hour
Academic Reading
An exploration and application of reading strategies to help students engage
academic reading for more effective reading rate, comprehension and retention.
The course will help students establish appropriate reading skills for academic
success in college.  Students taking this course to meet the reading proficiency
required by the university must pass the reading proficiency test in order to pass this
course.

AEC 180
1 hour
Applied Learning Techniques—Verbal
Emphasizes techniques for the improvement of study skills, listening and note
taking, reading and comprehension.  The course meets two hours a week, with
the third hour reserved for extra assignments.  Work is completed in a lab
setting.  May be repeated one time only.  Pass/fail only.

AEC 185
1 hour
Applied Learning Techniques—Math
Emphasizes techniques for the improvement of math study skills, listening and
note taking and mathematics skills.  The course meets two hours a week, with a
third hour reserved for make-up or extra assignments.  May be repeated one time only.
Pass/fail only.

AEC 190
1 hour
Foundations of Learning and Academic Engagement
This course is specifically designed to help increase learning and academic success for
students on academic probation. Students on academic probation will meet
individually with a faculty or staff member in the Academic Enrichment Center
throughout the entire semester. Topics covered will emphasize deep learning,
academic engagement and responsibility, and study skills.

AEC 280
1 hour
Applied Learning Techniques—Verbal
Emphasizes techniques for the improvement of study skills, listening and note
taking, reading and comprehension.  The course meets two hours a week, with
the third hour reserved for extra assignments.  Work is completed in a lab
setting.  May be repeated one time only.  Pass/fail only.

AEC 285
1 hour
Applied Learning Techniques—Math
Emphasizes techniques for the improvement of math study skills, listening and note
taking and mathematics skills.  The course meets two hours a week, with a third hour
reserved for make-up or extra assignments.  May be repeated one time only.  Pass/fail only.

AEC 350
1 hour
Introduction to Peer Leadership in the First-Year Seminar
An introduction to the role of a peer leader within the first-year seminar.  Topics include
peer education, group facilitation, discussion leading, lesson planning and personal
leadership development.  May be repeated twice for a total of 3 credits.

AEC 351
2 hours
Peer Leadership in the First-Year Seminar I
This course is designed to support the beginner peer leader within the first-year seminar.
A primary focus of the course will be the study and application of small group leadership
skills related to the Foundations of the Christian Liberal Arts course as well as personal
leadership development for the student.

AEC 352
2 hours
Peer Leadership in the First-Year Seminar II
This course is designed to support the intermediate peer leader within the first-year
seminar.  A primary focus of the course will be the study and application of small group
leadership skills related to the Foundations of the Christian Liberal Arts course as well
as personal leadership development for the student.  Assignments will engage the second
year leader in supporting beginner peer leaders.

AEC 353
2 hours
Peer Leadership in the First-Year Seminar III
This course is designed to support the advanced peer leader within the first-year
seminar.  A primary focus of the course will be the study and application of small group
leadership skills related to the Foundations of the Christian Liberal Arts course as well
as personal leadership development for the student.  Assignments will engage the third
year leader in supporting beginner and intermediate peer leaders.

AEC 410
1 hour
Speed Reading
Emphasis on speed reading techniques and effective comprehension.  Meets two hours a week.
Prerequisite: 13th grade-level reading; not open to freshmen.  Pass/fail only.

AEC 440
1 hour
Advanced Test Preparation
Individualized instruction and review of both quantitative and verbal materials in
preparation for passing exams such as the GRE, GMAT, LSAT, and MCAT.  Meets twice
a week for seven weeks.  Pass/fail only.

ESL 100
1 hour
ESL Orientation
Taken during a student’s first semester in the ESL Program, ESL Orientation
provides instruction and a discussion space on academic, cultural, and spiritual
issues facing ESL students.

ESL 101
2 hours
English Grammar
This course integrates classroom grammar instruction with meaningful,
individualized grammar practice in an independent lab setting.

ESL 102
2 hours
TOEFL Preparation
This course provides students with the skills and strategies needed to succeed on
the Test of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL) through test simulations,
vocabulary building, and four-skill instruction and practice.

ESL 103
3 hours
Class Audit
This course, to be taken in the semester immediately preceding admittance to a
degree-seeking Taylor University program, gives students extended exposure to a
Taylor University class of their choosing. Students will learn the content of the
course as well as gain insight into the linguistic and cultural demands of an American
university.

ESL 104
2 hours
Advanced Academic Vocabulary
For English students who have attained their desired level of English proficiency,
but who are planning to enter graduate or professional schools where the
curriculum will be taught in English, this course provides a supplemental vocabulary
pertaining to activities and subjects commonly encountered in these programs (e.g.,
research terminology).

ESL 105
2 hours
American English Pronunciation
Non-native English speakers typically have particular sounds that are troublesome
depending on their native language.  This course provides instruction in clearly and
correctly pronouncing these sounds that are important to communicating
effectively in English.

ESL 106
3 hours
American Pop Culture
This course is designed to cause students to reflect on their home culture while
learning through discussion, lectures, and experience key aspects of American pop
culture.

ESL 107
2 hours
Academic Listening Strategies
An intensive academic listening tutorial that prepares advanced level English
language learners for American undergraduate-level lectures and classroom
interactions through authentic listening texts.

ESL 108
2 hours
Academic Reading Strategies
An intensive academic reading tutorial that prepares advanced level students for
college undergraduate-level reading requirements through attention to strategies
for reading and using authentic texts.

ESL 109
2 hours
Academic Presentation Skills
This course provides instruction and practice in the speaking, organizational, and
academic skills required to make successful academic presentations in American
universities.

ESL 110
4 hours
Academic Reading and Writing
Through this course, students will be introduced to the world of academic reading
and writing in an American university. Students will learn reading skills necessary to
comprehend a text as well as strategies to manage a typical reading load for a
university student.  Students will also receive practice and instruction in composing
many different forms of writing assignments found in American classrooms.

ESL 111
4 hours
Academic Listening and Speaking
This course provides students with the tools necessary to thrive in an American
university, in and out of the classroom. Students will gain focused instruction and
experience in speaking skills and listening skills through practical assignments that
tailor the classroom experience to fit each student’s academic interests and needs.
Students will learn and practice classroom communication, group work,
presentation skills, note-taking strategies, classroom lecture comprehension, and
conversational listening.

ESL 200
3 hours
Advanced Academic Language Skills
This integrated skills course ensures that English Language Learners are equipped
with the linguistic tools necessary to meet the demands of an American academic
environment. Students will receive focused instruction and practice in advanced
academic speaking, listening, reading, and writing through college-level books,
lectures, film, and other forms of academic media.

ESL 201
3 hours
The American Classroom
This course prepares advanced students for the university classroom through
content-based instruction that closely follows the curriculum format of Taylor
University classrooms.  Students will gain a broad perspective of historical, religious,
and societal influences on American educational culture through lectures, class
discussions, and practical assignments.

ESL 202
3 hours
Academic English Preparation for Biblical Literacy
Designed to prepare advanced English language learners for the academic rigors of
Taylor University’s Biblical literature courses (survey of the Old and New
Testaments). It is not an introduction to the literature, content, and history of the
Bible, but rather is a course that builds necessary academic reading, writing,
listening, and study skills for success in these courses in subsequent semesters.

CSP 101
3 hours
Chinese I
This course in introductory Chinese focuses on acquiring survival fluency in spoken and
written Chinese.  The emphasis is on the spoken form of Mandarin Chinese, the national
language of China.  This course is only available as part of the China Semester Program.

CSP 102
4 hours
Chinese II
This course is designed to develop a student’s competency in listening, speaking,
reading, and writing the Chinese Mandarin language; the primary emphasis will be
on listening and speaking.  This course is only available as part of the China Semester
Program.  Prerequisite: CHI 101 or CSP 101.

CSP 201
3 hours
Intermediate Chinese I
See CSP 102.  Prerequisite: CHI 102 or CSP 102.

CSP 202
3 hours
Intermediate Chinese II
See CSP 102.  Prerequisite: CHI 201 or CSP 201.

50
CSP 250C
1 hour
Chinese Calligraphy
Long considered the highest art form in Chinese culture, this course is an
introduction to the fundamentals of Chinese calligraphy for non-art students.
Students will learn about the origin and construction of Chinese characters, the
significance of calligraphy in Chinese culture, and the primary styles of Chinese
calligraphy.  Students will work under a Chinese calligraphy teacher to develop
technique and produce calligraphy.  This course is only available as part of the China
Semester Program and meets a foundational core aesthetic literacy requirement.

CSP 310
3 hours
Chinese History and Culture
A course designed to acquaint students thoroughly with the Chinese worldviews,
political system, religious situation and philosophy through Chinese history from
the earliest era to the end of Qing Dynasty, and deepen the understanding of
modern Chinese society.  This course is only available as part of the China Semester
Program and meets the foundational core history requirement.

CSP 381
3 hours
China Study Tour
Students will travel to several destinations within mainland China and Hong Kong to
observe cultural and economic activity in one of the world’s fastest-transitioning
economies.  They will visit companies, interact with Chinese students, and observe
cultural differences.  In addition, they will have the opportunity to share what is
possibly America’s most sought-after commodity–English language competency.  This
course is only available as part of the China Semester Program and meets the foundational
core cross-cultural requirement.

VIS xxx
17 hours
Consortium Visitor
Contemporary Music Center
The Contemporary Music Center, a subsidiary of Greenville University, located in Nashville, Tennessee, provides a curriculum and community designed to
speak to the heads, hearts, and souls of young musicians and aspiring music executives.  In addition to seminars, lectures, and practicum experiences, great
attention is given to the actual creation and marketing of original music.  Designed as an artists’ community, the program seeks to develop artists and music
executives with a Christ-centered vision for music content, production, and delivery.
In addition to core courses listed below, students select courses from the Artist Track, Business Track, or Technical Track to earn 16 hours of credit.
CMC 300
3 hours
Faith, Music and Culture
The purpose of this course is to help students develop a Christian approach to the
creation, marketing, and consumption of contemporary music.  While engaging in
studies of theory, history, and criticism, students explore the concept of culture
and the nature of popular culture.  Students examine popular art and music in
contemporary aesthetic, social, cultural, and industrial contexts, and explore the
issues involved in relating faith and worldview to the production and criticism of
commercial music.


CMC 301
3 hours
Inside the Music Industry
Through readings, lectures, and seminars delivered by leading industry figures, the
course will give up-to-the-minute insight into the inner workings of the music industry.
Emphasis will be given to career possibilities and the gifts and skills required to succeed
in each of the major areas.  Students will gain an understanding of the structure and
methodologies of a typical U.S. record company.

CMC 302
1 hour
Practicum: Contemporary Music Center Tour
Each student will participate in an intensive week-long road trip to a major music
market.  Briefings, tours, and meetings will be arranged with leading record
companies, artist management firms, booking agencies, recording studios, concert
promoters, writers, producers, and artists in various cities.

CMC 401
3 hours
Studio Recording
Artists will work via both the classroom and lab with faculty, other students, and
visiting experts to learn how to produce, record, mix, and edit recordings in a
 professional multi-track studio.
CMC 402
3 hours
Performance
In consultation with staff and executive track students, artists will develop a live
concert presentation that best utilizes their gifts as musicians, entertainers, and
communicators.  Both informal and public performances will be presented
throughout the semester.
CMC 400
3 hours
Essentials of Songwriting
Artists will receive classroom instruction, participate in directed study with staff,
and work in collaboration with other students to develop their use of form, melody,
harmony, rhythm, and lyric.  Emphasis will be placed on the song as the vehicle for
the artist’s creative exploration and public communication.

CMC 403
3 hours
Strategic Management
Through lecture, text, and visiting music industry experts, executive track students
will gain an understanding of the economic, creative, and spiritual elements critical
to a career in contemporary music.  Students identify their gifts and develop a long-
term career plan.  Students prepare materials necessary to pitch an artist to a
 record company and negotiate a mock recording contract.
CMC 404
3 hours
Music Business Survey
Executive track students will learn how to: (1) create a label business plan; (2) analyze and
forecast trends in popular music; (3) assemble a successful artist roster; and, in tandem
with the artists, (4) plan, budget, and produce recording sessions.
CMC 405
3 hours
Advanced Media Marketing
Through classroom instruction and presentations by visiting industry experts,
executive track students will become familiar with the role of packaging, retail
point-of-purchase materials, publicity, advertising, radio and video promotion, and
Internet marketing and tour support in the marketing and sale of recorded music.
Students will develop comprehensive marketing plans for each semester’s artist
recordings.
k
CMC 406
3 hours
Advanced Studio Recording
Each engineer in this course will work with a group of artists for the entire semester,
recording, mixing and mastering their songs.  Engineers are expected to show
 proficiency in mic placement and the musical application of software plug-ins.
CMC 407
3 hours
Audio Engineering
This course is designed to train students for entry-level positions as a live sound
engineer / front-of-house or monitor engineer.  Each engineer must be able to
complete line and sound checks quickly and reliably, trouble shoot problems and
understand console and system signal flow.
CMC 408
3 hours
Concert Production
This course is designed to train students for entry-level positions in live concert
lighting.  Students will manage power distribution, DMX control of lighting fixtures
and ultimately the properties of light and dispersion that artfully blend to create
alternate forms of reality.
BIB 203
3 hours
In the Footsteps of Paul
A study of the biblical background and contemporary significance of cities Paul visited and wrote to in Greece and Turkey or Greece and Italy.  This course may count for BIB 210
or a major or minor elective.  Meets the foundational core cross-cultural requirement.  Offered January interterm.

HGU xxx
12 hours
Study in Korea


HEA 370
3 hours
Heart Institute
Meets foundational core life science requirement and cross-cultural requirement.  Offered January interterm.

FMA 365
3 hours


FMA 493
12-13 hours
Internship

HKB xxx
17 hours
Study in Hong Kong
GBS 325
3 hours
Peace and Conflict: Peacebuilding and Reconciliation
This course studies peace and conflict through an interdisciplinary lens, examining
the impact of conflict across multiple sectors of society—religious, social,
economic, and political.  The impact of conflict on civic society and individuals will
be examined through educational activities that explore identity, peacebuilding,
conflict resolution, and mediation.  Meets foundational core general social science
requirement.

ISP 200
1 hour
Hill Climbing
This course is designed to introduce students to a variety of basic techniques and
principles necessary for a safe and enjoyable hiking experience, as well as to
promote lifelong activity that aids in developing a healthy lifestyle.  Particular areas
of content include gear selection, basic land navigation skills, hiking technique, trip
planning, “Leave No Trace” ethic, and first aid.  Students complete a variety of
reading assignments and keep a journal of their hiking experiences.  Prerequisite:
EXS 111, KIN 100, or KIN 221.  Meets a foundational core requirement.

ISP 220
3 hours
Contemporary Ireland
This course entails an investigation into the theory and application of
contemporary Irish society.  It includes a study of the geographic, social, cultural,
political, artistic and religious aspects of Ireland.  Attention will also be paid to an
understanding of historical conflict and reconciliation, especially as it is currently
being played out in Northern Ireland, and its effects on the people in the Republic.
Exploration of these topics occurs through involvement with Irish people,
engagement in cultural activities, studying the history, culture, geography and
literature of Ireland, conversations with one another and personal journaling.
Meets the foundational core civic engagement requirement.

ISP 225
3 hours
History of Ireland
This course deals with the different people who became permanent settlers in
Ireland over the centuries and the contribution that each has made to the
development of an Irish society and economy, as well as a distinctive Irish artistic
and political life.  The early lectures consider the Celts, Vikings and Anglo-
Normans, but the principal focus is on the modern centuries, with a detailed
treatment of English and Scottish Protestant settlements in Ireland and the
interaction of these settlers and their descendants with the Catholic population.
Special attention is given to the major conflicts that occurred, especially those of
1642-52, the 1790s, and the current conflict in Northern Ireland.  Finally,
consideration is given to the Anglo-Irish War of Independence and the Irish Civil
War.  Meets the foundational core history requirement.  History majors who have
already fulfilled the foundational core requirement may take the course for upper-division
credit, by approval of the instructor.

ISP 230
3 hours
Irish Literature
This course concentrates upon literature written by Irish writers within Irish contexts
and landscapes—intellectual and emotional when not physical.  Assignments exploit
unique opportunities available while studying in Ireland itself, adjacent to England.
More complicated is the colonial influence upon Ireland, the island’s currently divided
space, “the troubles,” and the connection between high art and popular expression.
Thus, a focus of the course will be how the search for a literary voice not only parallels,
but indeed facilitates the search for a national Irish identity.  Acknowledging writers’
interest in Gaelic language and culture, students read works in English.  Noting the
role of musical performances in pubs and the rhetoric of the public sphere, the course
concentrates upon fiction, poetry, and drama.  Meets the foundational core literature
requirement.  English majors who have already fulfilled the foundational core requirement
may take the course for upper-division credit, by approval of the instructor.

ISP 250
1 hour
Participation in the Arts
This course introduces the student to part of the Irish cultural heritage through dance and
music.  Students learn the basics of Irish dancing and playing the bodhran drum.  Meets the
foundational core participation in the arts requirement.

ISP 320
2 hours
Living Cross Culturally
This course helps students reflect on their values, attitudes and behaviors and those
of their home culture in comparison to the Irish culture.  Students are encouraged to
develop understanding of and adaptation to a different culture, as well as empathize
with persons from that culture.  Personal development through this process is
emphasized.  Meets the foundational core cross-cultural requirement.

ISP 325
3 hours
History of Ireland
See ISP 225.

ISP 330
4 hours
Irish Literature
See ISP 230.

ISP 350
3 hours
History and Culture of Ireland
Students are introduced to Irish culture, history, society, and modern Ireland. Students
are encouraged to develop understanding of and adaptation to a different culture as
well as empathize with persons from that culture.

ISP 355
3 hours
Celtic Christianity
A survey of Christian belief as developed during the history of the Church, with a
special focus on Medieval Christianity in Ireland.  Meets the foundational core requirement
of REL 313.


International Business Study Tour
Business sponsors this business study tour during January interterm or in the summer.  Students visit various international sites and use these locations as
their classroom to study trade, economics, and other business topics.

ITB 381
3-4 hours
International Business Study Tour
This study tour of selected international locations focuses on regional trade,
economics, and other business topics.  Issues of cultural differences, conflicts,
compromises, and international cooperation are examined.  Throughout, the
cultural dimension of international business dealings is emphasized.  Instructor
permission required.  Prerequisites: MKT 231; ECO 202; and sophomore standing within
a business major/minor.  Offered January interterm or Summer.

Jerusalem University College
Jerusalem University College (JUC) offers an opportunity for Fall or Spring semester studies in the ancient city of Jerusalem.  A choice of several course
offerings is available, particularly in the area of Biblical and International Studies.  Students have the opportunity to study Scripture in context, view biblical
sites, understand the Arab-Israeli conflict, and experience modern and ancient cultures.  This program provides a basic understanding of the land and people
of the Bible and of the Middle East.  Availability of the program is dependent upon review of current security conditions.  Until official transcripts are received, students
will be enrolled in the following course:

JUC xxx
17 hours
Holy Land Studies/Israel
53
LCC International University
LCC International University, formerly Lithuania Christian College, is located in the beautiful port city of Klaipeda, Lithuania. This one-semester program is
available during the Fall or Spring semester.  Students live in an urban European setting with roommates from throughout Europe, and study with students
from over 20 countries.  The semester includes programmed travel to Russia, Latvia, Estonia, and various sites in Lithuania.

The program allows Taylor students to enroll in 12-17 credit hours of university courses, including subjects in business, English, psychology, sociology, and
biblical studies.  A wide variety of courses fulfilling foundational core requirements are also available.

Until official transcripts are received, students will be enrolled in the following course:

LCC xxx
17 hours
LCC International University


Lighthouse Projects
Since 1972 the Lighthouse program has been engaging students in carefully chosen international service-learning projects as they minister Christ’s redemptive
love, grace, and truth to a world in need.  The program enables students to step out of the familiar in faith, study and build relationships in other cultures, develop
and exercise their gifts and abilities, expand their global perspective, and explore vocational calling.  As servant learners, teams partner with on-field ministries
helping to implement their long-term ministry goals.  Teams are selected in the spring for service projects the following January.

During the Fall, students take a one-credit-hour course in cross-cultural ministry and team building.  In January, students earn three cross-cultural credits while
engaging in work projects, compassionate ministries, community development, teaching English, performing arts, medical missions, evangelism, discipleship, and
other ministries under the direction of faculty sponsors and field leaders.  Lighthouse is a ministry of Taylor World Outreach; refer to the Taylor World Outreach
in the Student Development section of this catalog.


IAS 120
1 hour
Introduction to International Ministry
To prepare for Lighthouse projects, students study the concept of culture,
American cultural distinctives, and the cultural, religious, and historical
characteristics of Lighthouse host nations.  Students examine the components of
effective intercultural ministry and communicating faith in Christ cross-culturally.
Attention is given to personal character, spiritual life, commitment and teamwork
essential for effective service.  Enrollment by permission of instructor.  Grade only.
Offered Fall semester.
IAS 320
3 hours
Cross-Cultural Outreach
Students are immersed in another culture and provide needed service to gain cross-
cultural understanding, interpersonal and skill development and spiritual growth.
Emphasis is given to reflection on God’s global purposes, intercultural relationships
and life stewardship.  Prerequisite: IAS 120 or permission of instructor.  Meets foundational
core cross-cultural requirement.  Offered January interterm.
Literary London
A study of literature and culture is offered in England annually by the Department of English and Modern Languages during January interterm.  Students may
receive credit in foundational core, literature, or cross-cultural studies.  The group focuses its activities in central London with field trips to surrounding areas
such as Stratford-upon-Avon, Canterbury, Oxford, Dover, and Salisbury.  Students are encouraged to attend plays and musicals and to participate in British life.

ENG 233
3 hours
Literary London
An annual January-term course that travels to London and elsewhere in the United
Kingdom, enriching the reading and discussion of assigned works of British
Literature by experiencing the locations and culture that helped shape those works.
Meets foundational core literature requirement.  Enrollment with permission of instructor.
Offered January interterm.


Los Angeles Film Studies Center
The Los Angeles Film Studies Center (LAFSC), located adjacent to Burbank, California, provides a values-based education for skills acquisition and on-the-
job training for students interested in the various aspects of the film industry.  Serving as a Fall or Spring semester extension campus for the Council for
Christian Colleges and Universities member colleges, the LAFSC incorporates a semester-study program with internship experiences to equip students to
be positive Christian presences in the film industry.  Students take three core courses: FSC 305; 332; 492; and one elective course chosen from: FSC 312,
327, 340, or 360.  Applicability to a major must be determined in advance.

FSC 305
4 hours
Hollywood Production Workshop
Students work collaboratively in groups to create a festival-ready piece including all
the legal documentation and rights to enable the finished production to qualify for
festival submission.  The course offers students the opportunity to make a motion
picture production using Hollywood locations, resources and protocol.  All
students participate in at least one key role in the production process.  Designed
to meet the needs of both novice and experienced students, this course is taught
by professional, experienced Christian filmmakers with credits in the Hollywood
industry.


FSC 312
3 hours
Professional Screenwriting
This course offers an introduction to contemporary screenwriting including an
understanding of dramatic structure, character and dialog development and the
writing process.  Students complete a full-length screenplay for a feature film or
“movie-of-the-week.” Emphasis is given to the role of Christian faith and values as
they relate to script content.

FSC 327
3 hours
Narrative Storytelling
Concentrating on the art form of narrative storytelling, the course places special
emphasis on the visual aspect of the discipline.  Two tracks are offered in the course.
The Structural track covers topics ranging from the history of story in culture and
film to the mechanics of story creation to the development of story-writing skills.
Instruction in the technical story track focuses on advanced methods of
cinematography and post-production and how those techniques can be used to
improve visual storytelling.  After the core instructional period in each track, students
from both tracks are reunited and will have the opportunity to hone their narrative
analysis skills, participate in workshop style labs and make two short films that
 demonstrate their ability to utilize storytelling theory on screen.
FSC 332
3 hours
Faith and Artistic Development in Film
This course focuses on the integration of faith and learning as well as developing the
necessary skills for analysis of the culture of Hollywood.  The first section of the class
emphasizes the eye: discovering your own identity, looking at film’s historical impact,
spiritual impact, audience trends, the auteur movement, and vision in film, as well as
providing a basis for heart preparation for production.  The second section of the course
emphasizes the heart: ethics, relationships and communication, passion and art. The last
section of the course emphasizes the hand, exploring the collaborative process in
Hollywood Production Workshop and Motion Picture Production: roles and aspects of
production, the production process, relationships on set, and communication. All
students participate in a team-taught lecture seminar led by the faculty of the Los
Angeles Film Studies Center.
54
FSC 340
3 hours
Professional Acting for the Camera
An advanced workshop in the practice and process of acting for the camera aimed
at students who have a desire to pursue acting as a career.  Instruction includes an
overview of current camera acting techniques and thorough discussion of the art
of acting.  The class primarily consists of acting scene work with all scenes being
filmed and critiqued on the big screen.  Students will also be required to pursue
roles in student and independent films.  Several class sessions throughout the
course will be devoted to the business of acting for film and television in the
Hollywood entertainment industry with an emphasis given to developing the
materials and relationships necessary for a successful career.

FSC 360
3 hours
Independent Study
This course may be set up by special request and arrangement.  In order to be considered,
students may submit a portfolio and a project proposal.  Students with approved projects
will be appointed a mentor who is a professional in the Hollywood industry to supervise
the project.  The number of independent studies offered each semester will be
determined by LAFSC faculty, the availability of a suitable mentor and approval from the
home school’s film/communications department head.  Projects could include further
development of a portfolio or reel, critical research, or a senior thesis project.

FSC 492
6 hours
Internship: Inside Hollywood
Students complete an unpaid internship in some aspect of the Hollywood
entertainment industry.  Real-life exposure is provided to the business through
placement with major Hollywood companies.


Middle East Studies Program
The Council for Christian Colleges & Universities sponsors a Middle East Studies Program (MESP) currently located in Amman, Jordan.  Junior and senior
students are exposed to the vast resources of the region during the 15-week Fall or Spring semester.  Students are exposed to the complex issues behind
regional conflict, gain an awareness of the people and culture of the Middle East, and are educated on the global dimension of the Islamic faith.  The program
may include travel to Egypt, Israel/Palestine, Lebanon, Morocco, Spain, Tunisia, or Turkey, dependent upon regional conditions.  Involvement in a local service
project is an important component of the program.  Availability of the program is dependent upon review of current security conditions.

MES 100
4 hours
Introduction to Arabic Language
This course helps students acquire basic skills in Arabic.  The course emphasizes
the practical use of the language, encouraging interaction with the locals through
assignments and service projects.  Students are provided with solid introduction to
the colloquial grammar and a substantial vocabulary as students take more than 50
hours of instruction.

MES 310
4 hours
People and Cultures of the Middle East
This course seeks to acquaint students to the variety of peoples and cultures found
in the Middle East.  Literature, music, dance, and food are integrated into the
learning experience.  Students also learn about pressing issues, from gender to war
to economic development, that currently animate the many religious and political
communities they visit.  The course examines the basic structure of historical and
contemporary societies and cultures with special emphasis on those found in Egypt,
Jordan, Syria, and Turkey.
MES 312
4 hours
Conflict and Change in the Middle East
The purpose of this course is to help students understand the historical, political and religious
transformations that have occurred in the last century.  The Arab-Israeli conflict will receive
special emphasis with the goal of helping students understand the complexity of the issues
surrounding the current attempts to establish a lasting peace.  The course includes an
extended travel component throughout the region.

MES 322
4 hours
Islamic Thought and Practice
An emphasis on contemporary expressions of Islam in the Middle East.
This course examines many dimensions of Islamic faith-historical, legal, doctrinal, popular, and
behavioral-from early times to the present.  While emphasis is on the early period and its
influence on latter events and people, it also attempts to relate these early developments to
contemporary issues in the Middle East like the impact of colonialism, gender equality,
modernization, development, and democracy.

Orvieto Semester
The Orvieto Semester through Gordon College takes an interdisciplinary approach to the study of art, art history, history, and theology in the historic and
picturesque setting of Orvieto, Italy.

All students take an introductory course (Disegno in Orvieto) that challenges students to look at, listen to, draw, and write about Orvieto.  Students then select
three among a set of courses offered in the visual arts and humanities.  In addition, students with no background in the Italian language will be expected to take a
2-credit tutorial-based course in Italian Language Studies.  Students earn up to 18 hours of course credit.

Until official transcripts are received, students will be enrolled in the following course:

ORV xxx
18 hours
Study in Orvieto, Italy


Oxford Study Program
The Taylor Oxford Study Program offers an alternative approach to major study during January interterm.  Learning is facilitated by a tutorial method at
England’s Oxford University.  The program consists of various group meetings to assimilate British culture.  Each Taylor student meets weekly with an
Oxford tutor on a topic of the student’s choice for Taylor credit.  Students are hosted in homes of British church families.

OSP 370
3 hours
Oxford Special Topics

Scholars’ Semester in Oxford

The Scholars’ Semester in Oxford (SSO) is a partnership with the Council for Christian Colleges & Universities.  SSO presents an opportunity to learn about
literature, the classics, history, theology, philosophy, and more in this city dedicated to scholarship.  Through work with academic tutors, students hone
their skills and delve into the areas that interest them most.  As a visiting student of Oxford University, participants earn 17 credit hours as a member of
Wycliffe Hall.  Due to Oxford’s intense academic environment, a minimum GPA of 3.70 is required.

SSO xxx
4 hours
Selected Topics in British Literature


SSO 310
4 hours
Undergraduate Research Seminar
Students prepare a research plan on a topic of their choice; they reflect on
methodological issues within their discipline; and integrate material covered in
literature and elsewhere, with a view to produce a piece of research that can help
further their scholarly activities beyond Oxford.

SSO 320
6 hours
Primary Tutorial
This course, chosen in the same field of study as the integrative seminar, is typically
one-on-one, supplemented by Oxford faculty lectures.  The tutorial is usually based
on the presentation of one short essay responding to an assigned question, and is
carried out as a conversation between the tutor and the student.  Offered tutorials
 cover a range of topics.
SSO 330
3 hours
Secondary Tutorial
Similar in structure to the primary tutorial, the secondary tutorial covers a different
subject matter.  Tutorials offered in a broad range of topics.

SIS xxx
17 hours
Study in Spain


USP xxx
16 hours
Study in Uganda
In addition to the core course listed, students select courses from the Uganda
Studies Emphasis (USE) or Social Work Emphasis (SWE).

USP 300
4 hours
Faith and Action in the Ugandan Context
This course combines a traditional classroom component (consisting of reading,
discussion, small group processing, and lecture) with a broad spectrum of experiential
learning (e.g., living and studying with Ugandan students; home stays with Ugandan
families; travel to various regions of Uganda and Rwanda; and exposure to both
missionaries and Ugandans involved in various social services).

YSJ xxx
15 hours
Study in York
HNR 120
2 hours
Global Paradigms of Leadership
This seminar style course will explore leadership from diverse, global perspectives.
Students will engage leaders and leadership styles from other cultures, studying how
the Christian faith integrates into diverse leadership structures.

HNR 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

HNR 225
1 hour
Honors Colloquium
The Honors colloquium is an interdisciplinary course which brings together a
group of like-minded students to discuss a variety of topics with a focus on the
year's theme.  Requirements for this course include attending a variety of campus
lectures and events and engaging in dialogue around “big ideas” in culture,
Christianity, and public discourse.  Students will have the opportunity to facilitate
discussion of a topic of their choosing.  May be repeated for credit.

HNR 264
4 hours
Going Up to Glory: Migration and Voice in African American Lives
This interdisciplinary course presents an integrative survey of African American
literature and history from African origins through the modern civil rights movement.
The historical focus is on the three major migrations African Americans have
experienced during this period.  Literary selections from multiple genres will span
these eras and highlight the development and patterns of African American voice.
Meets both the foundational core literature and history requirements.  Prerequisite: ENG 110.

HNR 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.
HNR 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

HNR 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

HNR 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Offered primarily during Summer.

HNR 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such
facilities as the library or laboratory.

HNR 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with
emphasis on directed readings and discussion.

HNR 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.
Open to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.
IAS 102
1 hour
Orientation to Distance Learning
This course is an introduction to Blackboard, TU Online history and staff, and
University policies that pertain to the distance learner.  An overview of learning
styles and time management strategies make up the content of the course which
is supplemented by John Stott's Your Mind Matters.  Students will use Blackboard
communication tools to complete assignments.  This course is offered through Taylor
University Online (TUO).

IAS 110
4 hours
Foundations of the Christian Liberal Arts
This course is an introduction to the liberal arts, the integration of faith and
learning, the foundational core, improved learning, and the transition to college.
Through large group lectures and small group discussion sessions, the themes
of right relationship with God, self, others, and the world are developed.
Required of all students.  Meets foundational core requirement.  Offered Fall semester.

IAS 111
3 hours
God, Humanity, and Knowledge
An interdisciplinary introduction to the liberal arts and the integration of faith
and learning.  Through lectures, readings, films, and discussion, the course
intentionally seeks to challenge students to be more confident in the
development of a meaningful belief system.  For students enrolled in two-week pre-
college summer program.  Meets foundational core requirement for IAS 110.  Offered
Summer term.

IAS 120
1 hour
Introduction to International Ministry
To prepare for Lighthouse projects, students study the concept of culture,
American cultural distinctives, and the cultural, religious and historical
characteristics of Lighthouse host nations.  Students examine the components
of effective intercultural ministry and communicating faith in Christ cross-
culturally.  Attention is given to personal character, spiritual life, commitment,
and teamwork essential for effective service.  Offered Fall semester.  Grade only.

IAS 125
1 hour
Short-Term Missions Engagement
This course is designed to prepare students for and involve them in a spring break
ministry experience within the framework of service-learning.  Students will receive
training specific to the ministry in which they will participate, experience a pre-trip
local service experience with their team, participate in an 8-10 day spring break
missions project, and reflect upon what they are learning throughout the course.
Through participation in this course, students should have a greater understanding of
an involvement in the Christian call to service.  Concepts related to a life of service
will be addressed including evangelism, cultural awareness, team dynamics, meaningful
service, reflection, debriefing, and stewardship.  Offered Spring semester.

IAS 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

IAS 230
1 hour
Issues in Science and Religion
An interdisciplinary examination of key issues underlying the relationship of
science and Christianity, focusing on issues concerning creation, the fall, the
flood, and the world in which we live today.  The course will be a focus on
general scientific concepts and theological principles involved in the integration
of faith and learning.  Counts as one elective credit in either physics or religion and
toward foundational core science credits.

IAS 231H
2 hours
Issues in Science and Religion
A more in depth interdisciplinary examination of key issues underlying the
relationship of science and Christianity, focusing on issues concerning creation,
the fall, the flood, and the world in which we live today.  The course will be a
focus on general scientific concepts and theological principles involved in the
integration of faith and learning.  Students will pursue research into a particular
issue within this area, as well as more in depth study groups.  Counts as elective
credit in both physics and religion and toward foundational core science credits.

IAS 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

IAS 320
3 hours
Cross-Cultural Outreach
Through this Lighthouse service-learning experience, students are immersed in
another culture and provide needed service to gain cross-cultural
understanding, interpersonal and skill development and spiritual growth.
Emphasis is given to reflection on God’s global purposes, intercultural
relationships and life stewardship.  Prerequisite: IAS 120 or permission of instructor.
Meets foundational core cross-cultural requirement.  Offered January interterm.

IAS 340
1-2 hours
Lewis and Related Authors Seminar
A seminar offered by the Center for the Study of C. S. Lewis and Friends
focusing on the works of authors represented in the Edwin W. Brown
Collection: C. S. Lewis, George MacDonald, Dorothy Sayers, Charles Williams,
and Owen Barfield as well as related authors.  An interdisciplinary course which
seeks to encourage scholarship and critical thinking. Specific topics vary from
semester to semester.  May be repeated three times for credit.  Open to all students.

IAS 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

IAS 373
1 hour
Conversations on Race
This course is designed to help students explore the topic of race through readings,
discussions, media presentations, and reflection on personal and field experiences.  It
will guide students in a meaningful thought process and dialogue that will allow them
to consider their own racial identity, the meaning of race in interpersonal relationships
on this campus and in society, as well as the important connection between Christian
faith and race in the church and American society.  An emphasis will be placed upon
creating a safe environment where questions and dissent will be respected and
welcomed, resulting in learning for all involved.

IAS 403
4 hours
A Christian Worldview
A foundational course designed to introduce students to a Christian worldview.
Attention is given to the definition, function, formation, and evaluation of
worldview.  The course then explores significant biblical and theological
perspectives on the ultimate issues of life, including God’s purposes for humans,
the reality of sin, God’s redemption of humanity, and the ultimate realization of
glory.  Students will also learn how the church historically has faced these issues
and how these issues have shaped the church.  This course is offered through
Taylor University Online (TUO).


IAS 495
1 hour
Senior Seminar
Senior Seminar is an integrative, interdisciplinary foundational core
requirement.  Students will register for it during either the Fall or Spring
semester of their senior year.  Meets foundational core requirement.

Library and Information Science Courses
LIS 165
3 hours
Introduction to Archives
An introduction to the purpose and practice of archives and special collections.
Emphasis is placed on the history and development of the profession, basic
collection management and preservation, working with patrons and
researchers, and digital resources.

ART 101
3 hours
Drawing I
Introduction to the fundamentals of observation and rendering, perspective, and
composition, using a variety of drawing mediums.

ART 151
3 hours
Two-Dimensional Design
A foundational course in understanding the elements and principles of two-dimensional
design composition and color theory, as well as methods for creative problem solving.
A studio-skills class utilizing a variety of mediums in a related series of projects.

ART 152
3 hours
Visual Communications
An introduction to the graphic design industry, with emphasis in visual problem
solving, a basic understanding of typography, color and composition as well as the
implementation of the various additional elements of design.

ART 154
1 hour
Digital Tools: Illustrator
This course focuses on the development of drawing and design skills using Adobe
Illustrator, the industry standard software for vector image and logo generation.

ART 156
1 hour
Digital Tools: Photoshop
This course focuses on the development of painting and image editing skills using
Adobe Photoshop, the industry standard software for bitmap image generation
and digital photo manipulation.

ART 157
1 hour
Digital Tools: InDesign
This course focuses on the development of print layout and compositing skills,
manipulating type and images, using Adobe InDesign, the industry leading software
for page layout construction and desktop publishing.

ART 160
3 hours
Contemporary Strategies in Art
This course is designed to calibrate freshman studio art majors via collaborative engagement
and exploration of processes, theories, and art works relevant to producing art in our
present age.
ART 162
1 hour
Digital Tools: Painter
An introductory course focusing on digital image creation, utilizing the drawing and painting
controls found in Corel Painter.

ART 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

ART 172
2-3 hours
Art Appreciation
A study of art through a historical survey.  This course introduces the student to the
great masters and art periods of the past while broadening the student's appreciation
and understanding of art.  Meets a foundational core aesthetic literacy requirement.  This
course is offered through Taylor University Online (TUO).

ART 203
3 hours
Drawing II
Advanced conceptual approaches as they relate to drawing as an artistic end.
Prerequisites: ART 101 and ART 151.

ART 210
3 hours
Introduction to Art Education
A survey of the history and philosophy of art education.  The course utilizes the disciplines
of art criticism, history, aesthetics, and production to acquire information, develop
resources, and create a variety of learning experiences for students of various
developmental levels.

ART 211
3 hours
Introduction to Art Therapy
A survey course introducing the history and philosophy of art therapy.  Material covered
will include history, theory, and practice as well as a survey of populations and settings of
art therapy.  The role of art making in the therapeutic process will be explored.  A mix of
lecture, case studies, guest speakers, research, discussion, group art exercises, and journal
exercises will be used to give students exposure to the different therapeutic arts.
Prerequisite: PSY 100.



72
ART 221
3 hours
Painting I
Beginning experiences in the materials, theory, techniques and composition used in
historical and contemporary styles of oil painting.  Consideration of the work of
individual painters introduces various conceptual approaches to painting.
Prerequisites: ART 101 and ART 151.

ART 230
2 hours
Art and Life
Lecture sessions focus upon works from several art forms, with the goal of
developing students’ perceptual skills.  A major focus of this course is experiencing
art.  Written critiques on selected events are part of the course curriculum.  Meets
a foundational core aesthetic literacy requirement.

ART 250C
1 hour
Participation: Ceramics

Meets a foundational core aesthetic literacy requirement.

ART 250D
1 hour
Participation: Drawing
Meets a foundational core aesthetic literacy requirement.

ART 251
3 hours
Typography
An introduction to the essential principles of typography; the design and expressive
capacities of letter forms are explored through historical study, typesetting assignments,
discussions, and studio projects.  Prerequisites: ART 101, ART 151, ART 152, and ART 154.

ART 253
3 hours
Foundations of Photography
Provides ground-level introduction to the tools, concepts, and techniques of
photography.  Students will explore composition, style, color, tonality, and light.
Strong emphasis on full comprehension and technical mastery of digital cameras,
digital processing, and color-managed output.

ART 254
3 hours
Illustration I: Visual Voice
An introductory course to the art and business of illustration with an emphasis in
developing conceptual skills, a personal visual voice and unique stylistic approach.
Coursework will include the production of editorial, promotional, and personal
illustrations.  Prerequisites: ART 101 and ART 151.

ART 257
3 hours
Layout and Prepress
An editorial design course, with a focus on page layout construction, digital pre-press and
tabloid design.  Students will learn terms and skills necessary for a career in the editorial
design industry.  Projects may include book covers, brochures, magazines and newspaper
layouts.  Prerequisites: ART 101, ART 151, ART 154, ART 156, ART 157, and ART 251.

ART 261
3 hours
Film and Darkroom
Maintains the heritage of analog photography by exploring silver halide films and
various darkroom processes. Emphasis on shooting and processing black-and-white
film and printing paper prints with enlargers. Color films and processing discussed,
as well as experimental darkroom techniques. The course culminates with large
format view camera work. Students must present a 35mm film camera in good order to
enroll.  Prerequisite: ART 253.

ART 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

ART 271
3 hours
Three-Dimensional Design
A foundational course in understanding the elements and principles of three-
dimensional design composition, as well as creative problem solving.  A studio skills
class utilizing a variety of mediums in a related series of projects.

ART 272
3 hours
Sculpture: Casting
Three-dimensional studies on form as practiced through art history, classical to abstract
representations of the human form, and architectural sculptural methods (welding and additive
methods).  Materials for this course cover clay, stone, and metal.  Prerequisite:  ART 271.

ART 275
3 hours
Metals I
Beginning metalworking projects use various techniques, with precious and non-
precious metals.  Soldering, enameling, metal casting and stone setting are covered.

ART 281
3 hours
Ceramics: Handbuilt Forms
An introduction to basic clay formation techniques with an emphasis on the sculptural
and asymmetrical potentials of hand constructed clay forms.  Covers essentials of the
ceramic process: forming, glazing, and transformation through firing.

ART 300
2 hours
Art for Teachers
Opportunities for the development of skills and learning experiences for use in the
elementary classroom.  Introduction to the components of Discipline-Based Art Education
through lecture, studio projects, and out of class assignments.

ART 302
3 hours
Figure Drawing
Intermediate level drawing course with emphasis in rendering the human figure.
Prerequisite: ART 101.

ART 308
2 hours
Digital Tools: Blender
A ground-level primer in 3D imagery using Blender.  Introduces rudiments of modeling,
lighting, materials, sculpting, particle systems, simple animation, and rendering.
Intended for absolute beginners and not recommended for intermediate to advanced
users or developers.  Prerequisites: ART 154 and ART 156.

ART 309
2 hours
Secondary Art Methods
Examine methodology and teaching practices in art, organizing and writing the art
curriculum, classroom management, assessment of student progress, and general
strategies and methods for conducting an art program for the middle and high school
level students.  In addition, studio work will be utilized to create a portfolio of art
projects suitable for middle and high school students.  Written assignments for the course
will be added to the professional portfolio.

ART 310
3 hours
Elementary Art Education
Theory and foundations for the development of skills and learning experiences for use in the
elementary art classroom.  The Discipline-Based Art Education model will be utilized in
preparing lesson plans, studio projects, and practical application content.

ART 311
3 hours
Western Art History I
A survey of architecture, sculpture, and painting from prehistory to the Late Gothic in
Europe and the Near East.

ART 313
3 hours
Western Art History II
A survey of architecture, sculpture, and painting from the Proto-Renaissance to the
Modern era in Western Europe and the United States.  Prerequisite: ART 311.

ART 316
3 hours
Asian Art History
A survey of the arts of South and East Asia including India, China, Japan, and Korea with
an emphasis on understanding works within their cultural contexts.  Meets a foundational
core aesthetic literacy requirement.

ART 317
3 hours
History of Photography
Invites students not only to know the factual, international history of the medium, but to
consider its implications for society and culture in general.  Projects and assignments will
fully acquaint students with the rudimentary mechanics of optics and cameras in their
earliest development, as well as major photographers and their styles.  Camera required.
Meets a foundational core aesthetic literacy requirement.

ART 320
3 hours
Acrylic Painting
An introduction to the techniques, materials and processes involved in acrylic painting.  The
course will focus on various aspects of acrylic painting on a mixed variety of surfaces and utilizing
various varnishes, mediums, and brush techniques.  Prerequisite:  ART 101.

ART 322
3 hours
Water-Based Media
An introduction to distinctive techniques, materials, and processes involved in water-
based painting.  The course will explore watercolor, gouache, and ink wash.
Prerequisite:  ART 101.

ART 324
3 hours
Painting II
An intermediate level course where students engage in the advancement of their technical
proficiency, explore a greater degree of self-initiated projects, and engage in in-depth critical
analysis of contemporary painting.  Prerequisite:  ART 221.

ART 345
3 hours
Relief and Serigraphy
Handprinting as an expressive medium is investigated through relief and screen printing
processes, including linoleum block printing, woodcut printing, cut stencils, drawing
fluid/screen filler use, and photo-based silkscreen. This course serves as an
introduction to the essential tools, materials, and techniques related to relief and
serigraphy. Readings and discussion pertaining to the history of radical thought
expressed via prints and the subsequent dissemination of printed materials will
augment studio projects.
73
ART 346
3 hours
Portraiture
Provides the opportunity to explore portraiture in depth, including conventional,
environmental, expressive and experimental work.  Camera required.  Prerequisite: ART 253.

ART 347
3 hours
Intaglio and Lithography
Handprinting as an expressive medium is investigated through intaglio and
lithographic processes. Projects explore the use of hardground etching, soft-ground
etching, whiteground, aquatint, chine colle, drypoint, photo etching and plate and
stone lithography. This course serves as an introduction to the essential tools,
materials, and techniques related to intaglio and lithography. Readings and
discussion pertaining to the history of radical thought expressed via prints and the
subsequent dissemination of printed materials will augment studio projects.

ART 351
3 hours
Product ID
A design course with emphasis in creating a product identity from concept to
completion.  This course will discuss but not be limited to, conceptual design,
logo/logotype development, packaging design, advertising design and the
development of promotional materials.  Professional presentation and client skills
will also be discussed.  Prerequisites: ART 251 and ART 257.

ART 353
3 hours
Commercial Photography
Introduces various commercial photo categories and demonstrates ways to make
a living with a camera.  Emphasis is always on the marketing and stylistic needs of
clients rather than the personal style of the photographer.  Covers images for
various facets of marketing and retail: advertising, fashion, product and food photos,
and selling stock.  Camera required.  Prerequisite: ART 253.

ART 356
4 hours
Web Design
This course will teach students design fundamentals for interactive media with a focus on
designing user interfaces for the internet.  Students will be introduced to the vocabulary,
foundational technology, design elements, and techniques for creating interactive media.
Projects will cover a range of topics that will introduce students to the many uses for
interactive design, identifying, and designing for different target audiences, and the basics
of how to deliver the finished product to those audiences.  Additionally, through the
projects and class exercises, students will be introduced to and gain a better
understanding of industry standard tools.  Prerequisite: ART 156.

ART 357
3 hours
History of Graphic Art
A design course focusing in depth on the stylistic history of graphic design, from
Gutenberg to the present.  Weekly studio assignments will be given with specific
historical and stylistic goals.  The purpose of this course is to create a strong
awareness of historical styles and to develop artwork applicable to a working
portfolio.  Prerequisites: ART 251 and ART 257.

ART 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

ART 365
3 hours

Illustration 2: Visual Narrative
An intermediate level course focusing on continued development of the illustrator's personal
voice while producing a unified series of location based sequential images useful for a
professional working portfolio.  Students will continue to explore new media, refine
technique, and discuss essential business practices.

ART 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

ART 372
3 hours
Sculpture: Fabrication
Intermediate use of technical skills and conceptual issues of creating sculpture with
form and space.  Prerequisite: ART 271 or permission of the instructor.

ART 380
3 hours
Ceramics: Wheelthrowing
The use of the potter's wheel for throwing vessel and sculptural forms.  Form and
surface design are considered, as well as various firing techniques.

ART 382
2 hours
The Christian and the Arts
Seminar that deals with topics related to the Christian and the Arts emphasizing the
development of critical abilities via the discussion of readings, student presentations,
and writing assignments.  Prerequisite: Junior status.

ART 383
1 hour
The Christian and the Arts—Art Education
Seminar that deals with topics related to the Christian and the Arts for Art Education
majors emphasizing the development of critical abilities via the discussion of readings,
student presentations, and writing assignments. Prerequisites: Art Education major and
junior status.

ART 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally, one hour
of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.

ART 413
3 hours
Contemporary Art
Introduces the student to a wide range of contemporary art, emphasizing the
development of analytical and critical skills.  Meets a foundational core aesthetic literacy
requirement.  Prerequisite: Junior status.

ART 417
3 hours
Advanced Ceramics
Largely self-directed, this course will give the student opportunity to further skills
and concepts developed in their previous handbuilding and wheelthrowing courses.
This course will also allow for exploration in making clay, glazes, and experimental
firings.  Prerequisites:  ART 281 and ART 380.

ART 441
3 hours
Advanced Printmaking
Advanced studies in printmaking, addressing the refining of skills, and the individual
exploration of one or two printmaking processes.  Prerequisites: ART 241 and ART 342.

ART 445
3 hours
Illustration 3: Thesis
An advanced level course focusing on a large scale thesis project of personal imagery for
the student's senior show and portfolio.  May be taken twice for credit.

ART 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.

ART 456
4 hours
Web Animation
Students will build on the skills learned in ART 356, by focusing on industry standard
animation and interactive software for the world wide web.  This course will further
develop each student’s conceptual, interactive page layout, and web programming skill
sets.  Emphasis will be placed on fully utilizing Flash’s unique animation, interactivity and
scripting controls, to create a self-promotional website useful in the pursuit of a future
design career.  Prerequisite: ART 356 or COS 143.

ART 457
3 hours
Portfolio Development
Advanced design course emphasizing development of a working portfolio.  Projects may
include book covers, advertisements, brochures, posters, editorial design, logotypes,
and corporate identity campaigns.  Prerequisite: ART 351 and ART 357.

ART 461
3 hours
Experimental Photography
Encourages the student to explore personal photographic aesthetics, vision, and statement
with an eye toward galleries and markets or a personal portfolio.  Work would most likely
be conceptual and expressive in nature.  The course also provides wide-open opportunity
for technical experimentation.  Camera required.  Pre-requisites:  ART 253 and ART 261.

ART 472
3 hours
Sculpture: Advanced Topics
Advanced use of technical skills and conceptual issues of creating sculpture with form
and space.  Studio projects employ additive, subtractive, and casting methods utilizing
such materials as clay, plaster, wood, plastics, and metals.  Prerequisite: ART 272 or
ART 372 or permission of the instructor.

ART 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with emphasis
on directed readings and discussion.

ART 481
3 hours
Studio Capstone
This course serves as a culmination of students' undergraduate art making endeavor,
providing guidance in the development of a body of work to be presented in a final
exhibition with thematic and aesthetic cohesiveness.  Class includes a trip to a significant
contemporary art destination.  Prerequisite: Senior status.



74
ART 484
3 hours
Senior Exhibition
Senior Thesis II provides continued support as students prepare for their senior
thesis exhibition.  This course also serves as a seminar devoted to the
conceptualization of a career in the arts, given its many forms.  Students will also
gain exposure to practicalities of life as a working artists such as funding, grant-
writing, exhibiting, and pursuit of higher education.

ART 485
3 hours
Portfolio Exhibition
Creation of a body of work for the student’s senior exhibition with thematic and
aesthetic cohesiveness.  Students should plan for the costs associated with the
exhibition.  Prerequisite: Senior status.

ART 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.
Open to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

Film and Media Arts Courses
FMA 125
1 hour
Film and Media Arts: New Majors Orientation
An introduction to the Film and Media Arts major, focusing on the work habits,
mindset, and requirements for success in the major with preliminary work on
discovering one’s voice as a visual storyteller.  Course includes the development of
critical skills such as self-reflection, creativity, observation, collaboration, story
development, and awareness of the impact of one’s creative work on audiences.
Offered Fall semester.

FMA 145
2 hours
Introduction to Visual Storytelling
An introduction to the visual language and story structure of film and television in
American culture.  Students will learn to identify the elements of story structure;
analyze the use of lighting, camera composition/movement, and production design;
and then develop original visual stories that have emotional resonance.

FMA 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

FMA 185
2 hours
Digital Tools: After Effects
An introduction to Adobe After Effects software for motion graphics and animation.
Prerequisite: ART 156.  Offered January interterm.

FMA 215
3 hours
Audio Production
An exploration of the principles and applications of audio for film and media production.
Topics discussed include sound theory, microphones, audio fundamentals, systems
theory, recording, and editing with Avid Pro Tools.  Emphasis is on communicating and
producing creative and technically excellent work for commercials, interviews, podcasts,
long-form audio storytelling, and Foley/sound design.  Meets a foundational core
aesthetic literacy requirement.  Offered Fall and Spring semesters.

FMA 220
3 hours
Film and Video Production
A hands-on immersion in visual storytelling using single camera film-style shooting
techniques.  Course includes digital cinematography, nonlinear editing, lighting, audio
for video/film and producing with an emphasis on creative storytelling and visual
aesthetics.  Meets a foundational core aesthetic literacy requirement.  Prerequisite: FMA
215.  Offered Fall and Spring semesters.

FMA 230
3 hours
Scriptwriting
This course covers the theory and practice of nonfiction writing (e.g., scripting for clients
and documentary) and fiction writing (e.g., short film screenplay).

FMA 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

FMA 300
1-2 hours
Media Laboratory
Two hours of credit may be earned per semester by students holding top leadership
positions in WTUR, the campus radio station or Envision Productions, the
department’s in-house television and video production team.  One hour of credit
may be earned per semester by those holding secondary positions in those
organizations.  One or two hours of credit may also be earned by assisting with
approved departmental production projects.  A maximum of six hours may be earned.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor.

FMA 310
3 hours
Introduction to TV Writing
An introduction to writing television drama and comedy beyond the principles
covered in FMA 230. Includes generating ideas, breaking a story, and how to apply
the essentials of narrative storytelling to traditional half-hour and one-hour time
formats.  Prerequisite: FMA 230.  Offered occasionally.

FMA 312
2 hours
Steadicam® Workshop
A workshop covering the proper safety, operation, and creative use of the
Steadicam® camera support system for cinematography.  Offered January interterm.
FMA 320
3 hours
Advanced Screenwriting
An advanced exploration of the screenplay format, leading to the creation of a full-
length screenplay.  Includes dramatic theory from Aristotle’s Poetics, the essentials
of writing visually, story structure, beat sheets, outlines, treatments, creating story
beats, mastering subtext, and finding one’s voice as a writer.  Prerequisite: FMA 230.
Offered occasionally.

FMA 330
2 hours
Audio Field Production
A hands-on exploration of the technology and practices of audio professionals with
the goal of developing both the ear and the skills required for the audio role on a
film/television/video crew.  Selection and placement of microphones for optimal
recordings on-location and operation of field audio recording equipment are also included.

FMA 332
2-3 hours
Audio Post-Production
A survey of the methods and techniques used to import, correct, sweeten, mix,
and export audio for film, television, and video production using advanced audio
software.  Prerequisite: FMA 215.

FMA 335
3 hours
International Production
A team-based experience shooting a video or film project internationally including
research and pre-production planning, exploration of cultural and technical issues
that impact field production, and significant gathering of footage with the goal of later
telling an impactful nonfiction story.  Offered Interterm of even years and as needed.
Prerequisites: FMA 215 and FMA 220.

FMA 350
3 hours
Media Theory and Ethics
An overview of media communication theories and ethical challenges in the media
workplace.  Prerequisite: JRN 255.

FMA 351
3 hours
Media Performance
An introduction to the theory and practice of television and radio/podcast announcing,
commercial and corporate voice-over work, voice-over for animation, and film acting.

FMA 352
3 hours
History and Criticism of Film
A survey of film history, artistic growth, and early influences and techniques of
filmmaking.  Theories for critiquing films are emphasized.  Prerequisite JRN 255.
Offered Spring semester of even years.

FMA 355
3 hours
Multi-Camera Live Production
An overview of multi-camera live production processes, techniques and personnel in the
studio setting and on-location.  Students will plan and produce programming, functioning as
a production team.  Included required lab.  Prerequisite: FMA 220.  Offered Fall semesters.

FMA 358
3 hours
Sundance Study Trip
An exploration of the intersections between faith and independent film including
reading and writing, followed by a week-long trip to the Sundance Film Festival.
Offered January interterm by application.

FMA 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

FMA 365
3 hours
Inside the Entertainment Industry
An overview of the people, skills, and processes required for success in the film and
television industries from both business and creative perspectives.  Taught by
entertainment industry professionals in Los Angeles as the academic component of Taylor
University's semester-long Hollywood Internship Program.  Prerequisites: FMA major, junior
or senior standing, acceptance into TUHIP program.

FMA 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.
75
FMA 375
3 hours
Post-Production Methods
Video editing principles and practices, leading to the certification test for Avid Media
Composer.  Advanced color correction for film and television using DaVinci Resolve.
Prerequisite: FMA 220.  Offered Spring semester.

FMA 380
3 hours
Editing Aesthetics
An exploration of the art of editing including how editing contributes to rhythm, tempo,
emotion, and storytelling.  Students will also focus on how editing relates to dialogue,
audio, and action.  Students will edit using techniques specific to fiction, documentary,
commercials, and film trailers.  Prerequisite: FMA 220.

FMA 388
3 hours
Media, Faith, and Culture
An exploration of the intersections between media, popular culture, and the gospel.
Topics include evangelical responses to popular culture through history, religious
broadcasting, religious filmmaking, media in the local church setting, media in global
missions, and portrayals of Christ and Christians on TV and film.  Prerequisite: JRN
255 and junior standing.  Offered occasionally.

FMA 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Pass/fail only.  Offered primarily during Summer.

FMA 395
3 hours
Directing and Cinematography
An advanced production course leading to deeper understanding of image creation,
both in theory and practice.  Emphasizes camera technology and associated
equipment such as wireless focus, aperture, and video as well as advanced lighting
techniques.  Course includes visualizing a script, the director/cinematographer
collaboration in storytelling, how visual theories inform storytelling, and how a
director directs talent.  Course involves both individual and group work.  Prerequisite:
FMA 220.  Offered Fall semester.

FMA 420
3 hours
Documentary Filmmaking
An exploration of the art of documentary film.  Includes critique of notable
documentaries, the study of multiple approaches to nonfiction storytelling and the
creation of a festival-ready short documentary including pre-production, production,
and post-production.  Prerequisite: FMA 220.  Offered Fall semester.

FMA 430
3 hours
Producing for Clients
This course develops the skills required to create a client-driven video or film
production project.  Producing tasks including pre-production, budgeting, scheduling
and client relations are emphasized.  Students work in teams with an outside
organization to produce a professional video or film project.  Prerequisite: FMA 220.
Offered Fall semester of even years.

FMA 440
3 hours
Narrative Filmmaking
Students work in teams to create a festival-ready short film including scripting, pre-
production, production, and post-production. Students will develop an ability to
integrate Christian thought and storytelling.  Prerequisites: FMA 220 and FMA 230.

FMA 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.

FMA 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with emphasis
on directed readings and discussion.

FMA 485
3 hours
Senior Capstone
Seniors will complete a senior portfolio and prepare for employment and graduate
school.  Offered Spring semester.

FMA 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.  Open
to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

FMA 492
8-16 hours
Internship
Professional semester of supervised internship in a work setting related to the major
field of study.  Prerequisites: Completion of departmental core and approval of the
department faculty.  Pass/fail only.

FMA 493
12-13 hours
Internship: Taylor University Hollywood Internship Program
Entertainment industry internship completed as part of Taylor University’s
Hollywood Internship Program.
BIB 103
4 hours
Introduction to Holy Land Studies
A study of the biblical background and contemporary significance of Israel.  Taught
in Israel during January, this travel-study course may count for either BIB 110 or a
departmental elective.  Offered January interterm—when available.

BIB 110
3 hours
Biblical Literature I
A course that has as its primary content the Old Testament, with special attention
given to the law, the prophets and the history of Israel.  Meets foundational core
requirement.

BIB 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

BIB 203
3 hours
In the Footsteps of Paul
A study of the biblical background and contemporary significance of cities Paul
visited and wrote to in Greece and Turkey or Greece and Italy.  Taught during
January, this travel-study course may count for BIB 210 or a departmental elective.
Offered January interterm.

BIB 204
4 hours
Introduction to Holy Land Studies
A study of the biblical background and contemporary significance of Israel and Jesus
Christ.  Taught in Israel during January, this travel-study course may count for either BIB
210 or a departmental elective.  Offered January interterm—when available.

BIB 210
3 hours
Biblical Literature II
A course that includes a foundation in New Testament study with focus on Jesus
Christ as portrayed in the Gospels and Epistles.  Also included is a series of
explorations into the relevancy of Christ to modern life.  Meets foundational core
requirement.  Prerequisite: BIB 110 or BIB 310.

BIB 213
4 hours
Survey of Biblical Literature
A survey of the Bible, both Old and New Testaments, designed to help students
learn the central ideas and themes of the Bible; to become familiar with its chief
persons, places, and events; to become aware of the types of biblical literature; and
to develop the ability to study the Bible effectively.  This course is offered through
Taylor University Online (TUO).

BIB 217
3 hours
Genesis
A detailed study of the book of "beginnings," giving attention to its authorship,
authenticity, chronology, and spiritual implication.  This course is offered through
Taylor University Online (TUO).

BIB 218
3 hours
Matthew
A detailed study of the purpose, structure, and theology of Matthew's gospel, with
special emphasis on titles and teachings of Jesus, significant events in His life, and
the application of the gospel to the present time.  This course is offered through Taylor
University Online (TUO).

BIB 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

BIB 272
3 hours
Inductive Study of the Bible
Students learn to study biblical texts carefully, inquisitively, and according to literary
context.  Students learn to attend to literary genre, relevant socio-historical and
theological contexts, and using biblical studies resources and tools in order to grow
in their ability to interpret biblical texts.  Students learn to draw connections from
what a text meant to its original audience to what its significance might be for
people today, including how it might be lived out and taught in contemporary
contexts.  Prerequisites: BIB 110 or BIB 310; and BIB 210.

BIB 310
3 hours
Biblical Literature I
See BIB 110.  Primarily for transfer students and has additional requirements.  Meets
foundational core requirement.  Available upon request and with permission of the
instructor.

BIB 311
3 hours
Gospel of John
An analytical study of the content of the fourth gospel, with special emphasis on
the distinctive elements of John’s message.  This course is offered through Taylor
University Online (TUO).

BIB 313
3 hours
Romans
This course combines inductive study of the New Testament letter of Paul to the
Romans with critical investigation of contemporary approaches to Paul, with special
focus on the “New Perspective.”  Prerequisites: BIB 110 and BIB 210.  This course is
offered through Taylor University Online (TUO).

BIB 320
3 hours
Pentateuch
Emphasizes the historical narrative and the content of the Law of God.  Special
attention is given to the Genesis account of the origin of the cosmos, man, sin and
salvation.  The authorship of the Pentateuch is considered.  Prerequisite: BIB 110 or
BIB 310.  Offered Spring semester.

BIB 330
3 hours
Acts and the Early Church
A historical study with particular attention given to the missionary expansion of the
early Church, the work of the Holy Spirit and the place of the Church in the world.
Prerequisite: BIB 210.  Offered Spring semester.

BIB 331
3 hours
Pauline Epistles
Attention is given to the life, ministry, and writings of Paul.  The doctrinal, pastoral,
and personal epistles of Paul are studied with reference to their geographical and
historical settings, the organization of the Apostolic Church and the development
of Christian doctrine.  Careful exegesis is made of selected portions of each epistle.
Prerequisite: BIB 210.  Offered most Fall semesters.

BIB 332
3 hours
Hebrews and General Epistles
A study of the non-Pauline epistles with attention to their authorship, historical
place in the canon and doctrinal uniqueness.  The contents of each book are
analyzed, and problem texts are treated.  Prerequisite: BIB 210.  Offered Spring
semester of odd years.

BIB 340
3 hours
Hebrew Prophets
Selected major and minor prophetic works of the Old Testament are considered,
with special emphasis given to the historical background, Messianic message, and
content, together with specific theological concepts and teachings that are pertinent
to modern times.  Prerequisite: BIB 110 or BIB 310.  Offered most Fall semesters.

BIB 341
3 hours
The Gospels
Stresses the life and teaching of Jesus as set forth in the Synoptic Gospels and John.
Attention is given to the literary and theological characteristics of each individual
gospel and to the development of gospel criticism.  The primary focus, however, is
on the words and works of Jesus Christ and their significance for Christians today.
Prerequisite: BIB 210.  Offered Fall semester.

BIB 350
3 hours
Poetic and Wisdom Literature
Hebrew poetry and wisdom as presented in the books of Job, Psalms, Proverbs,
Ecclesiastes, Lamentations, and the Song of Solomon.  Prerequisite: BIB 110 or BIB
310.  Offered most Fall semesters.

BIB 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

BIB 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

BIB 393
3-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Offered primarily during Summer.

BIB 420
3 hours
Apocalyptic Literature of the Bible
Examines the historical and theological dimensions of Old Testament, New
Testament, and second Temple period apocalypticism.  Special attention is given to
apocalyptic thought in Daniel, the gospels, and Revelation.  Prerequisite: BIB 210.
Offered Spring semester of even years.

BIB 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.


BIB 452
3 hours
Old Testament Historical Literature
Selected historical books in the Old Testament are considered, with particular
emphasis given to the authorship, historical theory, and theological content of these
books.  Prerequisite: BIB 110 or BIB 310.  Offered Spring semester of odd years.

BIB 462
3 hours
Biblical Theology
A study of the Bible and its central message and meaning.  The Bible is viewed as
recording a special kind of history revealing God’s will and purpose and giving
essential meaning to all human life and destiny.  This course is normally taken during
the senior year.  Prerequisite: BIB 272.  Offered Fall semester.

BIB 480
3 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with
emphasis on directed readings and discussion.

BIB 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.
Open to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

BIB 493
3 hours
Biblical Literature Capstone
Designed as a culminating experience for all Biblical Literature majors wherein
students focus on key exegetical, historical, and theological issues crucial to a
proper understanding of the biblical literature.  The completion of the course paper
and its presentation to peers meets university requirements for senior comprehensive
exams for Biblical Literature majors.  Prerequisites: BIB 272, BIB 320, and BIB
341.  Offered Spring semester.

CMI 100
3 hours
Introduction to Christian Ministries
A course that focuses on the purpose and scope of Christian ministries and the
types of ministries available to majors.

CMI 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

CMI 232
3 hours
Historical and Theological Foundations for Christian Ministries
A course focusing on the biblical, theological, historical, and philosophical foundations for
Christian ministry.  Prerequisite: CMI 100.  Offered Fall semester.

CMI 242
3 hours
Psychological and Educational Foundations for Christian Ministries
A course focusing on theories of human development and learning, as well as
educational theory.  Applications for ministry settings are explored.  Prerequisite:
CMI 100.  Offered Spring semester.

CMI 262
3 hours
Personal Foundations for Ministry
Students’ capacity for ministry is enhanced in this course by facilitating personal
growth and development.  Emphasis is given to the ways theological truths address
life issues.  Prerequisite: CMI 100.

CMI 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

CMI 325
3 hours
Discipleship and Evangelism
An intensive study of the theology, theories and approaches used to help people
grow and develop in their faith.  A special focus will be placed on the life of Christ
as a model for ministry.  Prerequisite: CMI 100.  Offered Spring semester.

CMI 345
3 hours
Care, Kingdom, and Culture
Provides a theological and kingdom of God lens to engage contemporary, personal,
and cultural issues.  Includes topics relating to sexuality and gender, race and
ethnicity, and mental health.  Students will be equipped to engage their context
missionally through cultural exegesis and connoisseurship while developing skills in
pastoral care.  Prerequisite: CMI 100.  Offered Fall semester.
CMI 351
3 hours
Teaching and Learning Strategies
A practical course designed to help the student teach the Bible more effectively by
the use of educational strategies.  A teaching lab and supervision are included, and
competency in the use of instructional media is required.  Prerequisites: CMI 100 and
BIB 272.  Offered Fall semester.

CMI 352
3 hours
Program and Curriculum Development
A course that focuses on the development of educational programs within church and
parachurch ministries.  Emphasis is on published curricula and the development of
curricular writing skills.  Prerequisite: CMI 351.  Offered Spring semester.

CMI 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

CMI 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

CMI 371
3 hours
Leadership Development
A course designed to facilitate the development of students’ skills in leadership,
organization and management related to specific ministry situations.  Prerequisite:
CMI 100.  Offered Fall semester.

CMI 393
2-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Offered primarily during Summer.  Prerequisite: senior status or permission of instructor.

CMI 421
3 hours
Philosophy and Strategies for Christian Ministries
A research course designed to help students articulate their philosophies of
ministry within a particular age group or ministry context.  Attention is given to
critical areas of need within Christian ministry.  This course meets university
requirements for senior comprehensive exams for Christian ministry majors.  Graduating
Christian Ministries majors only.  Offered Spring semester.


CMI 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.

CMI 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with
emphasis on directed readings and discussion.  Prerequisite: major GPA of at least 3.00.

CMI 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.
Open to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

CMI 492
5-8 hours
Christian Ministries Internship
A practical, semester-long, supervised ministry experience in Cuenca, Ecuador.
Permission required from CMI program advisor and CMI Ecuador program liaison.

CMI 493
3 hours
Christian Ministries Senior Capstone
This integrative course exposes students to models of ministry and vocational
direction through research and participative observation and experiences.  This course
introduces the method for the final philosophy of ministry comprehensive paper.  A
substantive exposure trip is part of the course structure.  Offered January interterm.

GRK 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

GRK 201†
4 hours
Elementary New Testament Greek I
A study of the fundamental principles of New Testament (Koine) Greek grammar.
Emphasis is placed on the mastery of forms, memorization of vocabulary, and translation
of sentences from Greek to English.  Offered Fall semester of even years.

GRK 202†
4 hours
Elementary New Testament Greek II
A continuation of the study of the fundamental principles of New Testament
(Koine) Greek grammar.  John’s First Epistle is translated during the last half of the
semester.  Prerequisite: GRK 201.  Offered Spring semester of odd years.

GRK 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

GRK 301†
3 hours
Greek Grammar and Syntax
An intermediate Koine Greek grammar course that places special emphasis on the
more exegetically significant details of Greek grammar and syntax by reading and
analyzing selected portions of the Greek New Testament.  Prerequisite: GRK 202.
Offered Fall semester of odd years.

GRK 302†
3 hours
Exegesis of the Greek New Testament
An introduction to the procedure and practice of Greek exegesis.  Emphasis is
placed on the “how-to’s” of doing textual criticism, word studies, outlining the
argument of a passage, validating exegetical decisions, and the proper use of
exegetical tools.  Prerequisite: GRK 301.  Offered Spring semester of even years.

GRK 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

GRK 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

GRK 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Offered primarily during Summer.

GRK 401
3 hours
Advanced Exegesis of the Greek New Testament
An extension of skills developed in GRK 301 and GRK 302.  Offered by arrangement
with the instructor.

GRK 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.

GRK 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with
emphasis on directed readings and discussion.

GRK 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.
Open to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.
HEB 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

HEB 211†
3 hours
Elementary Old Testament Hebrew I
A study of the fundamental principles of Old Testament Hebrew.  Emphasis is
placed on the mastery of forms and memorization of vocabulary skills, with a focus
on the basic forms of the verb (sometimes called “Qal” stem).  Offered Fall semester
of odd years.

HEB 212†
3 hours
Elementary Old Testament Hebrew II
A continuation of the study of basic Old Testament Hebrew grammar and
vocabulary with an emphasis on solidifying Hebrew reading skills and a focus on the
more complex forms of the verb (sometimes called “derived” stems).  Prerequisite:
HEB 211.  Offered Spring semester of even years.

HEB 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

HEB 311†

3 hours
Hebrew Syntax and Lexicography
Introduction to principles and practice of Hebrew syntactical analysis and
lexicography, along with development of reading skills and additional Hebrew
vocabulary.  Prerequisite: HEB 212.  Offered Fall semester of even years.

HEB 312†
3 hours
Hebrew Exegesis
An introduction to the principles and practice of exegesis and textual criticism of
the Hebrew Bible with an emphasis on developing vocabulary skills.  Prerequisite:
HEB 311.  Offered Spring semester of odd years.

HEB 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

HEB 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

HEB 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Offered primarily during Summer.

HEB 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.

HEB 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with
emphasis on directed readings and discussion.

HEB 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.
Open to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.



†Greek or Hebrew may be used to fulfill Taylor University’s foreign language requirements.

Philosophy Courses
PHI 110
3 hours
Introduction to Philosophy
A survey of important issues and traditions in philosophy.

PHI 121
3 hours
Society and Philosophy
A philosophical inquiry into pressing issues for contemporary society.  This course
addresses questions concerning public discourse, citizenship, government, civil
disobedience, science, technology, popular music, film, and sports.  Topics are
considered in light of philosophical perspectives from ancient to contemporary times
as well as in light of historical Christian theology.  Meets foundational core civic
engagement or general social science requirement.

PHI 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

PHI 191
1 hour
Faith and Philosophy
An examination of issues related to the integration of Christian faith and philosophy.
Must be completed by philosophy majors no later than the year of their first upper division
philosophy courses.

PHI 201
3 hours
Logic
A study of classical and contemporary formulations of the principles of human
thought.  Proper deductive and inductive logic is contrasted with fallacies.  Categorical
logic, truth functional logic, and quantificational logic are examined.  Offered Fall semester.

PHI 202
3 hours
History of Philosophy I
A survey of philosophical thought from the early pre-Socratic Greeks to the modern
period.  Offered Fall semester.

PHI 203
3 hours
History of Philosophy II
A survey of philosophical thought from the modern period to contemporary
movements such as linguistic analysis and phenomenology.  Offered Spring semester.

PHI 262
3 hours
Contemporary Moral Issues
A systematic analysis of pressing issues such as sexual morality, divorce, abortion,
homosexuality, euthanasia, and war and peace.  Offered Spring semester.

PHI 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

PHI 311
3 hours
Medical Ethics
An examination of ethical issues in medicine and healthcare with an emphasis on learning
to develop and communicate Christian ethical positions in a pluralistic world.  Issues
discussed will include respect for patients, the moral status of embryos and fetuses,
terminal care and euthanasia, and justice in healthcare.

PHI 322
3 hours
World Religions: Western Tradition
A study of Judaism, Islam, Zoroastrianism, and related religious movements.  Offered
Fall semester.

PHI 323
3 hours
World Religions: Eastern Tradition
A study of Hinduism, Buddhism, Sikhism, Shinto, and Chinese religions.  Offered Spring
semester.

PHI 342
3 hours
Aesthetics
A study of classical and contemporary theories about the nature of art, the artistic
process, the psychology of aesthetic experience, and standards for good art.
Prerequisite: one other course in philosophy or consent of the instructor.

PHI 355
3 hours
Metaphysics
A study of such issues as the nature of existence, identity, essences, causality,
freedom, and space and time.  Prerequisite: One other course in philosophy or consent of
the instructor.

PHI 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.
PHI 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

PHI 371
3 hours
Principles of Ethics
A survey of the theoretical foundations of ethics, such as the distinction between
absolutist and relativistic views, the nature of justice, and the need for rules.
Readings from classical and modern authors are included.

PHI 382
1 hour
Ethics Bowl
An intensive study of practical moral issues, culminating in regional and national
competitions involving Ethics Bowl teams from other colleges.  May be repeated
twice for credit.  Prerequisite: consent of the instructor.

PHI 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Offered primarily during Summer.

PHI 410
3 hours
Bioethics
This course will consider, from a Christian perspective, some of the philosophical
issues and questions related to many of the current health-care and end-of-life
concerns in modern society.  The course will consider the importance of a
worldview perspective in addressing the issue of personhood and in ethical decision
making.  This course is offered through Taylor University Online (TUO).

PHI 413
3 hours
Contemporary Christian Belief
The integration of Christian thought with contemporary ideas and an introduction
to Christian apologetics.  Meets foundational core requirement and is required of all
students.  Prerequisite: REL 313.

PHI 420
3 hours
Continental Philosophy
A seminar giving detailed attention to influential works in continental philosophy,
from its roots in Kant down to the present.  Prerequisite: Any PHI course or instructor
permission.

PHI 425
3 hours
Philosophical and Theological Methods
An interdisciplinary examination of both the history and current movements within
philosophical and theological methodology.  Prerequisite: Any PHI course or instructor
permission.

PHI 432
3 hours
Epistemology
Contemporary theories on the nature and limits of knowledge and the justification
of beliefs.  Prerequisite: Any PHI course or instructor permission.

PHI 445
3 hours
Philosophy of Mind
A study of philosophical theories of consciousness, perception, and intelligence,
with special attention on contemporary research.  Prerequisite: One other course in
philosophy or consent of the instructor.

PHI 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.

PHI 452
3 hours
Philosophy of Religion
A study of the major issues in the philosophy of religion, including religious
experience, theism, religious language, and the problem of evil.  Prerequisite: Any PHI
course or instructor permission.

PHI 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with
emphasis on directed readings and discussion.  Prerequisite: major GPA of at least 3.00.

PHI 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.
Open to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.


Religion Courses

REL 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
 A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.
REL 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
 A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.
REL 303
3 hours
Revelation, the Seven Cities, and the Seven Councils
A survey of Christian belief with special emphasis on Revelation and the seven church
councils.  January interterm course involving two weeks study on campus and two weeks on
site in Turkey.  Meets REL 313 foundational core requirement.  Prerequisites: BIB 110 or BIB
310; and BIB 210.

REL 310
3 hours
Theology of Worship
A theological Biblical and historical study of Christian worship from a classical as well as
contemporary perspective.  This course examines the pattern, purpose and essential and
non-essential features of worship found in the Bible and in church history with the goal of
formulating one’s own theology and practice of Biblical worship.  Open to Music, Biblical
 Studies, and Philosophy majors.  Prerequisite: REL 313.  Offered Spring semester of even years.
REL 311
3 hours
Foundations of Christian World Mission
A study of the biblical, theological, and historical foundations of Christian mission
 strategy.  Offered Fall semester.
REL 313
3 hours
Historic Christian Belief
A survey of Christian belief as developed during the history of the Church.  May not be
counted toward BIB, CMI, or PHI majors or minors.  Meets foundational core requirement and is
 required of all students.  Prerequisites: BIB 110 or 310; 210 or 203; and junior or senior status.
REL 350
3 hours
Global Theology
Global theology investigates international contemporary Christian understandings of
God through the rubric of systematic theology.  A seminal dimension of Christian
global engagement, global theology seeks to understand how international Christians
express their faith against the backgrounds of their respective histories and in the
context of their current social, political, and religious contexts.  The course pays
special attention to dialogue between international Christians and believers of
neighboring faiths, who often constitute the majority in various global contexts.  A goal
of the course is to increase awareness that western Christianity has much to gain
through partnership with Christians from the majority world.  Offered Spring semester
of even years.
REL 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

REL 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

REL 391
3 hours
Preparation and Strategy for Christian World Mission
An introduction to the essentials of missionary life and global service.  Current global
and mission trends and holistic outreach strategies are explored.  Attention is given
to knowledge, skills, and attitudes essential for adaptation and intercultural
relationships.  Offered Spring semester.

REL 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Offered primarily during Summer.

REL 432
2 hours
World Missions Area Studies
A research seminar designed for students to explore global opportunities in a
region of the world that interests them.  The religion, history, economics, culture,
government, language, and geography of an area and outreach strategies
appropriate to the region are considered.  Prerequisite: ANT 200 or REL 311 or REL 391
or junior status.  Offered Spring semester.

REL 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.

REL 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with
emphasis on directed readings and discussion.

REL 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.
Open to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.
Theology Courses
THE 243
3 hours
Introduction to Theology
A detailed study of Bibliology, theology, and angelology.  This course is foundational to
all systematic theology.  This course is offered through Taylor University Online (TUO).


Youth Ministry Courses

YMI 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
 A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.
YMI 221
3 hours
Ministry to Youth
A general study of the various programs used to meet the needs of junior high and
 senior high youth through church and parachurch ministries.  Offered Spring semester.
YMI 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
 A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.
YMI 315
3 hours
Youth Culture and Issues
An intensive study of theories and approaches used to understand culture and issues
 facing adolescents today.  Offered Fall semester.
YMI 325
3 hours
Discipleship and Evangelism in Youth Ministry
An intensive study of the theories and approaches used to help junior high and senior
 high youth to grow and develop in their faith.  Prerequisite: YMI 221.
YMI 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
 An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.
YMI 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.
YMI 393
2-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Offered primarily during Summer.  Prerequisite: senior status or permission of instructor.

YMI 421
3 hours
Philosophy and Strategies for Youth Ministry
A research course designed to help students articulate their philosophies of
ministry within a particular youth ministry context.  Attention is given to critical
areas of need within youth ministry.  This course meets university requirements for
senior comprehensive exams for youth ministry majors.  Graduating youth ministry majors
only.  Offered Spring semester.

YMI 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.

YMI 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with
emphasis on directed readings and discussion.  Prerequisite: major GPA of at least 3.00.

YMI 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.
Open to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

Communication Courses
CAC 125
2 hours
Communication Major Orientation
Explores the communication majors, focusing on requirements and career options.  The
course is designed to aid students as they prepare for both their coursework on campus
and career decisions upon graduation.  Offered Fall semester.

CAC 158
2 hours
Digital Tools: Office Suite
Provides an overview of Microsoft Office Suite, particularly focusing on Excel.
Offered Fall and Spring semesters.

CAC 160
3 hours
Integrative Communication
Integrative communication explores and develops public,
interpersonal,
organizational, and small group communication skills.  Students will learn how to
analyze and adapt to the needs of diverse audiences and contexts using verbal and
nonverbal communication principles.  Meets foundational core speaking requirement.

CAC 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

CAC 220
3 hours
Essentials of Written Communication
Teaches fundamentals of professional written communication.  Students complete a
variety of assignments exemplifying the types of writing routinely practiced in business
settings including letters, resumes, news releases, reports, proposals, instructions, and
other forms of business communication.  The emphasis is on real world experience and
application.  Offered Fall and Spring semesters.

CAC 225
3 hours
Communication Theory and Research
Examines paths of inquiry in the communication discipline.  Students study, analyze,
and explain dimensions of communication within a variety of contexts.  Offered Fall
and Spring semesters.

CAC 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

CAC 340
3 hours
Intercultural Communication
The study of the complex process of intercultural communication.  The course seeks to
create an awareness of culture-bound assumptions and ways to communicate more
effectively with persons from other cultures.

CAC 345
3 hours
Social Media Strategy
Explores using social media strategically and creating written strategy for usage.
First half of the semester focuses on students' professionalizing their personal social
media; second half includes working with clients to build a social media strategy for
their businesses.

CAC 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

CAC 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

CAC 393

1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Offered primarily during the Summer.

CAC 450
1 hour
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.  Tutorial and peer review methods are used to monitor
student’s progress in writing the senior thesis.   Offered Spring semester.

CAC 485
2 hours
Senior Capstone
Senior communication department majors will complete a senior project or paper
and prepare for employment and graduate school.  Offered Fall semester.

CAC 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.
Open to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

Communication Courses
COM 111
3 hours
Introduction to Organizational Communication

Introduces students to foundational principles of communication as applied in general
organizational contexts.

COM 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

COM 210
3 hours
Public Speaking
Explores the development of speaking strategies and skills, including audience
analysis, nonverbal and visual communication, research, organization, the use of
evidence to support a point of view, delivery, and listening.  Meets foundational core
speaking requirement.

COM 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

COM 301
3 hours
Strategic Communication
Explores communication issues in organizations through an application of communication
principles, concepts, and theories to prepare students for critical evaluation and management
of communication plans, strategies, and assessments.

COM 320
3 hours
Interpersonal Communication
Studies interpersonal theories, research, and biblical principles in order to better
understand one's own identity and interactions with others.  Understanding, creating,
and analyzing personal messages in various contexts.

COM 325
3 hours
Conflict Resolution

Applies foundational principles of communication in organizations to conflict contexts
with the purpose of preparing students to mediate and resolve conflict in organizations.



COM 327
3 hours
Leadership Communication
Applies foundational principles and theories of communication to issues common
in leadership contexts.

COM 330
3 hours
Mediated Communication
Explores principles of interpersonal and public communication through the lens of
mediated forms of communication.

COM 335
3 hours
Nonprofit Organizational Communication
Applies foundational principles of organizational communication to issues common
in nonprofit and faith-based organizations.

COM 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

COM 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

COM 372

3 hours
Persuasion
Analysis and application of the strategies and theories of verbal and visual persuasive
messages and persuasive campaigns in a variety of contexts including advertising,
politics, and social movements.   Prerequisite: COM 210.

COM 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Offered primarily during Summer.

COM 411
3 hours
Advanced Organizational Communication
Students apply developed understanding of principles, theories, and issues to
evaluate popular organizational wisdom.  Prerequisites: COM 301 and COM 327.

COM 420
3 hours
Communication Audit
Applies a developed understanding of principles, theories, and issues through the
practical creation of a communication strategy and training material developed after
primary research in a communication audit.  Prerequisites: COM 301 and COM 327.

COM 430
3 hours
Restorative Communication
Examines dysfunctional communication behaviors which lead to the deterioration
of interpersonal relationships and the unique communication behaviors which lead
to reconciliation of interpersonal relationships.  Prerequisite: COM 320.

COM 486
1 hour
Senior Paper/Portfolio Development
Seniors will develop their senior paper/portfolio.  Prerequisite: CAC 485.  Offered
Spring semester.

COM 492
8-16 hours
Internship
Professional semester of supervised internship in a work setting related to the
major field of study.  Prerequisites: Completion of departmental core and major core
courses and approval of the department faculty.


Multimedia Journalism Courses
JRN 115
3 hours
Introduction to Media Writing
Examines a variety of journalistic writing techniques and formats, with a focus on
accurate and concise writing.  Students will write for print, broadcast, and the web.
Emphasis is on improving writing/editing and on telling stories across different media
platforms.  Offered Fall and Spring semesters.

JRN 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

JRN 225
3 hours
Foundations of Photojournalism
Provides a solid understanding of camera use, focusing on camera settings,
equipment, techniques, skills, and concepts of digital photography as applied to
journalistic storytelling for news, features, and photo essay.  Students should own or
have access to a digital SLR camera (some department cameras are available to loan).
Prerequisite: ART 156.  Offered Spring semester of odd years.

JRN 230
3 hours
Introduction to Sports Writing
This introductory course in sports writing and reporting covers the basics of how to
create and pursue story ideas, then write and execute them for public consumption,
whether in print or online.  Students will receive experience covering live sporting
events of area high school, collegiate, or professional athletic teams and writing
stories about the same.

JRN 245
3 hours
Introduction to Multimedia Storytelling
Teaches students basics of multimedia storytelling best practices to produce
multimedia news and feature stories via video, audio, photography, research, and
writing.  Specifically, this course will help prepare students to further develop their
skills as reporters, interviewers, writers, photographers and audio/video recorders,
and editors for traditional media, nonprofits, business, and industry.  Prerequisites: JRN
115; JRN 225 is preferred.

JRN 255
3 hours
Media and Society
This course examines the history, operations, and effects of media industries
including magazines, newspapers, radio, television, film, public relations, advertising,
and the Internet.  Offered Fall and Spring semesters.

JRN 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

JRN 300
1-2 hours
Media Laboratory
Two hours may be earned per semester by students holding the top leadership
positions in authorized campus student communications: newspaper, yearbook,
radio, or in-house production.  One hour of credit may be earned per semester by
those holding secondary media positions.  Media lab hours may also be earned for
special departmental projects approved by the faculty advisor and department chair.
A maximum of eight hours of media lab may be counted toward graduation.  Offered Fall
and Spring semesters.  Prerequisite: Instructor permission.

JRN 315
3 hours
Advanced Media Writing
Explores in-depth journalistic writing, introducing students to advanced research and
interviewing methods, writing, and editing.  Prerequisite: JRN 115.

JRN 332
3 hours
Layout and Design
Provides communication students with an understanding of the basic principles of
graphic design.  Students will learn to recognize, evaluate, and create good design by
practicing the points presented in class.  Meets a foundational core aesthetic literacy
requirement.  Offered Fall and Spring semesters.

JRN 355
3 hours
Networking Study Trip
Offers an off-campus, partially online course.  Students spend the equivalent of one
week in a midwest city (e.g. Chicago, Columbus, Grand Rapids).  Students read and
research corporate culture and communication before visiting various organizations
(both NFP and corporate).  Offered Interterm of even years.  Course fee.

JRN 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

JRN 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

JRN 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Offered primarily during Summer.

JRN 435
3 hours
Magazine Production and Feature Writing
Develops advanced student research and reporting skills in magazine writing.
Specifically, this course prepares students to be competent reporters, interviewers,
designers, and writers as they plan and create a magazine.  The course also
introduces students to the magazine industry and its inner workings.  Prerequisites:
JRN 115 and JRN 332.  Offered Fall semester of even years.

JRN 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.

JRN 457
3 hours
Media Agency
Provides a real-world, client-focused experience for students through an in-house
media agency.  Select students will manage media campaigns from start to
completion, assuming a variety of roles: writing, graphic design, web design, social
media, public relations, photography, and communication strategy.  Prerequisites: JRN
332, significant upper division courses in the major, and instructor permission.  Offered
Fall semester of even years.

JRN 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with
emphasis on directed readings and discussion.

JRN 486
1 hour
Senior Portfolio Development
Senior journalism majors will complete a senior portfolio.  Prerequisites: CAC 485
and senior status.  Offered Spring semester.

JRN 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.
Open to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

JRN 492
8-16 hours
Internship
Professional semester of supervised internship in a work setting related to the
major field of study.  Prerequisites: Completion of departmental core and major core
courses and approval of the department faculty.





Public Relations Courses
PBR 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

PBR 261
3 hours
Introduction to Public Relations
Analyzes public relations theory and practice, examining public relations
environments, audiences, and message strategies.  Emphasis is placed on history,
ethics, writing, and crisis management.  Offered Fall semester and offered Spring
semester as needed.

PBR 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

PBR 300
1-2 hours
Media Laboratory
Two hours may be earned per semester by students holding the top leadership positions
in authorized campus student communications: newspaper, yearbook, radio, or in-house
production.  One hour of credit may be earned per semester by those holding secondary
media positions.  Media lab hours may also be earned for special departmental projects
approved by the faculty advisor and department chair.  A maximum of eight hours of
media lab may be counted toward graduation.  Offered Fall and Spring semesters.
Prerequisite: instructor permission.

PBR 355
3 hours
Networking Study Trip
Offers an off-campus, partially online course.  Students spend the equivalent of one
week in a midwest city (e.g. Chicago, Columbus, Grand Rapids).  Students read and
research corporate culture and communication before visiting various organizations
(both NFP and corporate).  Offered Interterm of even years or as needed.  Course fee.

PBR 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

PBR 361
3 hours
Public Relations Cases and Campaigns
Examines the theory and practice behind creating a public relations campaign and a
communication case study.  Students work with clients to produce a strategic
campaign.  They also write a case study following the guidelines of the Arthur Page
Society.  Prerequisite: PBR 261.  Offered Fall semester.

PBR 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

PBR 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Offered primarily during Summer.
PBR 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.

PBR 455
3 hours
Event and Venue Planning
Focuses on the event planning aspect of public relations.  Students learn concepts
of venue and event planning and management from theory to the initial phases to
the evaluation phase of a major event they plan throughout the semester.
Prerequisite: PBR 261.  Offered Fall semester of odd years.

PBR 457
3 hours
Media Agency
Provides a real-world, client-focused experience for students through an in-house
media agency.  Select students will manage media campaigns from start to
completion, assuming a variety of roles: writing, graphic design, web design, social
media, public relations, photography, and communication strategy.  Prerequisites: JRN
332, significant upper division courses in the major, and instructor permission.

PBR 461
3 hours
Public Relations Writing and Production
Emphasizes the development and application of public relations writing, including
promotional kits, grant proposals, pitches, and other forms of public relations
writing.  This class connects with outside clients for real-world experience.
Prerequisite: PBR 261.  Offered Spring semester.

PBR 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with
emphasis on directed readings and discussion.

PBR 486
1 hour
Senior Portfolio Development
Senior public relations majors will complete a senior portfolio.  Prerequisite: CAC
485.  Offered Spring semester.

PBR 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.
Open to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

PBR 492
8-16 hours
Internship
Professional semester of supervised internship in a work setting related to the
major field of study.  Prerequisites: Completion of departmental core and approval of the
department faculty.

Professional Writing Courses
PWR 101
3 hours
Introduction to Professional Writing
Introduces the fundamentals of becoming a professional writer and how using words well
translates into many areas of the job world–publishing and beyond.  Foundational course
for professional writing majors and minors.  Offered Fall semester.

PWR 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

PWR 215
3 hours
The Writer’s Craft
Studies the writer's art.  This course considers literary models from a writer's perspective,
examining elements of classic and contemporary fiction and nonfiction and discussing their
application.  It emphasizes reading to develop skill in writing.  Prerequisite: PWR 101.  Offered
Spring semester.

PWR 230
3 hours
Technical Writing
Technical Writing prepares students to design effective technical documents for both
written and oral communication.  The course emphasizes business communications,
technical reports, scientific papers, compliance reporting, and technical documentation.




PWR 243
3 hours
Editing
Provides training in content editing, copyediting, and proofreading for book publishers,
magazines, and newspapers.  Prerequisites: JRN 115 and PWR 101.  Offered Fall semester.

PWR 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

PWR 313
2 hours
Article Writing I
An introduction to writing from a Christian worldview and an overview of the
different writing genres, with an emphasis on writing articles for publication.
Stresses functional skills such as self-editing, interviewing techniques, developing
vocabulary skills, and learning to cover news.  Through readings and writing
assignments, the student will follow a step-by-step process of learning the foundations
of article writing.  This course is offered through Taylor University Online (TUO).

PWR 314
2 hours
Article Writing II
A course concentrating on finding, evaluating, researching, and writing the various
kinds of non-fiction articles.  Self-editing, interviewing techniques, and developing
vocabulary skills are emphasized as students write humor, how-to, inspirational,
investigative, opinion, and other types of articles. Building on the foundational skills
learned in Article Writing I, students will learn the advanced specialty areas of
article writing.  This course is offered through Taylor University Online (TUO).

PWR 323
3 hours
Non-Fiction and Scriptwriting
Introductory course and workshop in the instruction and practice of writing non-
fiction and scriptwriting.  This course is offered through Taylor University Online (TUO).

PWR 327
3 hours
Introduction to Fiction Writing
An introductory course concentrating on the instruction and practice of writing
fiction.  This course is offered through Taylor University Online (TUO).

PWR 345
3 hours
Inspirational Writing
Focuses on writing for the Christian market: nonfiction (using the Bible well to write good
Bible questions for studies and lesson plans for various age groups), devotionals, personal
testimonies, and fiction (e.g., short stories, flash fiction).  Students develop the ability to
write in a captivating manner, showing solid Bible knowledge and understanding.  Students
also explore Christian writers past and present.  Prerequisite: PWR 101.

PWR 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

PWR 365
3 hours
Writing Seminar
Concentrated instruction in an area of specialized writing.  Writers in residence lead
classes and writing workshops on such topics as Detective Fiction, Inspirational Writing,
Biography, Magazine Features, Screenplays, and Writing for Children and Young Adults.
Students may receive credit for approved off-campus experiences such as the Los Angeles Film
Studies Program and semester at York St. John University.  Prerequisite: Permission of chair of
the Communication Department.  May be taken multiple times for credit.  May only count twice
toward major or minor requirements.

PWR 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

PWR 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally, one
hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.

PWR 423
3 hours
Advanced Non-Fiction Writing
The purpose of this course is to provide advanced academic instruction in applying
ethical principles to the process of gathering, analyzing and integrating information
into powerful nonfiction books.  The ultimate goal is to seek out powerful stories
reflecting a Christian worldview and in all work to clearly and accurately
communicate truth.  This course is offered through Taylor University Online (TUO).

PWR 427
3 hours
Advanced Fiction Writing
The purpose of this course is to provide academic instruction in reviewing classic
and current prominent fiction written from a Christian perspective, analyzing
current fiction and novels, and learning the basics of writing effective fiction.  The
ultimate goal is to clearly and accurately communicate themes that reflect a
Christian worldview in an excellent and effective manner.  Prerequisites: PWR 313,
PWR 314, PWR 323, and PWR 327.  This course is offered through Taylor University
Online (TUO).

PWR 444
3 hours
Book Editing and Publishing
Students participate in the process of turning a manuscript into a print-ready book.
Instructor will solicit manuscripts (potentially from faculty or other established
writers) and walk students through the entire process as if they are a publishing house.
Students will study publishing houses in depth, work as publishing boards, create pro
formas and budgets, work as agents and acquisition editors, then as editors and copy
editors.  Offered Spring semester.

PWR 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.

PWR 472
3 hours
Freelance Writing
Offers experience in the techniques and strategies of freelance writing.  This course
focuses on writing and marketing manuscripts for both religious and secular publications.
Students will be required to submit work for publication.  Prerequisite: PWR 101 or
instructor permission.  Offered Fall semester.

PWR 475
3 hours
Writing for Publication
Intensive seminar on writing manuscripts for publication.  Course offered in
partnership with "Write to Publish" conference, often held in Wheaton each June.
Students participate in conference and attend workshops with authors, editors,
literary agents, and publishers.  Students then work closely with instructor to
prepare manuscripts for publication.  In addition to tuition, students must pay
conference registration fee.  Offered Summer term.

PWR 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with
emphasis on directed readings and discussion.

PWR 486
1 hour

Senior Paper/Portfolio Development
Seniors will develop their senior paper/portfolio.  Prerequisite: CAC 485.  Offered
Spring semester.

PWR 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.
Open to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

PWR 492
8-16 hours
Internship
Professional semester of supervised internship in a work setting related to the
major field of study.  Prerequisites: Completion of departmental core and major core
courses and approval of the department faculty.

Chinese Courses
CHI 101
4 hours
Elementary Chinese I
The skills of listening, speaking, and writing are taught in the context of daily
happenings in the Chinese-speaking world.  The essentials of grammar are
studied.  Lab activities are provided.  Offered Fall semester.

CHI 102
4 hours
Elementary Chinese II
See CHI 101.  Prerequisite CHI 101.  Offered Spring semester.

CHI 201
3 hours
Intermediate Chinese I
Emphasis is placed on the conversational approach with additional reading and
writing.  Prerequisite: CHI 102.  Offered Fall semester.

CHI 202
3 hours
Intermediate Chinese II
See CHI 201.  Prerequisite CHI 201.  Offered Spring semester.
English Courses
ENG 101
3 hours
Fundamentals of College Composition
Introduction to college-level writing and preparation for ENG 110. Students will
improve their ability to read academic texts and respond to them in their own
writing. They will learn fundamental writing processes, including improving their
credibility, confidence, and voice as writers and revising their writing to meet
minimum college-level standards. Offered Fall semester.

ENG 110
3 hours
College Composition
Practice in writing clear and effective prose through several expository modes,
including a formal research paper.  Brief review of grammar and mechanics as
necessary, with concentration on analytical thinking.  This course must be taken during
the freshman year.  Meets foundational core writing requirement.  ENG 110 is a
prerequisite to all other English courses except ENG 101, ENG 230, ENG 233, ENG 240,
ENG 243, and ENG 250.

ENG 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

ENG 211
3 hours
Introduction to Creative Writing
A general introduction to and overview of creative writing (including poetry, fiction,
drama, and creative nonfiction) that meets the requirement for secondary
education students and also serves potential majors and other interested students.
Classroom setting with textbook; directed workshop activities after midterm facilitated by
selected ENG 410 students.  Prerequisite: ENG 110.  Offered Fall semester.

ENG 212
3 hours
Critical Approaches to Literature
Introduction to basic literary analysis and theory with emphasis on informed reading
and critical, written response to selections of poetry, fiction, drama and film.
Includes minorities literature.  Primarily intended for English majors, but recommended
for all students who desire greater reading and writing skills.  Prerequisite: ENG 110.

ENG 230
3 hours
World Literature
A selective survey of world literary achievement from antiquity to the present,
tracing the development of themes and ideas.  Meets foundational core literature
requirement.

ENG 233
3 hours
Literary London
An annual January-term course that travels to London and elsewhere in the United
Kingdom, enriching the reading and discussion of assigned works of British
Literature by experiencing the locations and culture that helped shape those works.
Meets foundational core literature requirement.  Enrollment with permission of instructor.
Offered January interterm.

ENG 240
3 hours
American Literature
A survey of the American literary tradition from its origins to the present,
evaluating and comparing themes, ideas and styles.  Meets foundational core literature
requirement.

ENG 243
3 hours
Latin American Literature
Survey of Latin American Literature offered through the Taylor University Ecuador
program.  Students will study a variety of genres and literary periods comparing
themes, ideas, and styles.  Meets the foundational core literature requirement.

ENG 250
3 hours
British Literature
Explores British literature from its beginnings to the present, including a brief
historical overview of the development of the English language.  Meets foundational
core literature requirement.

ENG 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.
ENG 300
1-2 hours
Literary Editing and Publishing I: Parnassus
Hands-on production of Taylor’s literary magazine from concept to finished product.
Two credit hours per semester may be earned by students holding senior editorships of
Taylor’s official literary magazine.  One hour per semester may be earned by those holding
secondary positions approved by the instructor.  A maximum of four hours may count toward
fulfilling the English writing concentration requirements; two hours maximum may count
toward the English literature concentration requirements.  A maximum of six hours in all
writing lab courses from any discipline may be earned toward graduation.  Prerequisites:
Permission of writing coordinator, ENG 211, and ENG 212.

ENG 305
3 hours
Writing Theory and Grammar
An introduction to the theories, research, and pedagogy of composition (including
grammar).  Topics include rhetorical, philosophical, and cognitive theories of writing;
composition research; and writing pedagogy.  Course designed for both creative
writing and English education majors.  Prerequisite: ENG 110.

ENG 309
3 hours
Teaching English in Secondary, Junior High/Middle School
A junior-level course that presents models of professionalism for English Education
majors.  Strategies and techniques for effective planning, teaching, and evaluating
materials with English/Language Arts curricula are demonstrated and developed.
Does not count as a major or minor elective.  Prerequisites: EDU 150, EDU 260, and
approval into the Teacher Educational Program.

ENG 311
3 hours
Writing and Rhetoric
Examines the foundational ideas from rhetoric and composition studies that relate
to the effectiveness of written communication.  Students will learn to apply these
ideas to their own writing.  Topics include classical to contemporary rhetoric, the
essay, persuasion, and construction of meaning through writing, invention, and voice.
Offered January interterm of odd years.  Prerequisites: ENG 211 and 212.

ENG 320
3 hours
Poetry Writing
Comprehensive instruction and guided workshop in writing poetry.  Recommended
for English BA majors with either literature or writing concentrations; available to all majors.
Prerequisites: ENG 110 and 211.  Offered Spring semester.

ENG 321
3 hours
Fiction Writing
Comprehensive instruction and guided workshop in writing fiction.  Recommended
for English BA majors with either literature or writing concentrations; available to all majors.
Prerequisites: ENG 110 and 211.  Offered Spring semester.

ENG 325
3 hours
Creative Nonfiction
Comprehensive instruction and guided workshop in creative nonfiction.  Emphasis
on distinguishing and practicing sub-genres, such as memoir, nature essay, personal
essay and journalistic essay.  Prerequisites: ENG 110 and ENG 211.  Offered Spring
semester of even years.

ENG 331
3 hours
American Literature to 1865
Explores the complexity of literary origins with its variety of Native-American,
discovery, colonial, federal, Enlightenment, and African-American voices through the
Romantic period.  Prerequisites: ENG 212 and 200-level English literature course.  Offered
Fall semester of odd years.

ENG 332
3 hours
American Literature 1865-1945
Explores the themes and characteristics of key works of American fiction, poetry, and
drama in the context of the late nineteenth and mid-twentieth century.  Prerequisites:
ENG 212 and 200- level English literature course.  Offered Fall semester of even years.

ENG 333
3 hours
Business and Technical Writing
Practice in the forms of writing required in business and industry.  Prerequisites: ENG
110, ENG 211, and ENG 212.


ENG 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.  Prerequisites: ENG 211
and ENG 212.

ENG 361
3 hours
Drama
A selective survey of the historical development of drama from its origins to the
present day.  Counts for either pre-twentieth- or twentieth-century requirement.
Prerequisite: ENG 212 and 200-level English literature course.  Offered Spring semester
of odd years.

ENG 362
3 hours
Shakespeare
Intensive analysis of selected plays and sonnets.  Attention is given to the
conventions of the Elizabethan and Jacobean theater.  Prerequisite: ENG 212 and 200-
level English literature course.  Offered Spring semester.

ENG 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest at the discretion of the department but
not listed as a regular course offering.  Such courses may count as major elective hours
or foundational core hours, pending the approval of the English Department.  Prerequisite:
ENG 212 and 200-level English literature course.  Offered primarily during January
interterm and occasional Fall or Spring semesters.

ENG 371
3 hours
The Novel
A selective survey of the historical development of the novel, from its origins to
the present day.  Counts for either pre-twentieth- or twentieth-century
requirement.  Prerequisite: ENG 212 and 200-level English literature course.  Offered
Spring semester of even years.

ENG 373
3 hours
Literature of Diverse Cultures
A critical study of life in a global community, focusing on the twentieth-century
literature of one or more cultures.  Primarily intended for English majors, but
recommended for all students desiring cross-cultural awareness.  Prerequisite: ENG
212 and 200-level English literature course.  Offered Spring semester of even years.

ENG 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Offered primarily during Summer.  Prerequisites: ENG 211 and ENG 212.

ENG 410
3 hours
Advanced Creative Writing
Intensive practice in selected creative genres.  Students may also serve as workshop
leaders for ENG 211 students.  May be taken twice.  Prerequisite: Permission of
instructor and ENG 211, ENG 212, ENG 320, ENG 321, ENG 325, or ENG 472.  Offered
Fall semester.

ENG 412
3 hours
Early English Literature
A selective study of English literature from “Beowulf” through Chaucer and
Malory’s “Le Morte d’Arthur.” Prerequisite: ENG 212 and 200-level English literature
course.  Offered Fall semester of odd years.

ENG 422
3 hours
Renaissance Literature
A study of representative prose writers and non-dramatic poets of the English
Renaissance, such as More, Spenser, Donne, Herbert, and Milton.  Prerequisite: ENG
212 and 200-level English literature course.  Offered Spring semester of even years.

ENG 426
3 hours
Restoration and Eighteenth-Century Literature
A selective study of poets and prose writers from 1660 to 1798, such as Defoe,
Dryden, Fielding, Pope, Swift, Boswell, and Johnson.  Prerequisites: ENG 212 and 200-
level English literature course.  Offered Fall semester of even years.

ENG 431
3 hours
Romantic Literature
A study of writers from 1798 to 1832, such as Blake, Wordsworth, Coleridge, Byron,
Shelley, Keats, and Lamb.  Some attention is given to representative novelists.
Prerequisites: ENG 212 and 200-level English literature course.  Offered Fall semester of
even years.

ENG 441
3 hours
Victorian Literature
English authors from 1832 to 1901, such as Tennyson, Browning, Arnold, Carlyle,
Newman and Ruskin.  Some attention is given to representative novelists.  Prerequisite:
ENG 212 and 200-level English literature course.  Offered Fall semester of odd years.

ENG 443
3 hours
American Literature 1945-Present
Explores the themes and characteristics of American fiction, poetry, and drama from
the mid-twentieth century period to the present.  Prerequisites: ENG 212 and 200- level
English literature course.  Offered Fall semester of even years and Spring semester of odd
years.

ENG 444
3 hours
Contemporary Literature
A study of selected poetry, fiction, and drama since 1960.  Prerequisite: ENG 212 and
200-level English literature course.  Offered Fall semester of odd years.

ENG 445
3 hours
Modern British Literature
A study of poetry, fiction, nonfiction, and drama by such twentieth-century writers as
Woolf, Joyce, Eliot, Auden, Beckett, Lessing, and Larkin.  Prerequisites: ENG 212 and
200-level English literature course.

ENG 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.

ENG 470
3 hours
Literary Editing and Publishing II: Relief Journal
This advanced course has two main focal points: an introduction to literary editing
and publishing in general and the publication of the national journal Relief in particular.
Relief publishes creative writing and visual art that help shape the landscapes of faith,
imagination, and creativity for the contemporary reader.  May be taken twice.
Prerequisites:  Permission of the instructor, ENG 211, ENG 212, and ENG 300.

ENG 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with emphasis
on directed readings and discussion.

ENG 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.  Open
to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

ENG 492
1 hour
Senior Project Research
Students are required to meet on a regular basis with senior project directors in
order to plan, draft, and complete a preliminary version of the senior project.

ENG 493
3 hours
English Capstone
Designed as a culminating experience for all English majors wherein students evaluate
the status and the goals of their studies in a flexible forum exploring academic and
professional issues.  Senior Projects are completed for submission to project
directors.  Prerequisite: ENG 492.  Offered January interterm.


French Courses
FRE 101
4 hours
Elementary French I
Stresses reading and the use of spoken language, including the essentials of
grammar, and offers an introduction to French culture.  Includes coordinated lab
activities.  Offered as needed.

FRE 102
4 hours
Elementary French II
See FRE 101.  Prerequisite FRE 101.  Offered as needed.
FRE 201
3 hours
Intermediate French I
Continues and builds upon the approach of FRE 101 and FRE 102 through grammar
review and intensive reading.  Language lab activities are provided to promote oral
communication.  Prerequisite FRE 102.

FRE 202
3 hours
Intermediate French II
See FRE 201.  Prerequisite FRE 201.


Korean Courses
KOR 101
4 hours
Elementary Korean I
The first half of the elementary Korean language course.  This course is designed
for those who have no previous (or very limited) knowledge of the Korean
language.  Emphasis will be placed on the fundamentals of listening, speaking, and
the introduction of Korean culture.  Offered Fall semester.

KOR 102
4 hours
Elementary Korean II
The second part of first year Korean.  The course provides students with further
conversational and grammatical skills beyond those learned in the first semester.
Prerequisite KOR 101.  Offered Spring semester.
KOR 201
3 hours
Intermediate Korean I
The first half of second year Korean language course.  The objective of the course is
to equip students with communicative skills in speaking, reading, and writing at the
intermediate level in Korean, such as expanding simple ideas into imposing various
kinds of the speaker’s stance.  Prerequisite: KOR 102.  Offered Fall semester.

KOR 202
3 hours
Intermediate Korean II
The second part of second year Korean.  The course provides students with further
conversational and grammatical skills beyond those learned in the first semester.
Prerequisite KOR 201.  Offered Spring semester.

Spanish Courses
SPA 101
4 hours
Elementary Spanish I
The skills of listening, speaking, reading, and writing are taught in the context of
daily happenings in the Spanish-speaking world.  The essentials of grammar are
studied.  Lab activities are provided.

SPA 102
4 hours
Elementary Spanish II
See SPA 101.  Prerequisite: SPA 101.

SPA 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

SPA 201
3 hours
Intermediate Spanish I
Emphasis is placed on the conversational approach with additional reading and
writing.  Prerequisite: SPA 102.

SPA 202
3 hours
Intermediate Spanish II
See SPA 201.  Prerequisite: SPA 201.

SPA 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

SPA 301
3-6 hours
Spanish Conversation I
Intensive practice in oral Spanish to increase fluency and authenticity through
activities and conversation in Cuenca, Ecuador.

SPA 302
3 hours
Spanish Language Study
A course designed for the promotion of oral and written proficiency with an
emphasis on experiential learning, cultural and linguistic immersion.  Students will
have intensive practice to increase communicative competence through advanced
level activities and conversations.  Offered as Interterm and Summer trips in various
locations and Fall and Spring in Ecuador.

SPA 304
3 hours
Introduction to Spanish Linguistics
Introduction to the way the Spanish language is structured and to the various
subfields of linguistic analysis, such as morphology, syntax, and semantics.  Students
will be required to analyze the linguistic structure of sounds, words, and phrases.
Prerequisite: SPA 202.

SPA 305
3 hours
Communication in Spanish
A course designed for the promotion of oral proficiency that focuses on
interpersonal and academic discourse of cultural topics related to the Spanish-
speaking world.  Prerequisite: SPA 202.




SPA 310
3 hours
Culture and Civilization of Hispanic America
An historical/cultural overview of the people, and the political, economic, and social
forces that have shaped Spanish-speaking countries in the western hemisphere from
the 15th century through the contemporary period.  Prerequisite: SPA 305 or instructor’s
permission.

SPA 321
3 hours
The Art of Writing Spanish
An advanced workshop experience in the writing of Spanish.  Includes a review of
grammar and mechanics and practice in several expository modes, including a formal
research paper.  Prerequisite: SPA 305 or instructor’s permission.

SPA 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.  Prerequisite: SPA 305 or
instructor’s permission.

SPA 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.
Prerequisite: SPA 305 or instructor’s permission.

SPA 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally, one
hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Prerequisite: SPA 305 or instructor’s permission.  Offered primarily during summer.

SPA 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.  Prerequisite: SPA 305 or instructor’s permission.

SPA 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with emphasis
on directed readings and discussion.  Prerequisite: SPA 305 or instructor’s permission.

SPA 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.  Open
to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.  Prerequisite: SPA 305 or instructor’s
permission.


Modern Languages Courses
MDL 309

2 hours
Teaching Modern Languages in Secondary, Junior High/Middle School
This course is designed to provide students with fundamental linguistic knowledge
of Spanish and French and the application of this knowledge to different aspects of
instruction of Spanish/French and to language learning and teaching in bilingual
situations.  Those aspects include the acquisition of first and second language, the
methodologies of foreign language instruction, socio-cultural variables and general
knowledge of Spanish morphology and grammar, and understanding the difficulties
of English-speaking students in Spanish class.  This course consists of three major
parts: (1) second language acquisition; (2) Spanish/French grammar approached
from the teacher perspective; and (3) sociolinguistics, instructional technology and
language assessment.  Prerequisites: EDU 150, 260, approval into the teacher education
program, and junior status.

GEO 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

GEO 210
4 hours
Physical Geography
The study of the basic physical characteristics of the earth and the effect of the
natural environment upon the activities of humankind.  Meets the foundational
core earth science requirement.

GEO 220
3 hours
Regional Geography
A course offering basic ideas and supporting facts about contemporary world
geography.  Students study eight world regions: Europe, former Soviet Union,
Latin America, Anglo-America, Middle East, Orient, Pacific World and Africa.
Meets the foundational core general social science requirement.

GEO 230
3 hours
Political Geography
The geographic interpretation of world relations.  The relationships of
geographic elements to the development of nations both past and present are
examined.

GEO 270

1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.
GEO 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

GEO 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

GEO 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally, one
hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.  Offered
primarily during Summer.

GEO 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.

GEO 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with emphasis
on directed readings and discussion.

GEO 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.  Open
to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.



Global Studies Courses
GBS 130
3 hours
Introduction to Global Studies
Required for international studies majors, this course introduces students to cross-
cultural issues, international current events, and international career opportunities.
Meets the foundational core general social science requirement.  Offered Spring semester.

GBS 135
1 hour
Introduction to Intercultural Learning
This course focuses on preparation for an intercultural experience.  It includes an
overview of intercultural frameworks and encourage a learner’s mindset that is
curious about cultures, identity, value-formation, and similar and different ways of
making meaning in the world.  In an increasingly diverse and connected world, this
course provides tools for reflection and learning that will help students bridge
across cultural differences.

GBS 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

GBS 210
3 hours
Learning in Global and Intercultural Contexts
Students are introduced to intercultural concepts, while assuming a learner’s
posture towards an increased understanding of self and others, as well as various
ways of making meaning in the world.  In an increasingly diverse and connected
world, this course provides tools for reflection and learning that help students
bridge across differences.  They consider identity and cultural formation, differences
and similarities through the lens of a variety of cultural contexts, and frameworks
for cultural dimensions.

GBS 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

GBS 325
3 hours
Peace and Conflict: Peacebuilding and Reconciliation
This course studies peace and conflict through an interdisciplinary lens, examining the
impact of conflict across multiple sectors of society—religious, social, economic, and
political.   The impact of conflict on civic society and individuals will be examined
through educational activities that explore identity, peacebuilding, conflict resolution,
and mediation.  Meets foundational core general social science requirement.

GBS 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

GBS 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

GBS 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally, one hour of credit
is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.  Offered primarily during Summer.

GBS 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.

GBS 480
1-4 hours
Global Studies Senior Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with emphasis
on directed readings and discussion.  Students develop, revise, and complete a major
research project resulting in a 20-25 page paper.  This course serves as the senior capstone
experience for the Global Studies major and fulfills the senior comprehensive requirement.
Prerequisite: GBS 130.

GBS 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.  Open
to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

115
History Courses

All 3 credit hour HIS courses may meet the foundational core curriculum history
requirement except where indicated.  The same course may not meet both the
foundational core curriculum history and social science requirements.

HIS 103
3 hours
World History I
A survey of the foundations of civilizations and complex societies across the globe
from 3200 BC to AD 1500.

HIS 104
3 hours
World History II
A survey of the early modern and modern world (AD 1500 to present), with
attention given to international economic, political, and cultural contact, and its
consequences for peoples and cultures.

HIS 124
3 hours
History of the United States to 1877
A survey of the social, political, and cultural development of the people of the United
States from the colonization period through Reconstruction.

HIS 125
3 hours
History of the United States since 1877
A survey of the social, political, and cultural development of the people of the
United States from Reconstruction to the present.

HIS 130
3 hours
Introduction to History
This course introduces students to the discipline of professional history.  Topics covered
include but are not limited to rival forms of historiography; how to research, write, and
cite academic papers; understanding archives, professional organizations, university
presses, and other marks of the historical practice; and the application of a Christian
worldview to the study of the past.  Does not meet foundational core requirement.

HIS 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.
Departmental approval is needed to meet the foundational core history requirement.

HIS 211
3 hours
History and Geography of Latin America
Historical and geographical study of the nations between the Rio Grande River and
Cape Horn.  Attention is given to the development of each Latin American area and its
relationship to the United States.  Meets foundational core general social science requirement.

HIS 212
3 hours
History and Geography of East Asia
An examination of the histories of China, Japan, and Korea from their earliest
foundations to the contemporary era, with particular emphasis on the political,
religious, philosophical and cultural underpinnings of these societies.  The
geographic aspects of the region are also included.  Meets foundational core general
social science requirement.

HIS 213
3 hours
History and Geography of Africa
A study of the historic, physical, and cultural aspects of Africa, with primary emphasis on
sub-Sahara Africa and including the significant role Africa plays in the modern world.
Meets foundational core general social science requirement.  Offered Fall semester.

HIS 215
3 hours
History and Geography of South/Southeast Asia
An exploration of the political, cultural, and religious development of the Indian
subcontinent from 2500 B.C. to the modern era, as well as a survey of Southeast
Asia with a focus on Indonesia, the Philippines, Thailand, Singapore and Vietnam.
The course includes study of the impact of geography on the region’s people and
history.  Meets foundational core general social science requirement.

HIS 223
3 hours
The Greco-Roman World

An examination of the ancient Mediterranean civilizations of Greece and Rome
from the Bronze Age cultures of the Minoans and Mycenaeans to the "Fall" of Rome
and its aftermath.  Attention is given to the importance of geographical and spatial
concepts in the formation of global trends.  Students taking this course for the
Women's History minor will write a paper on an aspect of the life of women during this
time period.

HIS 224
3 hours
The Middle Ages
A study of the history of the Medieval world from the 4th century AD to the 15th
century AD.  This course will focus primarily on Western Europe, but it will also
include both Byzantium and the Islamic world and the interaction of these three
spheres.  Special attention is given to the dramatic changes in religion, culture, gender,
and ideology that occurred during this period.  Students taking this course for the Women's
History minor will write a paper on an aspect of the life of women during this time period.
HIS 225
3 hours
Women in Ancient Egypt
An examination of the lives of women in Pharaonic Egypt from approximately 3200
BC to 332 BC.  To do this, we will utilize evidence from ancient literature and art,
historical inscriptions, and archaeological finds.

HIS 226
3 hours
Women in World History

This course is a comparative study of the history of women in the world from the
early modern period to the present day, with a particular focus on women of the non-
Western world.  It examines the similarities and differences in their cultural, social,
religious, political, and economic status.

HIS 227
3 hours
War in American History
This course examines issues of war and peace in American history from the early
seventeenth century to the early twenty-first century.  While most military conflicts
will receive coverage, more in-depth attention will be paid to major ones like the
American Revolution, Civil War, World Wars I and II, and Vietnam.  The course will
analyze American wars from various angles, including but not limited to: military
history, social history, race and gender, intellectual life, and religion.  Through an
examination of primary and secondary sources, students will leave with an enriched
understanding of war in American history.  Offered Fall semester of odd years.

HIS 228
3 hours

The Roosevelts
This course examines the Roosevelt family and its importance to American history.
Students will be acquainted with some of the specialized scholarship on the Roosevelts
as well as with broader work on American history in the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries.  Students will also consider the benefits and drawbacks of historical
documentary filmmaking as exemplified in the Ken Burns film, The Roosevelts (2014).
Students counting this course toward the women's history minor must write their research
paper on some aspect of the Roosevelt women.

HIS 230
3 hours
American Religious History
A study of the historical development in the United States of such movements as
Puritanism, revivalism, the social gospel, Judaism, Catholicism, and variant forms of Protestantism.

HIS 233
3 hours
Reformation Christianity
A study of the history of Christianity from 1500 to 1650, dealing with the achievements
of Luther, Zwingli, and Calvin; the expansion of Protestantism in Germany,
Switzerland, and England; the Anabaptist movement; the Catholic Reformation; and
the religious wars up to the Treaty of Westphalia.  This course is offered through Taylor
University Online (TUO).

HIS 235
3 hours
Women in American History

A survey of women in America from the colonial era to the present.  Emphasis is
placed on the historical experience of women in terms of perceptions, restrictions and
resistance, and activities.

HIS 237
3 hours
The World War I Generation
This course examines the generation that came of age during World War I.  The
course focuses on the changes that the war caused as well as the spiritual crisis that
developed in response to the war.  The course uses the British authors collection in
the Zondervan library to explore themes that defined the World War I generation.
This course meets the requirements for the Public History and Women's History
concentrations and minors.

HIS 240
3 hours
European Religious History
A survey of the development of Christianity and Judaism in Europe from the Roman
Empire to the contemporary era, with special emphasis on the early church, the
conversion of the barbarians, the medieval church, the Reformation, Pietism, 19th century
reform movements and the impact of World Wars I and II.

HIS 245
3 hours
Revolutionary America
This course examines the complex society that developed in eastern North America
during the 17th and 18th centuries.  It explores the farreaching repercussions of contact
between Europeans, Native Americans, and Africans; the cultural, intellectual, military,
and political dimensions of European imperial endeavors; the unique social formations
that resulted from migration and the challenges of sharing space; the development of the
American Revolution; and the role of Christianity in the founding of the United States.

HIS 270

1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.
Departmental approval is needed to meet the foundational core history requirement.

116
HIS 310
3 hours
The Modern Civil Rights Movement
This course examines the modern Civil Rights Movement in the United States.
The focus is on the years 1954-1970, but significant attention is also placed on
the background to and aftermath of this period.  This course is offered in both on-
campus and travel-study formats.

HIS 311
3 hours
History and Geography of Latin America
See HIS 211.

HIS 312
3 hours
History and Geography of East Asia
See HIS 212.

HIS 313
3 hours
History and Geography of Africa
See HIS 213.

HIS 315
3 hours
History and Geography of South/Southeast Asia
See HIS 215.

HIS 317
3 hours
The Gilded Age and Progressive Era (1877-1920)
This course probes deeply into the Gilded Age and Progressive Era (1877-1920).
Students will deepen their understanding of the principal issues and
controversies in this period through readings in primary and secondary sources.
Oral presentations and written assignments will comprise the bulk of student
work.  The course will be organized around several prominent figures from this
period.  Students may count this course toward a minor in women’s history with a
research paper on some aspect of women’s history in this period.  Does not meet
foundational core history requirement.  Offered Spring semester of even years.

HIS 320
3 hours
Ancient Near Eastern History
An examination of the cultures of the ancient Near East from prehistoric times
through the 4th century B.C.  Attention is given to the importance of
geographical and spatial concepts in the formation of global trends.  Prerequisite:
HIS 130.

HIS 321
3 hours
Modern Middle East
See POS 321.

HIS 331
4 hours
Reformation and Enlightenment
Historical study of Europe from Luther to the Bastille, including the Ages of the
Reformation, Absolutism, and the Enlightenment.

HIS 335
3 hours
Modern European Empires
An examination of Europe’s cooperation and competition to build global
empires in the nineteenth century.  An emphasis on ideologies, policies, and
broad understanding of the scope of European imperialism.  Attention is given
to the importance of geographical and spatial concepts in the formation of global
trends.  Does not meet foundational core history requirement.

HIS 340
4 hours
Colonial America
This course examines the complex society that developed in eastern North America
during the 17th and 18th centuries. It explores the far-reaching repercussions of
contact between Europeans, Native Americans, and Africans; the cultural,
intellectual, military, and political dimensions of European imperial endeavors;
the unique social formations that resulted from migration and the challenges of
sharing space; and the role of Christianity in the founding of the United States.

HIS 342
4 hours
History of England
A study of English political, constitutional, cultural and intellectual developments,
the growth of the British Empire and international relations.

HIS 345
3 hours
Revolutionary America
See HIS 245.
HIS 352
3 hours
African-American History
A survey of African-American history from African origins through the modern civil rights
movement.  Emphasis is placed on the oppression and resistance to oppression that
characterize the African-American experience.  Offered Spring semester.

HIS 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.  Does not meet the
foundational core history requirement.

HIS 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.
Departmental approval is needed to meet the foundational core history requirement.

HIS 371
3 hours
Civil War Era (1820-1880)
A study of the most dominant public issue in mid-nineteenth century America, namely
the sectional conflict stemming from the issue of slavery.  The course gives major
emphasis to: (1) the institutions, ideas and events that led to the Civil War; (2) the war
itself; and (3) the reconstruction of the Union.

HIS 376
3 hours
History of Constitutional Issues: Institutional Powers
Considers the development of judicial review in relation to the powers of the President
and Congress.  Focuses on judicial interpretations of the commerce and taxing clauses
as well as state powers under the due process clause of the 14th Amendment.  This
course is offered through Taylor University Online (TUO).

HIS 385
3 hours
Constitutional Law I: Foundation
See POS 385.

HIS 386
3 hours
Constitutional Law II: Civil Liberties and Rights
See POS 386.

HIS 391
3 hours
The World Since 1945
An examination of key world events in Africa, Asia, Europe, Latin America, the United
States, and Canada since World War II.  The emphasis is on the political and economic
development, though cultural and social aspects are also included.

HIS 392
3 hours
Twentieth Century U.S.  History
A study of the political, military, economic, and cultural development of the nation during
its rise to world prominence.  Prerequisites: HIS 124 and HIS 125.

HIS 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally, one
hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.  Does not
meet the foundational core history requirement.  Offered primarily during Summer.

HIS 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities as
the library or laboratory.

HIS 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with emphasis on
directed readings and discussion.  Does not meet the foundational core history requirement.  This
course, including the 30-page major research project, fulfills the senior comprehensive requirement.

HIS 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.  Open to
students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.
Legal Studies Courses
LGS 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

LGS 250
3 hours
Law and Society
Examines the role of laws and the legal system in a societal context.  Topics include the
structure and function of the federal and state judicial systems, relationship of courts to
legislatures and administrative agencies, and critical analyses of law as a tool for
preserving social order and effecting change.  The course will include a comparative
study of legal systems and a discussion of the rule of law and development of democratic
institutions of government.  Students will also address the cultural view of law, lawyers,
and the legal system including a consideration of law as a vocation for Christ followers.
117
LGS 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

LGS 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

LGS 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

LGS 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Offered primarily during Summer.

LGS 441
3 hours
Principles of Legal Analysis
Taught by an attorney, this course is designed for those who expect to attend law school.
Students gain experience with the writing, reading, and critical thought levels expected of all
law students.

LGS 442
3 hours
Legal Thought
An overview of ancient, modern, and contemporary theories of the law.  The course
explores the nature of law and its relationship to politics, morality, and ethics.
Prerequisite: MGT 311 or permission of instructor.

LGS 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.

LGS 480
3 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with emphasis
on directed readings and discussion.

LGS 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.  Open
to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

Orphans and Vulnerable Children Courses
OVC 110
3 hours
Introduction to Working with Orphans and Vulnerable Children
This course serves as the introduction to the field of working with OVC in a variety
of settings, exposing students to global needs and best practices in terms of
addressing those needs.  It takes an ecological approach to understand the child in
a vulnerable context.  Topics include orphan care, adoption, foster care, trafficking,
and refugees.  This course also includes theological and ethical approaches to care.

OVC 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

OVC 220
3 hours
Violence Against Children
This course introduces students to the global epidemic of violence against children.  It will
explore causes and consequence of violence at the individual and systemic level.  Topics
will cover human rights of children, violence in the home, violence in the work-place, and
violence in the community.  Meets the foundational core general social science requirement.

OVC 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

OVC 310
3 hours
Philanthropy and Grant-Writing
This course examines the role that grant-making foundations and individuals have
played in supporting activities designed to affect social change and public policies,
and the significance of that work on local and international communities.  Patterns of
giving, understanding philanthropy, structural and organizational issues, outlining and
writing proposals, as well as programmatic opportunities and constraints are examined.

OVC 329
3 hours
Monitoring and Evaluation 1: Data Collection
This course provides students with an introduction to methods in monitoring and
evaluation.  It will focus on designing research that would establish both efficacy and
effectiveness.  Students will be trained in how to collect data designed to measure
program and intervention objectives.  Attention is given to working with
stakeholders and beneficiaries, with particular focus on respecting the rights and
welfare of all those involved.  Both qualitative and quantitative methods will be taught.
OVC 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

OVC 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

OVC 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally, one
hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.  Offered
primarily during Summer.

OVC 429
3 hours
Monitoring and Evaluation 2: Data Analysis
This course equips students with specific statistical procedures related to monitoring
and evaluation.  Students will be trained in presenting results in both oral and written
format, with a focus on client consultation.  In addition, qualitative analysis will be
taught.

OVC 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.

OVC 480
3 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with emphasis
on directed readings and discussion.

OVC 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.  Open
to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

OVC 493
3 hours
Senior Capstone
This course serves as a culminating learning experience that requires students to
develop a senior portfolio that synthesizes the curriculum.  Students will be
encouraged to work on projects that would lead to focus on selected topics.


Political Science Courses
POS 100
3 hours
American Politics
Primary emphasis is given to the relationship between the theories and ideals of democracy
and the actual practice of making and implementing policy.  The course considers the
constitutional system, as well as the institutions of American government.  Meets foundational
core civic engagement or general social science requirement.  Offered Fall semester.

POS 150
3 hours
World Politics
Surveys the development of the international political system and the relations
among nation-states, international organizations, and other entities.  Gives special
attention to war, conflict resolution, and international law.  Meets foundational core
civic engagement or general social science requirement.

POS 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

POS 215
3 hours

Human Trafficking
An examination of human trafficking in the United States and the world utilizing the
expertise of professionals who serve trafficked victims and their specific roles.
Students will gain a clear understanding of the forms of human trafficking as well the
work of professionals and survivors who serve these disadvantaged persons.



118
POS 222
3 hours
Comparative Politics
Studies political institutions and processes in selected countries.  Focuses on political
culture, democracy, and factors affecting how well governments function.  Meets general
social science requirement.  Offered Fall semester of even years.

POS 224
3 hours
Foundations of Freedom
This course studies the roles played by the U.S. Constitution, free market economic system,
Judeo-Christian faith, and public policies promoting strong communities and families in
establishing and sustaining fundamental freedoms envisioned by our founders from political,
historical, and other relevant social science perspectives.  It examines why the founders
believed the governmental framework established in the Constitution is essential to sustain the
fundamental freedoms of life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.  Meets foundational core civic
engagement or general social science requirement.

POS 232
3 hours
Political Thinking
Introduces students to central concepts and theories of politics and engages students
in critical analysis of those concepts and theories.  Special consideration is given to key
works on the integration of Christianity and politics.  Offered Spring semester.

POS 233
3 hours
State and Local Politics
This course is designed to introduce the student to the theory, function, institutions,
processes, policies, and operations of state and local government and politics. The
increase in the importance and status of state and local politics and policy in meeting
the needs of its citizens necessitates such a course, particularly with the increasing
complexity of constitutional challenges, policy advocacy and innovation, and
intergovernmental relations. During times of economic and political crises, and the
increasing expansion of national governmental legal and regulatory authority, state
and local government politics is under increasing pressure to adapt during times of
economic and constitutional crisis. It is imperative that students have a solid
understanding of how state and local governments and politics work with the non-
profit and private sectors.

POS 245
3 hours
Research in Political Studies
An introduction to the conduct of research in the study of politics.  Students engage
in activities that help them develop basic research literacy and understanding as they
apply basic research methodology utilized by political scientists and practitioners.

POS 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

POS 304
3 hours
Global Governance
The course begins by surveying different approaches to the study of security.  It then
takes a thematic approach.  It considers whether liberal democracies are different
from other types of state in relation to war and attitudes to the laws or war.  It also
examines the issues of nuclear weapon, terrorism, controls on conventional arms
transfers, ethnic conflict, the news media and public opinion, humanitarian
intervention, the occupation of Iraq, Christians’ war and pacifism, and the
relationships between security and development.  Designed to serve as a foundation
for participation in the American National Model United Nations (AMUN)
simulation.  Offered Fall semester.

POS 310
3 hours
Constitutional Development
A survey of the major political battles that have defined the United States
Constitution over time.  Introduces students to prominent figures in Constitutional
thought, issues in Constitutional interpretation, and contemporary legal struggles.

POS 312
3 hours
Political Behavior
A description and examination of the voting behavior of the American people and
opinions about candidates, political parties and public policy.  Some attention is also
given to the formation of public opinion in a democratic polity.  Meets general social
science requirement.  Offered Spring semester of odd years.

POS 321
3 hours
Modern Middle East
A political history of Southwest Asia and North Africa in the 20th century.  Special
attention is given to the variety of governments in the region, Islam and politics and
domestic and international conflict.  Meets general social science requirement.  Offered
Spring semester.

POS 325
3 hours
American Foreign Policy
Uses case studies of major events in U.S. foreign relations since World War II to
consider the relationship between morality and politics.  Includes an overview of the
process of making and implementing foreign policy within the U.S. government.
Offered Fall semester of odd years.

POS 327
3 hours
International Law and Justice
International Law and Justice offers students an overview of the role of law in
international affairs and the benefits and challenges of supranational legal structures,
including international organizations, conventions, and other bilateral and multilateral
arrangements.  The course will commence with an analysis of the foundational
definitions and components of international law and the often-complicated
relationships between domestic legal systems and international legal frameworks.
Students then will explore in greater depth several specific content areas of
international law, including trade, the environment, security, and human rights.  The
course also will provide an opportunity for critical engagement with the concept of
justice in the development and application of international law, particularly for
vulnerable and marginalized individuals and communities, as well as the theological
foundations of justice.  Throughout the course, students will have opportunities to
discuss the unique expectations and opportunities for Christ followers to pursue
justice in a global context.

POS 331
3 hours
Public Policy
An extensive examination of the interaction between Congress and the Presidency
in making public policy.  The course focuses on major theories of public policy and
examines governmental policy-making from these perspectives.  Meets civic
engagement or general social science requirement.  Offered Fall semester.

POS 344


3 hours
Campaigns and Elections
This course will examine the foundation and development of campaigns and
elections in the US.  In addition, it will also focus on the role of political parties and
media and political communication.  Students will engage in actual campaign and
electoral behavior activity.  Participation as a volunteer in an actual campaign is
expected as part of course requirements.  Recommended course prerequisite: POS
100 and sophomore standing.  Offered every two years coinciding with fall election cycle.

POS 345


3 hours
Congress and the Presidency
Studies congressional processes such as leadership, committees and rules and the
role of the President in American politics.  Special emphasis is given to the
interaction between Congress and the President in formulating public policy.
Offered Spring semester of even years.

POS 350
3 hours
International Security
The concept of security is used very frequently in relation to international issues.
This course introduces students to the study of international security, including
theoretical, normative, and policy issues.  Offered January interterm.

POS 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

POS 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

POS 374
3 hours
Religious Liberty and Christian Freedom
This course introduces students to the subject of religious liberty and Christian
freedom, analyzing the nature of freedom and the position of Christianity as
foundational to liberty.  Students are then exposed to a comparative analysis of
hostility and persecution, its development, and its typology.  Offered Spring semester.

POS 385
3 hours
Constitutional Law I: Foundation
Considers the development of judicial review in relation to the powers of the
President and Congress.  Focuses on judicial interpretations of the commerce and
taxing clauses, as well as state powers under the due process clause of the 14th
Amendment.  Offered Fall semester.

POS 386
3 hours
Constitutional Law II: Civil Liberties and Rights
Focus is on the Bill of Rights and the equal protection clause of the 14th Amendment.
Considers such topics as freedoms of speech, press and religion, the civil rights
movement and the controversy over privacy rights.  Offered Spring semester.

POS 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Offered primarily during Summer.

119
POS 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.  Advanced work under the supervision of a professor in
connection with a special project or to enhance preparation for graduate work.

POS 462
3 hours
Theories of International Relations
International Relations as a discipline has always been characterized by the
extensive and significant theoretical ferment.  This course will provide an overview
of key theoretical traditions in International Relations and their evolution and
contestations in recent years.  Offered in odd years.

POS 465
2 hours
Senior Paper
A journal-length analytical research paper based on scholarship in the field that is
related to the student’s chosen topic.  Fulfills the senior comprehensive
requirement.

POS 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with
emphasis on directed readings and discussion.

POS 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.
Open to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.


Political Science, Philosophy, and Economics Courses
PPE 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

PPE 213
3 hours
International Political Economy
Examines trade, development and environmental protection as issues involving both states
and non-state actors in world politics.  Uses case studies to consider the relationship between
Christian ethics and the wealth and poverty of nations.  Meets foundational core civic
engagement or general social science requirement.  Offered Spring semester.

PPE 220
3 hours
Completing Capitalism
The course engages with the economic thought of leading economic practitioners as well as
seating this analysis within a wider ethical analysis of capitalism.  Students will be required to
explore key debates that occur at the nexus of economic and political theory and policy.
Students will have the opportunity to understand the nature of ethical challenges facing
modern capitalism, the key political-economic debates within modern capitalist societies,
multiple forms of capital that go beyond traditional understanding, and how we can engage
our faith in our analysis of capitalism.

PPE 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

PPE 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

PPE 361
3 hours
Western Political Thought
A survey of major thinkers from Plato to the present through discussion of
perennial issues such as individualism and community, liberty and equality and
governmental power.  Offered Fall semester.

PPE 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

PPE 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Offered primarily during Summer.

PPE 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.  Advanced work under the supervision of a professor in
connection with a special project or to enhance preparation for graduate work.

PPE 467
3 hours
Senior Seminar
Senior Seminar is designed to accomplish three goals: 1) engage the political science
graduating seniors in an overall assessment of the theory and practice of political
science and international relations, largely through approved and required readings
and writing projects; 2) provide the opportunity for political science graduating
seniors to develop a comprehensive and integrative faith and learning component
into a final research and writing project; and 3) to provide political science
graduating seniors to present their research findings before an on campus and/or
off campus audience, including faculty and peers.

PPE 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with
emphasis on directed readings and discussion.

PPE 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.
Open to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

Social Studies Courses
SOS 309
2 hours
Teaching Social Studies in Secondary, Junior High/Middle School
This course is a junior level secondary social studies methods course in which
various aspects of classroom instruction are addressed including standards, unit
and lesson planning, teaching strategies, questioning and critical thinking skills, P-12
student learning, and assessment.  Prerequisites: EDU 150 and EDU 260.

DAN 221
2 hours
Ballet
This course is designed to teach positions, steps, terminology, and introductory level
skills that form the basis of ballet technique.  Barre exercises, center exercises including
adagio, petite allegro and grand allegro, and quality stretching for a dancer’s workout will
be taught and perfected.  Additionally, there will be an introduction to various notable
performers and some of the historical and cultural aspects of ballet, presented through
discussion and video observations.  Meets a foundational core aesthetic literacy
requirement.  Offered Fall semester of odd years.

DAN 222
2 hours
Jazz
This course is designed to teach positions, steps, terminology, and introductory level skills
that form the basis of jazz technique.  A brief study of Luigi, Fosse, and contemporary jazz
will be introduced.  Stretches appropriate for the increase of flexibility and support will
be stressed and perfected.  Additionally, there will be an introduction to various notable
performers and some of the historical and cultural aspects of jazz, presented through
discussion and video observations. Jazz, contemporary and modern, techniques will be
explored in this class.  Meets a foundational core aesthetic literacy requirement.  Offered
every fourth Spring semester (alternates with DAN 221, DAN 223, DAN 224).

DAN 223
2 hours
Tap
This course is designed to teach positions, steps, terminology, and introductory level
skills that form the basic tap technique.  This course will be an elementary level of tap,
teaching the basics steps in tap dancing.  Theatre tap will be focused on in this class and
taught while learning some invaluable time steps for future use in auditions and
professional work.  Additionally, there will be an introduction to various notable
performers and some of the historical and cultural aspects of tap, presented through
discussion and video observations.  Meets a foundational core aesthetic literacy
requirement.  Offered every fourth Spring semester (alternates with DAN 221, DAN 222, DAN
224).

DAN 224
2 hours
Musical Theatre Styles
This course is designed to develop technique and ability from all aspects of dance
(ballet, jazz, and tap) and incorporate them into performance of Musical Theatre.
Students will be taught the importance of routine, weekly classes, and flexibility to
maintain their craft.  Classwork in stretching, small combinations, and a longer
musical theatre dance will be incorporated in every class.  Additionally, there will be
an introduction to various notable performers and choreographers of Broadway and
theatre, presented through discussion and video observations.  Meets a foundational
core aesthetic literacy requirement.  Offered every fourth Spring semester (alternates with
DAN 221, DAN 222, DAN 223).

DAN 231
1 hour
Technique: Ballet
This intermediate ballet course will provide progression, barre, center, and floor
exercises, with an opportunity for pre-pointe work, floor barre, conditioning, and
variations.  Advanced level technique allows for the refinement of intermediate skills
and breathing techniques for muscular strength and endurance exercises.

DAN 232
1 hour
Technique: Modern
This intermediate modern dance class focuses on proper technique, performing
complex combinations, and developing a personal style of each individual dancer.  Self-
discovery, discipline, and expression in the modern dance form will be encouraged and
explored.

DAN 241
3 hours
Dance History
Study the history of dance by learning the evolution of dance through the years,
important choreographers and performers, how dance styles throughout the world
have influenced mainstream, and where dance has been and where it is going.  Offered
Fall semester of odd years.

DAN 242
3 hours
Dance Pedagogy
Develop a strong knowledge in the classroom as an instructor.  Learn to find
corrections, know what to look for in ballet and modern technique, how to give
corrections, and the proper flow of a class.  Offered Spring semester of even years.

128
DAN 322
2 hours
Jazz
See DAN 222.

DAN 323
2 hours
Tap
See DAN 223.

DAN 324
2 hours
Musical Theatre Styles
See DAN 224.

DAN 331
1 hour
Technique: Ballet
See DAN 231.

DAN 332
1 hour
Technique: Modern
See DAN 232.
DAN 333
1 hour
Pointe
This course serves as an advance in the development of the student's skills in ballet.
A focus is on specific ballet techniques and performance qualities in ballet.  Offered
Spring semester of even years.

DAN 334
3 hours
Dance Improvisation and Composition
This course concentrates on techniques of improvisation and dance choreography:
improvisation in both singular and contact, composition in forms of ballet, modern,
and musical theatre production.  Offered Fall semester of even years.

DAN 383
1-4 hours
Applications in Technique
Application of study will serve as a practical measure of learning and expertise.  The
student will either serve as a teaching assistant for a modern, ballet, tap, jazz, or musical
theatre class, or serve as dance captain in a faculty directed production.

Music Courses
MUS 100
1 hour
Applied Lesson
Learning practice methods, building good techniques, acquiring sufficient repertoire,
gaining a broad knowledge of literature and composers, and achieving performance skills.
Does not meet a foundational core aesthetic literacy requirement.  Lessons are designed for
music majors and minors (registration overrides will be required for minors).  Lessons are ½ hour and
1 hour.  May be taken multiple times for credit.

MUS 100G
Applied Lesson—Guitar
MUS 100I
Applied Lesson—Instrumental
MUS 100K
Applied Lesson—Piano
MUS 100V
Applied Lesson—Voice

MUS 101
1 hour
Music Theory
A course in the rudiments of music designed to prepare the beginning music
major/minor for entrance into the music theory cycle.  Consists of integrated
laboratory experience for development of written, aural, and keyboard skills.
Proficiency placement test offered during Fall welcome weekend.  Meets a foundational core
aesthetic literacy requirement.  Offered Fall semester.

MUS 105
1 hour
Applied Lesson
Private instruction designed for personal enrichment and development of musical
talent.  Content determined by contract with instructor at the beginning of each
semester.  Meets a foundational core aesthetic literacy requirement.  Lessons are ½ hour.

MUS 105B
Applied Lesson—Brass
MUS 105G
Applied Lesson—Guitar
MUS 105K
Applied Lesson—Piano
MUS 105N
Applied Lesson—Organ
MUS 105P
Applied Lesson—Percussion
MUS 105S
Applied Lesson—Strings
MUS 105V
Applied Lesson—Voice
MUS 105W
Applied Lesson—Woodwind

MUS 118
2 hours
Vocal Diction I
A study of the International Phonetic Alphabet and its application for singers in Italian,
German, French, and English. Students will use classical and contemporary texts and
songs as their basis of study.  This class is to be taken in conjunction with Applied
Lessons, supplying a firm foundation for future study.  Required of all Voice specialties
and Musical Theatre majors.  Offered Spring semester.

MUS 119
1 hour
Vocal Diction II
A study of English, French, Italian, and German diction and its application in songs
and arias.  A working knowledge of the International Phonetic Alphabet is utilized as
a learning tool.  This class is to be taken in conjunction with applied lessons, supplying
a firm foundation for future study.  Required of all voice and musical theatre majors and
minors.  Prerequisite: MUS 118 or permission of instructor.  Offered Fall semester.

MUS 121
2 hours
Seminar in Composition I
Original composition in elementary and advanced forms.  Emphasis is on development
of individual style of expression. Prerequisite: MUS 101 or permission of instructor.

MUS 122
2 hours
Seminar in Composition II
Original composition in elementary and advanced forms. Continued emphasis is on
development of individual style of expression. Prerequisite: MUS 121 or permission of instructor.


MUS 124
3 hours
Music Theory and Harmony I
A study of the basic structural elements of tonal theory and harmony.  Topics covered include
construction of 7th chords, principles of part writing and voice leading, melodic phrase
analysis, diatonic harmonic progression (including function progression, cadence types, and
non-harmonic chord tones), and analysis of small forms.  Prerequisite: MUS 101 or successful
passing of music department’s Music Theory placement exam.  Corequisite: MUS 124L.  Offered
Spring semester.

MUS 124L
1 hour
Music Theory and Harmony I Lab
A laboratory experience that is designed to reinforce the content covered in MUS
124 through the development of aural and keyboard skills.  Corequisite: MUS 124.
Offered Spring semester.

MUS 125
3 hours
Music Theory and Harmony II
A continuation of Music Theory and Harmony I.  An intermediate study in the
principles of tonal harmonic progression, with an emphasis on the principles of
chromaticism and modulation.  Topics will include secondary dominants (vocabulary
and part writing); closely related key structures; modulation types (common chord,
chromatic, phrase, and sequential); and analysis of binary, ternary, and sonata forms.
Prerequisite: MUS 124 and MUS 124L.  Corequisite: MUS 125L.  Offered Fall semester.

MUS 125L
1 hour
Music Theory and Harmony II Lab
A laboratory experience that is designed to reinforce the content covered in MUS 125 through
the development of aural and keyboard skills.  Corequisite: MUS 125.  Offered Fall semester.

MUS 132
2 hours
Survey of Music History
This course will explore the basic elements of music.  It is a survey course of music
history and literature in the Western-European tradition, with emphasis on the major
composers, genres, forms, stylistic characteristics, and aesthetic principles of the
various eras.  The survey also includes a review of the American Vernacular music
culture, emphasizing the collateral influence it and European art music had on each other.
Meets a foundational core aesthetic literacy requirement.  Offered Spring semester.

MUS 135
2 hours
Introduction to Music Education
An introduction to the field of music education (P-12, general, choral, instrumental)
in general, and the areas of licensure (performance, knowledge, and dispositions)
that need to be demonstrated and documented in particular.  The IPSB
components—Indiana Standards, technology, diversity, service learning, literacy,
exceptionality, P-12 proficiencies, induction and portfolio development and
assessment—will be introduced in class.  In addition, an all-day field trip will be
taken to observe the music program in a model school and attendance will be
expected at the IMEA state conference.  Offered Fall semester.

MUS 149
2-3 hours
Music Appreciation
An introduction to the art of music and its materials.  A course designed to develop
greater understanding and appreciation of music and the various historical periods.
Considerable attention is given to listening to recordings and studying the lives of
leading composers.  Meets a foundational core aesthetic literacy requirement.  This
course is offered through Taylor University Online (TUO).

MUS 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

129
MUS 200
2 hours
Applied Lesson
Learning practice methods, building good techniques, acquiring sufficient repertoire,
gaining a broad knowledge of literature and composers, and achieving performance
skills.  Does not meet a foundational core aesthetic literacy requirement.  Lessons are
designed for music majors and minors (registration overrides will be required for minors).
Lessons are 1 hour.  May be taken multiple times for credit.

MUS 200C
Applied Lesson—Composition
MUS 200G
Applied Lesson—Guitar
MUS 200I
Applied Lesson—Instrumental
MUS 200K
Applied Lesson—Piano
MUS 200V
Applied Lesson—Voice

MUS 201
1 hour
Computers, Technology, and Music
This is a preliminary-level instructional course designed to train the music major in
the knowledge and applications of computer and MIDI systems as used in the music
profession.  Emphasis is placed on acquiring basic knowledge and skills in MIDI and
hardware systems, synthesizer performance, sequencing and desktop publishing.
Basic keyboard skills are essential.  Includes a supervised lab each week.  Meets a
foundational core aesthetic literacy requirement.  Prerequisites: MUS 124 and MUS 124L;
or permission of the instructor.

MUS 210GM
1 hour
Exploration of Global Music Ensemble
Exploration of Global Music Ensemble is an ensemble of singers and instrumentalists.
Students will experience hands-on exploration of traditional musical repertoires from
around the world.  Students will perform on instruments and sing songs from Asia,
Africa, and many countries around the world.  Sometimes these styles are learned
aurally/orally or with different kinds of musical notation.  No prior experience with
western music notation is necessary.  This ensemble is opened to all students.  Singers and
instrumentalists are welcomed.  Meets a foundational core aesthetic literacy requirement.

MUS 210JC
1 hour
Jazz Combo
The Jazz Combo is a selected ensemble by audition.  The combo explores
improvisatory stylings and performs a concert each semester.  Beginning,
intermediate and advanced level instruction is given.  Meets a foundational core
aesthetic literacy requirement when taken for credit.  Students may register to participate for
0 credit hours; 0 credit registration does not count toward foundational core requirement.

MUS 210JE
1 hour
Jazz Ensemble
The Jazz Ensemble is open to all wind and percussion players by audition.  It performs
contemporary stage band literature, as well as the jazz classics.  This ensemble performs
a concert each semester and tours in local schools and regional festivals.  Meets a
foundational core aesthetic literacy requirement when taken for credit.  Students may register
to participate for 0 credit hours; 0 credit registration does not count toward foundational core
requirement.

MUS 210LT
1 hour
Lyric Theatre
The Lyric Theatre program supports the liberal arts mission of Taylor University by
providing a broad range of performance experiences that span historic and
contemporary operatic and music theatre periods, genres, and styles.  Lyric Theatre
is open to all students by audition.  Performances include fully staged productions
and semi-staged “scenes” productions.  The primary goal of the ensemble is to create
live performances in which students demonstrate dramatic confidence, vocal ease,
and aesthetic sensibility.  Meets a foundational core aesthetic literacy requirement when
taken for credit.  Students may register to participate for 0 credit hours; 0 credit registration
does not count toward foundational core requirement.

MUS 210PB
1 hour
Pep Band
The Pep Band is open to all students who enjoy performing contemporary music at
football and basketball home games.  No audition required.  Meets a foundational core
aesthetic literacy requirement when taken for credit.  Students may register to participate for
0 credit hours; 0 credit registration does not count toward foundational core requirement.

MUS 210TS

1 hour
Taylor Sounds
The Taylor Sounds is a select group of musicians dedicated to a high standard of
chamber choral performance.  The goal of the group is to learn a breadth of quality
musical styles by notable composers.  The mission of the ensemble is to express the
highest divine and human values through the choral chamber music art.  Performance
tours include domestic and overseas venues, as well as conferences, conventions, and
banquets.  Meets a foundational core aesthetic literacy requirement when taken for credit.
Students may register to participate for 0 credit hours; 0 credit registration does not count toward
foundational core requirement.

MUS 210WC
1 hour
Taylor University Women's Chorus
A choral ensemble open by audition to all women at Taylor University.  This choir
utilizes contemporary sacred choral arrangements, spirituals, and praise and
worship songs as a means of ministering.  Pursuing vocal excellence, the Adoration
Chorus focuses on leading others in worship, performing in churches, university
functions, schools, and community venues.  Meets a foundational core aesthetic literacy
requirement when taken for credit.  Students may register to participate for 0 credit hours; 0
credit registration does not count toward foundational core requirement.

MUS 224
3 hours
Music Theory and Harmony III
A continuation of Theory and Harmony II.  Advanced studies in the principles of
extended tonal harmony, including introduction to hyper-tonal and post-tonal
concepts as found in the early 20th century.  Topics will include chromatic chord
vocabulary and part writing practice, foreign-key and enharmonic modulation, and
early twentieth century structural concepts.  Prerequisites: MUS 125 and MUS 125L.
Corequisite: MUS 224L.  Offered Spring semester.

MUS 224L
1 hour
Music Theory and Harmony III Lab
A laboratory experience that is designed to reinforce the content covered in MUS
224 through the development of aural and keyboard skills.  Corequisite: MUS 224.
Offered Spring semester.

MUS 240
1 hour
Taylor University Chorale
The Taylor Chorale is open to all Taylor students on an audition basis.  Repertoire
consists of music drawn from the spectrum of sacred choral works.  The mission
of the ensemble is to express the highest divine and human values through the
choral arts.  Performances include domestic and international tours, as well as
concerts for conferences and conventions.  Performance of sacred works with
professional orchestras are also part of the chorale tradition.  Meets a foundational
core aesthetic literacy requirement when taken for credit.  Students may register to
participate for 0 credit hours; 0 credit registration does not count toward foundational core
requirement.

MUS 243
3 hours
Music and World Cultures
An investigative study of selected non-Western cultures and the role of music
within the cultures.  Three components are basic principles of culture and basic
principles of music, Asian culture and music, and African culture and music.  This
cross-cultural course is open to all students.  Upper-division credit requires a paper
pertaining to music and a culture of the student’s choice.  Meets a foundational core
aesthetic literacy requirement.  Offered January interterm.

MUS 245
3 hours
Foundations of Worship Arts
Biblical and musical foundations of Christian worship ministry.  A survey of various
worship styles including historic and contemporary worship formats.  Principles of
leadership and creativity in worship planning will be discussed.  Open to all majors.
Meets a foundational core aesthetic literacy requirement.  Offered Fall semester of odd
years.

MUS 250
1 hour
Audio Visual Technologies in the Church
A study of the use of technology in the modern Christian Church including sound
reinforcement, video projection, computer assisted worship, and lighting formats.
This course will have a practical application component which includes laboratory
work with the chapel media technicians.  Offered January interterm of odd years.

MUS 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

MUS 275
0 hours
Performance Class
Performance Class meets Friday (12:00 PM) and is required of all majors and minors
in the Department of Music, Theatre, and Dance in every semester they are
registered for Applied Lessons.  The main focus of the class is to increase
performance skills in a non-juried environment.  In addition, presentations on
related topics—performance injury, health, and hearing—are given periodically.
Students are required to perform in a certain number of class sessions each
semester, depending upon their degree program.  Students with unavoidable class
conflicts must contact the instructor or Department Chair.

MUS 280
1 hour
Wind Ensemble
The wind ensemble is open to all wind and percussion players by audition.  The
Wind Ensemble performs the classic and contemporary wind repertoire, sacred,
pops, and pep band literature.  The wind ensemble presents one full concert
program each semester.  Meets a foundational core aesthetic literacy requirement when
taken for credit.  Students may register to participate for 0 credit hours; 0 credit registration
does not count toward foundational core requirement.
130
MUS 290
1 hour
Symphony Orchestra
The Symphony Orchestra is open to all string, wind, and percussion players by
audition.  The symphony orchestra performs selected masterworks of the symphonic
repertoire written for full orchestra from each of the major historical periods.  The
symphony orchestra performs one full concert program each semester.  Meets a
foundational core aesthetic literacy requirement when taken for credit.  Students may register
to participate for 0 credit hours; 0 credit registration does not count toward foundational
core requirement.

MUS 292
3 hours
Introduction to Electronic Music
Emphasis is placed on working with current technology with the objective of an
introduction to the aesthetics and types of electronic music, creating an electronic
composition as a final project.  Prerequisite: MUS 201.  Offered Fall semester.

MUS 300
1 hour
Applied Lesson
Learning practice methods, building good techniques, acquiring sufficient repertoire,
gaining a broad knowledge of literature and composers, and achieving performance
skills.  Lessons are designed for music majors and minors (registration overrides will be
required for minors).  Lessons are 1 hour.  May be taken multiple times for credit.

MUS 300G
Applied Lesson—Guitar
MUS 300I
Applied Lesson—Instrumental
MUS 300K
Applied Lesson—Piano
MUS 300V
Applied Lesson—Voice

MUS 301
2 hours
Music for Elementary Teachers
An introduction to the fundamentals of music and to the methods and materials
involved in teaching music and integrating music at the elementary school curriculum.
Specific focus is placed on incorporating music instruction, using the latest methods
and most recently published materials, into the regular classroom setting to enhance
enjoyment as well as whole person education.

MUS 309
3 hours
Secondary School Methods
An introduction to the methods and materials for teaching general music,
instrumental music and choral music at the secondary level.  Prerequisites: EDU 150
and EDU 260.  Offered Spring semester of even years.

MUS 310CM
1 hour
Chamber Music
Performance experience in chamber music organized by department faculty to
provide interactive music making experiences.  Offered as independent study with
area faculty members.  Meets a foundational core aesthetic literacy requirement.
Prerequisite: Junior status.  Offered Fall semester of odd years.

MUS 310GM
1 hour
Exploration of Global Music Ensemble
See MUS 210GM.

MUS 310JC
1 hour
Jazz Combo
See MUS 210JC.

MUS 310JE
1 hour
Jazz Ensemble
See MUS 210JE.

MUS 310LT
1 hour
Lyric Theatre
See MUS 210LT.

MUS 310PB
1 hour
Pep Band
See MUS 210PB.

MUS 310TS
1 hour
Taylor Sounds
See MUS 210TS.

MUS 310WC
1 hour
Taylor University Women's Chorus
See MUS 210WC.

MUS 311
3 hours
Elementary School Music
A study of the role of the music specialist in planning musical experiences for children,
with emphasis on child development, music literature, teaching aids, and teaching
practices, utilizing recorders and Orff Instruments.  Curriculum development and the
organization of the elementary school music program are also included.  A laboratory
experience is also included.  Offered Spring semester of odd years.
MUS 320
1-4 hours
Internship
In-depth experience with a minister of music involving responsibilities in various
phases of the church music program, including administration, organization,
rehearsal and worship.

MUS 331
1 hour
Instrumental Methods III—Percussion
Class instruction in percussion instruments.  Designed to acquaint music education specialists,
composition students, and church musicians with basic techniques for performing, arranging,
and teaching percussion instruments.  Offered Spring semester of even years.

MUS 332
1 hour
Instrumental Methods IV—Strings
Class instruction in string instruments.  Designed to acquaint music education specialists,
composition students, and church musicians with basic techniques for performing, arranging,
and teaching orchestral stringed instruments.  Offered Fall semester of odd years.

MUS 340
1 hour
Taylor University Chorale
See MUS 240.

MUS 342
3 hours
Advanced Form and Analysis
Exploration of representative works after 1600 through the lens of formal
structure, harmonic analysis, and counterpoint, with an emphasis on the stylistic
aspects of music.  Prerequisites or corequisites: MUS 125 and MUS 125L.  Offered Fall
semester of even years.

MUS 343
3 hours
Music and World Cultures
See MUS 243.

MUS 345
3 hours
Twenty Centuries of Christian Song
An introduction to the use of Christian congregational song through historical survey
and theological reflection of music and lyrics from chant to rhythm-section led music.
Additional focus on how to include a variety of song types in Christian worship and
ways to introduce music to congregations.

MUS 346
1 hour
Instrumental Methods I—Brass Instruments
Class instruction in various brass instruments.  Designed to acquaint music
education specialists, composition students and church musicians with basic
performance problems, arranging and teaching techniques of the brasses.  Offered
Fall semester of even years.

MUS 347
1 hour
Instrumental Methods II—Woodwinds
Class instruction in various woodwind instruments.  Designed to acquaint music
education specialists, composition students and church musicians with basic
techniques for teaching, arranging and playing woodwind instruments.  Offered
Spring semester of odd years.

MUS 351
2 hours
Choral Arranging
A course on the ranges, tonal possibilities, and technical limitations of the different
voices and the analysis of scores of standard choral compositions.  Arranging and
adapting scores for various vocal combinations are included.  Prerequisites or
corequisites: MUS 125 and MUS 125L.  Offered Fall semester of even years.

MUS 352
2 hours
Instrumental Arranging
Band and orchestral instruments are studied with a view to practical and effective
writing.  Arranging of compositions for various instrumental combinations is included.
Prerequisites or corequisites: MUS 125 and MUS 125L.  Offered Fall semester of odd years.

MUS 357
3 hours
Musical Leadership in the Church
A study of the organization, administration, and operation of the Christian church music
program.  Areas of study include the graded children’s choir program, adult choir ministry,
praise team ministry, and utilization of various instruments.  Open to music majors and minors.
Prerequisite: MUS 245 or permission of instructor.  Offered Spring semester of even years.

MUS 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

MUS 361
3 hours
Conducting I
An introduction to the psychological, technical, and musical elements of choral conducting.
Study of musical scores of choral literature is also stressed.  Offered Fall semester.


131
MUS 362
3 hours
Conducting II
Continuation of MUS 361 with emphasis on advanced score studies, conducting, and
rehearsal techniques of instrumental works.  Lab experience with band and orchestra
ensembles is included.  Prerequisite: MUS 361 or permission of the instructor.  Offered
Spring semester.

MUS 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

MUS 371
3 hours
Music History and Literature I
An introduction to western music and styles from the Middle Ages to the Classical
period.  Stylistic cognizance is acquired through examination of prevailing musical idioms,
forms, and literature.  Composers, performers, and historical figures that influenced music
history are also examined briefly, as well as terminology and vocabulary common to
musicology.  Prerequisites: MUS 124 and MUS 132.  Offered Fall semester.

MUS 372
3 hours
Music History and Literature II
An introduction to western music and musical style from the Romantic period to the
present.  Stylistic cognizance is acquired through examination of prevailing musical
idioms, forms, and literature.  Composers, performers, and historical figures that
influence music history are also examined, as well as terminology and vocabulary
common to musicology.  Prerequisites: MUS 124 and MUS 132.  Offered Spring semester.

MUS 380
1 hour
Wind Ensemble
See MUS 280.

MUS 381
2 hours
Piano Pedagogy I
A study of the methods and materials of teaching beginning piano students.
Supervised teaching experience is included.  Offered Spring semester of even years.

MUS 382
2 hours
Piano Pedagogy II
A study of the methods and materials of teaching intermediate keyboard students.
Supervised teaching experience is included.  Offered Fall semester of even years.

MUS 390
1 hour
Symphony Orchestra
See MUS 290.

MUS 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Offered primarily during Summer.

MUS 400
2-4 hours
Applied Lesson
Learning practice methods, building good techniques, acquiring sufficient repertoire,
gaining a broad knowledge of literature and composers, and achieving performance
skills.  Lessons are designed for music majors and minors (registration overrides will be
required for minors).  Lessons are 1 hour.  May be taken multiple times for credit.

MUS 400C
Applied Lesson—Composition
MUS 400G
Applied Lesson—Guitar
MUS 400I
Applied Lesson—Instrumental
MUS 400K
Applied Lesson—Piano
MUS 400V
Applied Lesson—Voice

MUS 440
3 hours
Vocal Pedagogy and Literature
Introduction to the scientific principles and theories of vocal production.  Guides
the student in building an appropriate repertoire of pedagogic materials and
repertoire choices through class demonstration, discussion, and examination of
current pedagogical attitudes and research.  Class members are required to observe
and teach voice lessons.  Offered Spring semester of even years.

MUS 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.

MUS 462
1 hour
Instrumental Pedagogy
Explores techniques and materials related to the teaching of instruments.  A
supervised lab experience is included.

MUS 463
1 hour
Instrumental Literature
A study of the literature of specific instruments from various historical periods with
emphasis placed on current practice.  Graded method books and technical materials
will also be reviewed.  Taught as a private lesson with specialist instructor and requisite
fee.  Prerequisite: MUS 462.  Offered Spring semester of even years.

MUS 470
2 hours
Piano Literature
A survey of keyboard works chosen from Baroque to contemporary periods.
Lecture, performance, recorded examples, and pedagogy techniques are used.
Open to piano majors, minors, and others by permission of the instructor.  Offered Spring
semester of odd years.

MUS 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with
emphasis on directed readings and discussion.

MUS 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.
Open to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.


Music, Theatre, and Dance Courses
MTD 131
1 hour
Introduction to Performing Arts
An introduction to the performing arts as an outgrowth of the Truth, Beauty and
Goodness of God.  The discussion will begin the development of the scholar/artist
who know their work as a continuation of the creative work of the Creator.  An
awareness of how Music Theatre and Dance share common philosophical
foundations and create opportunities for the exploration and expression of our
humanity will provide the structure of the course.  A requirement for all departmental
freshmen.  Meets a foundational core aesthetic literacy requirement.  Offered Fall semester.

MTD 392
3 hours
Entrepreneurship in the Arts
A study of the entrepreneurial aspects of the performing arts industry including
marketing and branding, the recording industry, leading and sustaining arts ventures,
communication, networking, and the overarching business of profit and not for profit
artistic enterprises.  Offered Spring semester of even years.



Theatre Courses

THR 110A
1 hour
Theatre Laboratory—Acting
Credit for participation in theatrical productions.  Requires a minimum of 30 hours,
one reflection paper, and peer and instructor assessment.  For work in acting—
includes audition, casting, rehearsal, creating a role, and performance.  Students may
register to participate for 0 credit hours; 0 credit registration does not fulfill major
requirement.  May be repeated for five credits total.  For theatre majors and minors.
Instructor permission required.

THR 110P
1 hour
Theatre Laboratory—Production
Credit for participation in theatrical productions.  Requires a minimum of 30 hours,
one reflection paper, and peer and instructor assessment.  For work in costume
and makeup, management, or stagecraft—includes project work and working within
a group.  Students may register to participate for 0 credit hours; 0 credit registration does
not fulfill major/minor requirement.  May be repeated for five credits total.  For theatre
majors and minors.  Instructor permission required.


132
THR 112
3 hours
Performing Literature
This literature and performance course aims to explore the relationship between
literature and theatre with emphasis given to translating analytical decisions into
performance.  The main focus of the course is the interaction between the literary
skills of close reading, critical writing, and discussion and the practical, aesthetic,
and symbolic elements of performance.  Meets either a foundational core aesthetic
literacy requirement or foundational core literature requirement.  Offered Fall semester.

THR 130
3 hours
Theatre History I: Antiquity to the Renaissance
This survey course covers the development of the theatre from its supposed origins
in ancient Greece and Rome to the European Renaissance including its architecture,
production values, acting and directing styles, and the political and social movements
that informed these traditions.  Students will engage with selected readings, discussion,
projects, and multimedia presentations.  Meets a foundational core aesthetic literacy
requirement.  Offered Spring semester.

THR 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

THR 212
3 hours
Mask Characterization and Movement
Study of the theories and principles of acting as an art, approached through a Christian
perspective of life and the human situation.  Practical application of performance
techniques and character development are provided through laboratory theatre
experiences.  Corequisite: KIN 200J.  Offered Spring semester of even years.

THR 220
1 hour
Stage Diction: Fundamentals and Dialect
Introduces and develops speech techniques for the actor, specifically in the areas
of relaxation, posture and alignment, respiration, phonation, registration,
resonance, and articulation, as well as study of the fundamental knowledge and skills
required to perform specific and credible dialects for the stage.  Offered January
interterm of even years.

THR 230
3 hours
Theatre History II: Renaissance to Postmodernism
This course will explore the history of theatre including its architecture, production
values, acting and directing styles, and the political and social movements that
informed the traditions from the Renaissance to the present.  Students will engage
with selected readings, discussion, projects, and multimedia presentations.  Meets a
foundational core aesthetic literacy requirement.  Offered Spring semester.

THR 240
3 hours
Acting Methods and Theories
The purpose of this course is to explore acting theory and teaching methods of
those whose names are associated with the evolution of the modern theatre. This
course will aid the student in the development of basic performance skills through
scene work.  Meets a foundational core aesthetic literacy requirement.

THR 241
3 hours
Stagecraft and Design
This course is designed as an introduction to the art of theatrical design and
production.  It will be taught as a survey course, exploring the many technical
aspects of theatrical production work from the conceptual beginnings, through the
design process, to the final work.  Students will gain a basic understanding and
competency in the areas of production research, scenic design, set construction,
costume research and design, make-up design and application, scenic art techniques,
properties, lighting, and sound design through projects and class discussion.  Meets
a foundational core aesthetic literacy requirement.  Offered Fall semester of even years.

THR 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

THR 301
3 hours
Theories and History of Applied Theatre
Theories and history of applied theatre covering a wide range of theatre
applications in education, health, community development, and human rights.
Prerequisite: THR 112 or permission of instructor.  Offered Fall semester of odd years.

THR 330
2 hours
Audition Techniques
Students cultivate an understanding of the realities of the marketplace and
necessary techniques for professional acting.  The focus is on acquisition of
performance skills.  This course will aid the student in the development of basic
performance skills through the building and refining of vocal/monologue audition
repertoire.  Offered January interterm of odd years.

THR 335
3 hours
Music Theatre: History and Styles
A practical application course that focuses on learning the ways in which musical
and textual understanding inform the interpretation and performing of acting and
singing techniques in various musical theatre forms from the 1920’s through the
20th century.  Offered Spring semester of even years.
THR 340
3 hours
Applications in Dramaturgy
This course is recommended for anyone who loves theatre and wishes to acquire
a more sophisticated understanding of this art form.  This course will introduce
students to the profession of dramaturgy which began in 1867 in Germany and took
root in the United States in the late 1960’s.  A single course or even an academic
program in this field cannot train a professional dramaturg all at once.  A mature
dramaturg emerges gradually through incremental learning and hands-on-
experience.  This study and practical application will provide the student with an
introduction to the discipline.  Offered Spring semester of even years.

THR 345
3 hours
Stage Management
This course will provide students with the opportunity to explore their leadership
potential and capabilities through the role of the Stage Manager in a theatrical
context.  Students will have the opportunity to interact with SM professionals.
Students will be encouraged to assess their own skills and consider how to best
address improvement.  Offered Fall semester of odd years.

THR 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

THR 362
3 hours
Conversations About Theatre and Theology
The course will explore central tenets of the Christian faith, incarnation,
community, and presence, and the ways in which those tenets are also essential to
the theatre.  The value of both cultural institutions will be explored as well as the
threats to their flourishing. Meets a foundational core aesthetic literacy requirement.
Offered Fall semester of even years.

THR 370
1- 4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

THR 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Pass/fail only.  Offered primarily during Summer.

THR 402
3 hours
Contemporary American Theatre
The study and application of literary theory as it relates to theatre and performance.
This course will examine current theoretical approaches from semiotics and post-
structuralism through cultural materialism, post-colonial studies, and feminist theory.

THR 432
3 hours
Play Directing
Study of the theories and principles of directing as an art approached through a
Christian perspective of life and the human situation.  Emphasis is given to play
analysis with practical application provided through laboratory theatre experience.
Prerequisite: THR 240 or permission of instructor.  Offered Spring semester.

THR 433
1 hour
Directing II: Application
The application of the theories and principles of directing explored in THR 432.
Students will apply their learning to the production of a full-length play with focus
given to actor/director communication, composition, and execution.  Prerequisite:
THR 432.  Offered Spring semester.

THR 440
2 hours
Musical Theatre Showcase
Studio course for graduating musical theatre majors. Classwork involves extensive
repertoire from genres of musical theatre appropriate for each individual.  The course
will culminate in a showcase performance presented at the end of the semester.

THR 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.

THR 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with
emphasis on directed readings and discussion.  Prerequisite: Approved capstone proposal.

THR 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.
Open to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

THR 492
8-16 hours
Internship
Professional semester of supervised internship in a work setting related to the
major field of study.  Prerequisites: Completion of departmental core and major core
courses and approval of the department faculty.  Pass/fail only.
133

ACC 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

ACC 241
3 hours
Accounting Principles I
An introduction to the language of business.  Financial transactions are analyzed,
recorded, summarized and reported in a meaningful manner to management.  Also
studied are basic financial statements and the various accounting and internal control
procedures for recording and protecting assets.  Offered Fall semester.

ACC 242
3 hours
Accounting Principles II
Continuation of ACC 241.  Accounting problems and procedures pertaining to
partnerships and corporations are studied.  Also studied are various accounting
procedures and reports used by management in acquiring fixed assets, budgeting
and controlling manufacturing and departmental operations, reporting financial
conditions, and analyzing the results of operations.  Prerequisite: ACC 241.  Offered
Spring semester.

ACC 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

ACC 303
3 hours
Cost Accounting
A study of the nature of costs and their importance in manufacturing, service and
not-for-profit organizations.  Topics include: collection and allocation of costs to
products and processes, planning, budgeting, and control reports, relevant costs,
cost-volume-profit analysis, responsibility accounting and other management
analyses and reports.  Prerequisite: ACC 242.

ACC 308
3 hours
Integrated Accounting Systems
Explores the use of integrated accounting software in a variety of business types
through hands on use.  Reinforces accounting principles and financial analysis.
Emphasizes the setup and maintenance of an integrated software system.
Prerequisite: ACC 242.  Offered in the Spring semester of odd calendar years.

ACC 341
4 hours
Intermediate Accounting I
A detailed study of the theory and procedures used by accountants in recording
and valuing assets and the resulting effect on profits.  Emphasis is placed on current
issues in accounting theory and practice in both intermediate accounting courses.
Prerequisite: ACC 242.  Offered Fall semester.

ACC 342
4 hours
Intermediate Accounting II
Continuation of ACC 341.  A study of the theory and procedures used by
accountants in recording and valuing liabilities and capital accounts.  Special
emphasis is placed on the preparation and interpretation of balance sheets,
income statements and statements of changes in financial position.  Prerequisite:
ACC 341 or permission of instructor.  Offered Spring semester.

ACC 353
3 hours
Fraud Examination
A study of how and why various types of frauds are committed and how they may be
deterred.  Topics studied include fraud prevention and detection, investigation, as well
as the various types including employee, vendor, customer, management, consumer, e-
commerce and investment.  Recent public frauds will be investigated and analyzed.
Prerequisites: ACC 342 or permission of instructor.

ACC 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

ACC 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.
ACC 375
3 hours
Accounting Ethics
This course develops students’ knowledge of the codes of professional ethics for
accountants (e.g., AICPA Professional Standards, CMA, CIA) covering various services
such as audit, attestation, review, compilation, and tax.  In addition, it will explore
different theories of ethical behavior and development and Christian ethics.
Prerequisite: ACC 242.  This course is offered through Taylor University Online (TUO).

ACC 381
3 hours
Government and Non-profit Accounting
Introduces fund accounting and covers the theory and accounting process for state and
municipal governments and non-profit organizations.  Prerequisite: ACC 342.

ACC 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally, one
hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Prerequisites: 15 accounting hours and SYS 101 for majors pursuing a systems curriculum.
Offered primarily during Summer.

ACC 394
9 hours
Extended Accounting Internship
Supervised learning involving an extended first-hand experience.  Prerequisites: 15
accounting hours and SYS 101 for majors pursuing a systems curriculum.  Offered primarily
during Spring semester.

ACC 405
3 hours
Auditing I (with Data Analytics)
A study of how professional auditors serve the public, stockholders, and management
by impartially examining the accounting records and financial statements of enterprises.
Topics to be studied include: standards, ethics of the profession, internal control
procedures, risk assessment and the nature of audit evidence.  The course will include
the use of various data analytics tools and techniques focusing on quantitative analysis,
depicting data visually, managing large volumes of data, deriving insights for risk
assessment, audit planning, and documenting audit evidence.  Prerequisite: ACC 342 or
permission of instructor.  Offered Fall semester.

ACC 406
3 hours
Auditing II (with Data Analytics)
A continuation of the study of how professional auditors serve the public,
stockholders, and management by impartially examining the accounting records and
financial statements of enterprises.  Topics to be studied include standards, ethics of
the profession, internal control procedures, risk assessment, and the nature of audit
evidence.  The course will include the use of various data analytics tools and techniques
focusing on quantitative analysis, depicting data visually, managing large volumes of data,
deriving insights for risk assessment, audit planning, and documenting audit evidence.
Prerequisite: ACC 405 or permission of instructor.  Offered Spring semester.

ACC 416
4 hours
Advanced Accounting
A study of the more complex issues in accounting for partnerships, consolidated
financial statements and multinational and not-for-profit enterprises.  This course
includes interim and financial reporting and coverage of current regulations and
pronouncements pertaining to the profession.  Prerequisite: ACC 342 or permission of
instructor.  Offered Fall semester.

ACC 442
3 hours
Federal Taxes 1
A study of the effect of federal income tax laws and regulations on individuals and
businesses.  This course includes discussion of current issues, tax research, tax planning
and representative tax preparation software.  Prerequisite: ACC 242.  Offered Fall semester.

ACC 443
3 hours
Federal Taxes 2
In depth study of taxation of entities including the tax treatment of formation and
liquidation of business entities, as well as differences between book and tax income
(loss).  The course also includes tax treatment of C Corporations, S Corporations,
partnerships, limited liability companies, and trusts and estates.  The types of tax
exempt organizations will be discussed.  Other topics covered include tax
consolidation, payroll taxes, and international topics.  Prerequisite: ACC 442.  Offered
Spring semester.

142
ACC 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.

ACC 475
6 hours
CPA Topics and Certification
A study of the topics tested on the Uniform Certified Public Accountant
examination as published by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants
in its Content Specification Outlines.  The course is designed to study these topics
at a deeper level than previously introduced in previous courses, and to improve
research, communication and application of these topics to business situations,
demonstrating critical thinking and problem-solving skills.  Prerequisites: ACC 405,
ACC 416, and ACC 442 or permission of instructor.
ACC 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with emphasis
on directed readings and discussion.

ACC 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.  Open
to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

Economics Courses
ECO 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

ECO 201
3 hours
Principles of Microeconomics
An introduction to microeconomics emphasizing decision making by individual
producers and consumers.  Consequences of such decisions for efficiency of
resource use and income distribution in a capitalistic economy are studied.  Meets
foundational core civic engagement or general social science requirement.  Prerequisite:
MAT 110, MAT 120, MAT 140, MAT 145, MAT 151, MAT 210, MAT 352, or SOC 355.
Offered Fall and Spring semesters.

ECO 202
3 hours
Principles of Macroeconomics
An introduction to macroeconomics emphasizing how the U.S. economy works.
Topics studied include the factors determining the size of the national economy,
inflation and unemployment and fiscal and monetary policies.  Meets foundational core
civic engagement or general social science requirement.  Prerequisite: ECO 201 or permission
of the instructor.  Offered Fall and Spring semesters.

ECO 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

ECO 331
3 hours
Intermediate Microeconomics
Intermediate-level analysis of decision making by individuals in various types of
markets.  Consequences of such choices for the decision-makers, other people, and
society as a whole are studied.  Prerequisites: MAT 146 or MAT 151; and ECO 201.

ECO 332
3 hours
Intermediate Macroeconomics
Intermediate-level analysis of factors determining GDP, unemployment, inflation
and interest rates in the U.S.  Both open and closed economy models are used.
The model divergences and policy implications of the various macroeconomic
schools are examined.  Prerequisite: ECO 202.

ECO 333
3 hours
History of Economic Thought
A study of the ideas of the great economic thinkers and the development of various
schools of economic thought, including the mercantilists, Smith, Malthus, Ricardo,
Mill, Marx, Marshall, and the Neo-classical and Keynesian revolutions.  The origins
of the more prominent twentieth century developments and schools are examined.
Prerequisites: ECO 201 and ECO 202.

ECO 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

ECO 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

ECO 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally, one
hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.  Offered
primarily during Summer.

ECO 428
3 hours
Money and Banking
A variety of practical banking topics are covered, including a review of the development
of the banking system, attention to the corresponding evolution of money and the
demand deposit system, and an overview of non-bank financial intermediaries and their
role in the present economy.  Prerequisites: FIN 361, ECO 201, and ECO 202.  Offered
Spring semester.

ECO 442
3 hours
Economic Development
A study of the principles of economic growth of lesser-developed countries (LDCs).
Historical development patterns of more-developed countries and various theories of
economic growth are considered for their relevance to LDCs.  Policies encouraging
growth are discussed.  The problems of transforming former socialistic economies into
free market economies are discussed.  Each student does a major research project on
one particular LDC.  Prerequisite: ECO 202.

ECO 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities as
the library or laboratory.

ECO 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with emphasis
on directed readings and discussion.

ECO 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.  Open to
students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

Entrepreneurship Courses
ENT 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

ENT 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

ENT 225
3 hours
Exploring Innovation and Entrepreneurship
This is an interdisciplinary, introductory course for students interested in
innovation and entrepreneurship.  The course focuses on how people, ideas, and
resources can be brought together to foster transformational economic, social, and
spiritual impact.  Topics include innovation and entrepreneurial processes,
identifying barriers to new venture creation, entrepreneurial ecosystems, and
networking and communication skills required for resource acquisition.  The
multiple lens approach facilitates student understanding that they can alter-the-
future in many spheres.  Course is open to any student with 30 hours of college credit.
ENT 310
3 hours
Creativity and Concept Development
Sometimes the most difficult part of innovation is knowing where to start or the creation
of an idea.  As a result of this course, students acquire skills, processes, and models for
enhancing the creative process and using these, develop a plausible business or ministry
concept with real-world applicability.  Offered Fall semester.

ENT 320
3 hours
Transformational Entrepreneurship and Innovation
This course is designed to give students the context and cognitive frameworks necessary
to analyze new venture ideas and implement a course of action toward creating
something new.  Students will gain exposure to the lifestyle and practices of the
entrepreneur to determine if entrepreneurship is a desirable career path.  Offered Fall
semester.

ENT 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.
143
ENT 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

ENT 380
1 hour
Enactus: Social, Environmental, and Economic Entrepreneurship
Active leadership participation in Enactus of 3 hours a week.  Enrollment by application.
One credit offered for each semester of participation for a maximum of 6 credits.  Students
may register to participate for 0 credit hours.  Prerequisite: sophomore standing.

ENT 381
3 hours
Global Entrepreneurship and Business as Missions
Students will travel to an international location to work with faculty mentors and
nationals to deliver a program that walks participants through the stages of a small
business start-up with Kingdom goals.  During the semester preceding the trip,
students will participate in required training sessions designed for cultural learning,
and understanding of the training material.  Prerequisite: Permission of the instructor.

ENT 386
1 hour
Founders Fellowship
Exposes students to the realities of living the life of an entrepreneur by introducing
them to seasoned and successful entrepreneurs and investors, as well as the various
support ecosystems and founder communities that exist.  Guest speakers will be
carefully selected to speak to the highs and lows of life as a founder, how to order
your spiritual and personal lives to flourish in the profession, and, where possible, to
speak directly to integrating a redemptive framework into your ideas and thinking.
To put it simply, this course is not about developing good startups; it’s about
developing good entrepreneurs for a lifetime of thriving.  Requires 30 hours of college
credit.  May be repeated for up to 6 credits.

ENT 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Offered primarily during Summer.

ENT 422
3 hours
New Venture Planning
Students are exposed to and learn the best practices for starting and growing new
ventures (profit or non-profit).  Course requirements include the development of a
product or service concept and completion of a comprehensive business plan that is
worthy of presentation to potential investors/contributors.  Characteristics and traits
of many contemporary entrepreneurs are studied.  Offered Fall and Spring semesters.

ENT 430
3 hours
Leadership and Stewardship
Explores the key entrepreneurial characteristics and attributes necessary to
successfully innovate regardless of discipline or service activity.  Students learn
processes and stratagems within the context of biblical worldview to establish a culture
of excellence in a variety of organizational environments.  Students are exposed to
stewardship principles critical to generating excellence through effective leadership,
exercise innovation processes and how to leverage the entrepreneurial mindset
through practical application, and appreciate their individual profile with self-
assessments to create an understanding of essential entrepreneurial characteristics as
well as their own entrepreneurial quotient.  These truths, skills, and associations can
be leveraged throughout the student’s life regardless of vocation or calling.  Offered
Spring semester.

ENT 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.

ENT 480
3 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with emphasis
on directed readings and discussion.

ENT 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.  Open
to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.



Finance Courses
FIN 110
1 hour
Investment Research I
This course is designed to provide students with a progressive depth of
understanding of finance topics.  These topics are discussed to the entire investment
research cohort but will require different levels of assessment by each level.  Topics
include investment valuations models, portfolio performance measures, risk
parameters, expected returns, and financial reporting analysis.  Prerequisites: ACC 242
 and at least sophomore standing.
FIN 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
 A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.
FIN 194
3 hours
Personal Finance
An overview of the personal financial planning process, including such topics as
investments, insurance, taxes, credit, retirement planning, and budgeting.  This course
provides students with an opportunity to examine and apply scripture-based
principles of money management in preparation for their entry into the workplace.
Not intended for business majors.  Meets foundational core civic engagement or general
 social science requirement. Offered Fall semester.
FIN 210
1 hour
Investment Research II
 See FIN 110.  Prerequisite: FIN 110.
FIN 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
 A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.
FIN 294
3 hours
Personal Financial Planning
This course seeks to help students develop a holistic approach in financial planning
by gaining a deeper understanding of the basic principles of personal finance.  Students
will learn how to analyze real-life personal financial challenges and apply appropriate
financial tools and mechanisms to address specific situations and financial needs.
 Prerequisite: ACC 241 or permission of instructor.
FIN 310
1 hour
Investment Research III
 See FIN 110.  Prerequisite: FIN 210.
FIN 330
3 hours
Investments
A course designed to give the student a basic familiarity with practical investment
strategies and terminology from both an institutional and individual perspective.
Discussion includes stock, bond, commodity, and option markets, as well as other
investment alternatives.  Heavy emphasis is given to current developments.
Prerequisites: MAT 210 and ECO 202.

FIN 340
3 hours
Real Estate
A review of real estate ownership as an investment vehicle for both individuals and
institutions.  Topics to be covered include valuation techniques, finance options,
operations management, and related tax issues.  Prerequisites: ACC 242, FIN 361, and
MGT 311.  Offered periodically.

FIN 350
3 hours
Financial Markets and Institutions
Students will develop a good understanding of the functions of financial markets and
institutions in the economy including the roles played by banks, other financial
intermediaries and institutions, and the markets for financial assets in raising capital
and determining security prices.  Students will learn to think critically about the causes
of financial crises, the importance of effective regulatory oversight, and policies in
maintaining market stability and their limitations in preventing market failures.
Prerequisites: ACC 241 and ECO 202.

FIN 355
3 hours
Foundations to Financial Planning
An overview of personal financial decision-making, emphasizing each phase of life.
Topics covered include career planning, budgeting, use of credit, insurance,
investments, retirement planning, and income tax planning.

FIN 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

FIN 361
3 hours
Corporate Finance
A study of methods used in the evaluation of financing and investment alternatives and
funds management.  The course integrates basic accounting with financial analytical
techniques.  Areas of emphasis include sources of financing, cash flow analysis, working
capital management, capital budgeting, net present value, cost of capital and long-term
debt and capital structures.  Prerequisite: ACC 242.  Offered Fall and Spring semesters.

FIN 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

FIN 372
3 hours
Risk Management and Insurance
This course will give students a good understanding of the different types of risks and
the importance of risk management in minimizing losses and maximizing opportunities. 
Students will learn how to identify, assess, and mitigate various risks against financial
losses through specific insurance mechanisms.  They will develop an appreciation for
different insurance business models and the models’ limitations in risk management. 
The importance of ethics (reputation risk mitigation), legal aspects, and regulatory
regimes will also be considered.  Prerequisite: MAT 210.
144
FIN 374
3 hours
Estate Planning
This course focuses on the transfer of assets from one generation to another.
Students will seek to understand how control of money after death can be
accomplished.  Prerequisite: FIN 294.

FIN 375
3 hours
Financial Data Analysis
This course will provide students an opportunity to conduct in depth financial analysis
using systems, focusing on Microsoft Excel.  This course will help students integrate
learning concepts from corporate finance, investments, and equity valuation courses
and apply those concepts within a widely used and very influential software system,
Microsoft Excel.

FIN 390
3 hours
Behavioral Finance
Behavioral finance has become a significant area of study both from the perspective
of individual investors as well as market participants.  This course seeks to give
students an opportunity to explore biases that influence our actions.  Students will
explore this topic from a biblical perspective in an effort to realize how our human
nature creates the foundation for these biases.

FIN 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Offered primarily during Summer.

FIN 395
1 hour
Professional Ethics in Finance
This course will explore the Code of Ethics and Professional Standards for both
industry designations CFP/CFA.  Students will engage in case studies and ethical
dilemmas while exploring topics from a biblical perspective.

FIN 410
1 hour
Applied Investment Research
See FIN 110.  Prerequisite: FIN 310.

FIN 431
3 hours
Security Analysis and Portfolio Management
This course introduces students to the principles of portfolio management.  The class
discusses the processes of equity analysis and valuation and covers common valuation
methodologies and techniques used by market participants.  The characteristics and
valuation of two competing asset classes—fixed income securities and real estate—
will also be explored.  Through their course work, students will participate in the
process of securities selection for Taylor University’s Student Management
Investment Fund.  Prerequisites: ACC 242, FIN 361, FIN 330, and FIN 350.

FIN 435
3 hours
Applied Equity Valuation
The CFA Research Challenge is an annual, global competition that provides university
students with hands-on mentoring and intensive training.  Students work in teams to
research and analyze a publicly traded company and then write a research report on
their assigned company with a buy, sell, or hold recommendation.  Prerequisites: FIN
110, FIN 210, and FIN 330.

FIN 440
2 hours
Securities Industry Essentials (SIE)
An in-depth examination of the securities industry from the perspective of the
brokerage function, including the regulatory environment and legal liability issues,
professional ethics, transaction settlement procedures, public/client relations, and
investment planning strategies.  This course prepares students to complete the
Securities Industry Essentials exam, the precursor to the Qualification Examination
for General Securities Registered Representative (Series 7 Exam), taken once
employed at a sponsoring firm.  Prerequisites: FIN 330 and FIN 361.  Offered Interterm
of even years.

FIN 441
2 hours
Series 65: Investment Advisor Representative
This course will cover the topics for the Series 65 exam (Investment Advisor
Representative).  Students will be expected to sit for the exam upon completion of
this course.  The Series 65 exam is administered in conjunction with the North
American Securities Administrators Association (NASAA).  Topics include economic
factors and business information, investment vehicle characteristics, and investment
recommendations and strategies.  Offered Interterm of odd years.

FIN 442
4 hours
SIE/Series 65 Combo
This course will combine the Securities Industry Essentials (SIE) and Series 65 courses
into one course offering.  See FIN 440 and FIN 441.  Offered Summer online.

FIN 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.

FIN 451
1 hour
Applied Portfolio Management
This course engages students in real-world portfolio management by establishing
investment strategies and implementing those strategies within a portion of the
university endowment.  Students will engage in domestic and global equities primarily.
Prerequisite: FIN 330.  May be repeated for credit.

FIN 453
1 hour
Applied Portfolio Risk Management
Extending from the other applied portfolio curriculum, this course incorporates
options as the primary risk management technique.  Trades are proposed and analyzed
as a team.  Regular reports are produced to aid in the ongoing improvement of
practices.  Corequisite: FIN 451.  May be repeated for credit.

FIN 461
3 hours
Advanced Financial Management
This covers the management of a firm's short and long term financial assets.  This
includes the evaluation of long-term investment decisions as well as short-term cash
asset management decisions.  Emphasis will be placed on the planning and budgeting
process associated with the management of the firm's assets.  Prerequisite: FIN 361.

FIN 462
1 hour
Applied Portfolio Annual Review
This applied portfolio management course gives students the opportunity to review,
analyze, summarize, and communicate past performance to key stakeholders.  The
reporting and analysis skills developed are essential to investment program success
and continuous improvement, especially as a capital attraction and retention
mechanism.  This course culminates in the deliverable of an Annual Report of the
Student Managed Investment Fund performance.  May be repeated once for credit.
Prerequisite: FIN 451.

FIN 471
3 hours
Retirement Planning
This course provides a comprehensive overview of retirement planning needs and
analysis for effective planning strategies.  Topics include qualified retirement plan
design, social security, Medicare, group life health and disability insurance, and non-
qualified deferred compensation.  Prerequisite: FIN 355.

FIN 472
3 hours
Insurance Planning
This course focuses on assessing and mitigating risk in the financial industry while
integrating insurance considerations to manage both risk and return.  Topics include
business and personal risk, corporate investments, diversification, ownership and
property, and legal liability.  Prerequisite: FIN 355.

FIN 475
3 hours
Financial Planning Capstone
This course will allow the student to create a written financial plan using the knowledge
acquired from previous course work in the financial planning classes.  The student will
use a software package to incorporate all the elements of a successful financial plan for
a case study client.  Prerequisites: ACC 442, FIN 355, FIN 471, FIN 472, and FIN 374.
Offered Spring semester.

FIN 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with emphasis
on directed readings and discussion.

FIN 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.  Open
to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

FIN 494
3 hours
Christian Financial Planning
This course provides the framework for biblical stewardship with regard to financial
planning.  Successful completion of this course allows students to take the Certified
Kingdom Advisors (CKA®) national proctored exam.

















145
Human Resource Management Courses
HRM 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

HRM 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

HRM 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

HRM 362
3 hours
Human Resource Management
A study of the role and functions of the human resource department of an
organization, with an up-to-date examination of the principles, policies and problems
of labor and management.  Topics include employee relations, job analysis,
compensation structures, recruitment practices, training, promotion, transfer, and
management-union relationships.  Prerequisite: MGT 352.  Offered Fall semester.

HRM 365
1 hour
SHRM Student Chapter
Active leadership participation in the Taylor University Society for Human Resource
Management (SHRM) Student Chapter.  One credit offered for each semester of
participation for a maximum of 6 credits.  Students may register to participate for 0 credit
hours.  Offered Fall and Spring semesters.  Instructor permission required.

HRM 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

HRM 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Offered primarily during Summer.
HRM 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities as
the library or laboratory.

HRM 462
3 hours
Organizational Behavior and Development
Organizational behavior is the study and application of knowledge about how and why
people, as individuals and as groups, act within organizations.  Organizational
development is the systematic application of behavioral science knowledge at various
levels—group, intergroup, and total organization—to bring about planned change.  The
goal is to describe, understand, predict, develop, and (to some degree) control human
activity at work.  This course will prompt the student to develop a cognitive framework for
understanding organizational behavior combined with an integration of the Christian faith.
Students develop a capacity to analyze organizational behavior situations critically and to
give thoughtful answers to situations and case studies.  Prerequisites: HRM 362 and MGT
352.  Offered Spring semester.

HRM 472
3 hours
Human Resources Management Topics and Cases
Advanced human resource management course offered as part of the Human Resource
Management concentration in the Management major.  Current topics and relevant
cases in human resource management will be discussed specifically for human resource
management professionals.  Prerequisite: HRM 362.  Offered Spring semester.  Priority given
to Management majors pursuing a concentration in Human Resource Management.

HRM 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with emphasis
on directed readings and discussion.

HRM 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.  Open to
students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.
International Business Courses
ITB 375
3 hours
International Business
An in-depth examination of business practices in other countries, leading to a better
understanding of intercultural relationships with trading partners, investors, and
host countries.  Prerequisite: MKT 231.  Offered Fall semester.

ITB 381
3-4 hours
International Business Study Tour
A study tour of selected international locations to focus on regional trade, economics and
business topics.  Issues of cultural differences, conflicts, compromises and international
cooperation are examined.  Throughout, the cultural dimension of international business
dealings is emphasized.  Prerequisites: sophomore standing within a business school major/minor
or permission of the instructor.  Offered Interterm and selected Summer terms.

Management Courses
MGT 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

MGT 201
3 hours
Introduction to Business
Students learn the foundational concepts of establishing and operating successful
ventures in the highly competitive global economy.  The business major as well as
other disciplines are exposed to key business leadership principles, strategies,
technologies, and disciplines used in the 21st Century enterprise through a
combination of lecture, case analysis, group projects, and simulation exercises.
Offered Fall and Spring semesters.

MGT 260
3 hours
Business Systems Applications
This course introduces and develops competency in various systems and
technologies commonly employed in the business environment.  Specific topics
addressed include spreadsheet applications (formulas, functions, charts, pivot
tables, formatting, customizations, and data analysis), document presentation and
productivity, business presentation tools, and integrated accounting systems.
Prerequisites: COS 104 and ACC 241.

MGT 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

MGT 311
3 hours
Business Law
An overview and summary of the basic business law topics that the majority of
students will encounter in their business careers and personal lives.  Topics include
contracts, agencies, personal property, torts, bailments, real property, leases, estates,
trusts and insurance.  Prerequisite: Junior status preferred.

MGT 322
3 hours
Business and Missions: Philosophy and Practicality
This course examines the historical, philosophical, and scriptural foundations for the
emerging Business as Missions movement.  Students will wrestle with the practical
challenges of maintaining effectiveness and spiritual vitality while balancing the competing
demands of simultaneously leading business and ministry initiatives.  Offered periodically.

MGT 352
3 hours
Management Analysis and Practice
A course designed to acquaint students thoroughly with the theories, principles, and
practical applications of management (planning, organizing, staffing, leading and controlling).
Management principles are learned in the context of a work team developing and administering
a business project.  Emphasizes business presentations and written reports involving current,
real-life situations.  Prerequisite: sophomore status.  Offered Fall and Spring semesters.

MGT 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

MGT 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

MGT 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally, one hour of credit
is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.  Offered primarily during Summer.

MGT 403
3 hours
Operations Management
This course presents the design (quality management, process design, and statistical process
control) and operations (supply chain management, forecasting, inventory management, and
resource planning) of productive systems.  Quality, competitiveness in a global economy, and
quantitative management are emphasized throughout the course.  Offered Fall and Spring
semesters.  Prerequisite: MAT 210.
146
MGT 431
3 hours
Project Management
This course presents the specific concepts, techniques, and tools for managing projects
effectively.  The role of the project manager as team leader is examined, together with
important techniques for planning, scheduling, and monitoring successful projects through
the project life cycle.  Lectures, case studies, and projects are combined to develop skills
needed by project managers in today’s environment.  In addition, special emphasis is placed
on managing technology related projects, leading to the potential for obtaining industry
certification in project management.  This course is offered through Taylor University Online (TUO).

MGT 442
3 hours
Business Ethics
A course designed to analyze the ethical dilemmas described in case studies of managers
in private and corporate businesses.  Studies include philosophical foundations for
Christian ethical model applications and the development of ethical dilemma resolution.
Particular business ethics issues are studied that are realistic and relevant to many business
professions.  Offered Fall semester.

MGT 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities as
the library or laboratory.

MGT 452
3 hours
Strategic Management
An advanced course dealing with integrative issues in management, encompassing long-
range and short-term objectives, planned and pursued in breadth and depth in an ever-
changing environment.  Prerequisites: ECO 201; ACC 241; MGT 352; senior status or instructor
permission.  Offered Fall and Spring semesters.

MGT 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with emphasis on
directed readings and discussion.

MGT 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.  Open to
students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

Marketing Courses
MKT 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

MKT 231
3 hours
Principles of Marketing
A study of the many facets involved in the field of marketing.  Emphasis is given to both
the modern marketing system in today’s international economy and to the marketing
strategies of an organization.  Topics include types of markets, market segmentation
methods, research methods, product and service strategies, product planning, new
product development, distribution channels, sales, advertising and pricing.  Special
emphasis is given to applications in international service and nonprofit disciplines.
Offered Fall and Spring semesters.

MKT 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

MKT 312
3 hours
Professional Selling
A study of the discipline of the sales professional, including both sales strategies and sales
management.  Primary emphasis is given to business and industry sales applications.
Topics include sales training, sales preparation, prospecting methods, types of
presentations, handling buyer questions, closing methods, post-sales service, and sales
management.  Course applications include the development and presentation of actual
sales demonstrations in class.  Prerequisite: MKT 231.  Offered Fall semester.

MKT 313
3 hours
Retailing and Services Marketing
A study of the creative and challenging field of retailing and service marketing, this
course takes both a practical and conceptual approach.  Topics include problems
commonly encountered in service business including service quality, service
guarantees, internal marketing, and assessing satisfaction.  Additionally, standard
marketing actions including consumer behavior, promotion, merchandise planning and
buying, store layout and design, pricing, personnel management and careers relative to
retailing and services marketing will be addressed.  Prerequisite: MKT 231.  Offered periodically.

MKT 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

MKT 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

MKT 380
3 hours
International Marketing
A study of the factors involved in marketing products and services in other countries.
Major geopolitical regions are analyzed and evaluated through practical assignments.
Topics include: market segmentation analysis, culture, language, values, finance,
transportation and distribution networks, international pricing strategies, political
structures, exporting organization, promotion and selling practices.  Selected research
projects and strategic plans provide students with practical applications of key
marketing skills.  Prerequisite: MKT 231.  Offered Spring semester.

MKT 390
3 hours
Digital Marketing
The internet is a dynamic marketplace, and it has become imperative for a business to integrate
ethical digital marketing efforts into its overall marketing strategy.  Students in this course will
explore the development, production, and implementation of digital-marketing methods
including, but not limited to, email marketing, web-based marketing, search-engine optimization
(SEO), online advertising, social media, and web analytics.  The class introduces tools to
appropriately measure and evaluate the effectiveness of digital-marketing campaigns that are
designed to improve the experience of the consumer.  Prerequisite: MKT 231.
MKT 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally, one hour of credit is
 awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.  Offered primarily during Summer.
MKT 410
3 hours
Marketing Research
A course designed to provide students with a fundamental understanding of the role and
methods of marketing research as a means to enhance the marketing strategies of any modern
organization.  Topics such as problem identification, proposal and research design, question and
survey development, sampling methodology, data analysis, and report presentation are covered
 in both theory and application.  Prerequisites: MKT 231 and MAT 210.  Offered Fall semester.
MKT 412
3 hours
Advertising and Promotional Strategy
A study of the strategic use of advertising and promotional strategy in today’s business
environment.  Students examine advertising and promotional strategy and its influence in
the marketplace.  Topics include advertising and promotional management, effectiveness,
creative design, copy development, media selection, agencies and research.  Practical
experience is gained through the development of advertising and promotional campaigns
 using various media.  Prerequisite: MKT 231.  Offered Spring semester.
MKT 445
3 hours
Best Practices in Marketing
The dynamic business environment requires marketing professionals to continually
reassess their position relative to changes in the industry.  This course is intended for
senior marketing majors preparing to embark on a career in marketing.  It will acquaint
students with the best thinking and practice currently being pursued by leading
organizations.  Class sessions are conducted in a workshop or seminar format where
students are expected to comment on cases, solve problems, and pose questions from
 the reading materials.  Prerequisite: MKT 231.  Senior status preferred.  Offered Fall semester.
MKT 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities as
 the library or laboratory.
MKT 451
3 hours
Marketing Analytics
An experiential learning course with introduction to basic Salesforce administration skills
and related tools to accomplish marketing and business process functions.  This course
includes cumulative training with Salesforce to learn the basics of a customer relationship
management (CRM) tool and the ways to implement, problem solve, and serve business
needs of any organization.  Students will be positioned to prepare for Salesforce
certification and gain hands-on experience in real-world data management and analysis
skills.  In addition to technical training, students will explore the impact and best practices
of data for ethical decision-making and informed analysis.  Prerequisites: MAT 210 and MKT
 231.
MKT 460
3 hours
Consumer Behavior
A course which examines such fundamental areas as consumer decision-making,
processes, information processing, external and internal influences and business effects
on consumer purchase/choice patterns.  An analysis of the psychological, social, and
 economic influences on consumption.  Prerequisite: MKT 231.  Offered Spring semester.
MKT 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with emphasis on
 directed readings and discussion.
MKT 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.  Open to
students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

147
Sport Management Courses
SMA 115
3 hours
Introduction to Sport Management
The course is an introduction to the profession of sport management.  The student
will study the history and philosophies of sport and be introduced to research in
the profession.  The course will also clarify the requirements of the Taylor
University Sport Management major, explore career opportunities in the
profession, and assist the student in preparing for employment in the profession.

SMA 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

SMA 210
3 hours
Introduction to Sport Technology and Analytics
Students are introduced to a variety of general and specialized applications of
technologies available to the Sport Management major.  Lab opportunities are
provided.  Prerequisite: COS 104.  Offered Spring semester.

SMA 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

SMA 350
3 hours
Sport Management
This course is a study of the roles, functions, and responsibilities of the person who
manages sports programs.  The emphasis is on how these functions can be
successfully performed in various sports organizations.  Prerequisite: SMA 115.
Offered Fall semester.

SMA 351
3 hours
Sport Public Relations
This course is an introduction to the responsibilities of communicating with the
public in a sports organization and the techniques and strategies that can be used
to promote sports effectively.  Assignments provide students with practical
experiences with these techniques and strategies.  Prerequisite: SMA 115.  Offered
Fall semester.

SMA 352
3 hours
Event and Facility Management
This course covers the duties that need to be performed in managing various types
of sports events and different types of sports facilities.  The process and features of
designing new facilities and remodeling existing ones and the maintenance
responsibilities of facility managers will also be studied.  Prerequisite: SMA 115 or
permission of instructor.  Offered Spring semester.

SMA 354
3 hours
Sport Finance
A comprehensive analysis of financial and economic issues related to the sports
industry. Topics include budgeting, capital structuring, planning processes, taxation,
public funding, fundraising, and sponsorships. Also, topics of a macro perspective
that affect various levels of sport and various leagues will be discussed. Prerequisite:
SMA 115 or permission of instructor. Offered Fall semester.

SMA 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

SMA 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

SMA 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Prerequisite: Permission of BUS department.

SMA 393A
1 hour
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Prerequisite: Permission of BUS department.

SMA 393B
1 hour
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Prerequisite: Permission of BUS department.

SMA 430
Legal Issues in Sport
3 hours
This course includes a review of legal concepts and terms.  Students will analyze
legal cases and issues in the realm of sports, study how cases/issues are solved, and
develop strategies for handling them.  Prerequisite: SMA 115.  Offered Fall semester.

SMA 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.  Prerequisite: Permission of instructor.  Offered Spring semester.

SMA 480
3 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with
emphasis on directed readings and discussion.  Students examine contemporary issues
in sport.  Case studies, guest speakers, field trips, readings, etc., may be used to critically
assess issues in sport and to explore strategies for managing them.  Prerequisites: SMA
115, SMA 210, SMA 350, SMA 351, SMA 352, SMA 354; or permission of the instructor.
Offered Spring semester.

SMA 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.
Open to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

SMA 492
4 hours
Sport Management Internship
This field experience is designed to have the students apply what they have learned
in their courses and to extend that learning by working in an organization that is
appropriate for their major.  Students work on a regular basis at the organization
under the supervision of approved staff members.  Students are also under the
supervision of a member of Taylor University Sport Management faculty.  Each
student must comply with the guidelines for credit hours, clock hours, and other
criteria that are specific for the internship in his or her major.  To register for this
internship, the student must submit a proposal and have it approved.

EDU 150
3 hours
Education in America
A study of the historical, philosophical, and sociological foundations of education.
The organization and role of the public school, P-12, in a multicultural society are
examined.  An analysis of teaching is made, including implications of some court
cases related to teaching, concepts of teaching, and leadership roles.  The course
includes a study of multicultural and ethnic differences among students and the
resulting effect on the teacher’s role.  Includes a field experience lab.
EDU 151
1 hour
Introduction to the Teacher Education Program
This course is designed to assist students who wish to transfer the equivalent of
EDU 150 Education in America, but have unmet requirements.  In this course,
students will complete outstanding requirements for EDU 150 and become familiar
with requirements for the teacher education program at Taylor University.  A field
experience may be required.
EDU 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.
EDU 200
3 hours
Introduction to Early Childhood Programs
This course deals with the history of early childhood education and also takes an in-depth
look at the qualities needed to become an effective early childhood teacher.  Students
study the professional aspects of developing appropriate curriculum and physical settings
for the preschool and kindergarten classroom.  Methods that meet the physical,
emotional, social, mental, and spiritual developmental growth of young children are
explored.  Includes weekly observation of and participation with children in preschool,
kindergarten, and Headstart programs.  Prerequisite: EDU 150.
153
EDU 222
2 hours
Reading in the Content Area for Secondary Teachers
Designed to provide practical procedures for developing effective reading skills at
the junior high, middle, and secondary school levels.  Attention centers on
understanding the relationships between the processes of reading and the learning
of content.  Suggestions on how to meet the total range of student reading needs
in the classroom are addressed.  Methods and materials to enhance advanced
comprehension and study skills of adolescents in a multicultural society are
presented.  Includes a field experience lab.  Required for all secondary/all-grade majors
seeking licensure. Prerequisite: EDU 150.

EDU 242
3 hours
Educational Technology in Elementary Education
Students develop skills in using presentational software, video conferencing, smart
boards, portable devices, and video editing and discover their application to classroom
instruction.  Students will understand the International Society for Technology in
Education (ISTE) standards.  Ethical and fair use issues regarding educational technology
and media will also be addressed.  Meets the foundational core computation requirement.

EDU 243
1 hour
Technology Applications in Elementary Education
The course examines the pedagogical value of technology in the elementary school.
Students will learn how to apply technology to classroom instruction.  Ethical and
fair use issues regarding educational technology and media will also be addressed.
Prerequisite: COS 104 or equivalent.  Offered Spring semester only.

EDU 255
3 hours
Foundations of Literacy and Language Arts in the Elementary Classroom
Course explores fundamental concepts concerning the development of children’s
language and literacy and the teacher’s role in this process including the selection
of appropriate instructional materials and strategies to meet the literacy needs of
children. This course also investigates the techniques and methods necessary for
integrating language arts in the elementary classroom. Topics include core literacy
issues, emergent literacy, word identification and recognition, phonological
awareness, and methods for language arts instruction. Required for all elementary
majors seeking licensure. Prerequisite: EDU 150.

EDU 260
3 hours
Educational Psychology
The course focuses on the study and application of learning theories and
psychological concepts and principles to the teaching-learning process.
Developmental stages, age-level characteristics of students, gender differences,
learning styles, contemporary views of intelligence, effects of ethnicity and social
class on teaching and learning, principles of multicultural education, the teacher’s
role in accommodating special needs in the regular classroom, learning theories,
various instructional approaches, theories of motivation, and various types of
assessment, including standardized and high-stakes tests, are examined.  Prerequisite:
EDU 150.

EDU 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

EDU 306
2 hours
Discipline and Classroom Management for Elementary Teachers
This course is designed to assist students preparing for the elementary classroom in
developing practical skills and techniques for organizing the classroom and maintaining
effective discipline.  Students develop a plan for discipline and classroom management
which utilizes a proactive approach based on positive ethical practices consistent with
Christian and democratic principles.  Several widely accepted discipline theories along
with the study of legal implications for teachers are used in conjunction with observations
and case studies to assist students in developing effective discipline plans.  Prerequisite: EDU
150.  Elementary Education majors only.

EDU 307
2 hours
Discipline and Classroom Management for Secondary Teachers
This course is designed to assist students preparing for the secondary or all grade
classroom in developing practical skills and techniques for organizing the classroom and
maintaining effective discipline.  Students develop a plan for discipline and classroom
management which utilizes a proactive approach based on positive ethical practices
consistent with Christian and democratic principles.  Several widely accepted discipline
theories along with the study of legal implications for teachers are used in conjunction
with observations and case studies to assist students in developing effective discipline
plans.  Prerequisite: EDU 150. Secondary/all grade education majors only.

EDU 309
1 hour
Methods of Instruction and Assessment in Secondary Education
A junior level course that focuses upon pedagogical methods including assessment,
instructional strategies, and culturally responsive teaching practices. The majority
of the course includes a placement in a secondary school for a laboratory field
experience. Prerequisites: EDU 150, EDU 222, EDU 260, and approval into the teacher
education program. Offered Fall semester.


EDU 315
1 hour
An Exploration of Young Adult Literature
The course will explore the genre of young adult literature.  Students will critically
evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of young adult literature.  Students will
recognize current themes and topics of young adult literature.

EDU 321
2 hours
Teaching Science in the Elementary Classroom
This course is designed to introduce students to hands-on, inquiry based methods of
teaching science in the elementary classroom.  Content from physical sciences, life
sciences, and earth/space sciences will be included.  Course will include objectives
and lesson plans linked to national and state standards; integration of reading, writing,
and other content areas to science; and using a variety of assessment strategies.  JuMP
field experience.  Prerequisites: EDU 150 and approval into the teacher education program.

EDU 332
2 hours
The Junior High/Middle School
A study of the philosophy, development, and organization of middle schools and
junior high schools.  Examines through readings, seminars, field experiences, and
classroom investigations the purpose, curriculum, and instructional strategies,
including the use of appropriate media and technology, for effective teaching in junior
high/middle schools.  This course provides prospective teachers with knowledge and
understanding of the adolescent, the school, and practical teaching activities.  Includes
a field experience lab.  Must be completed prior to student teaching.  Prerequisites: EDU
150 and EDU 260.

EDU 344
1 hour
Educational Technology in Secondary Education
This course addresses fundamental principles related to the appropriate, responsible,
and ethical use of the Internet and relevant technology as integrated in the secondary
education classroom.  Through understanding and applying the International Society
for Technology in Education (ISTE) standards, students will develop a philosophy for
effectively integrating technology into the secondary classroom and will practice
these principles through the creation of content specific instructional models and
learning activities.  Students will investigate the potential for technology to expand
research opportunities, increase skill development, and encourage the curating of
content knowledge.  Required for secondary education majors seeking teacher licensure.
Corequisite: EDU 332.

EDU 351
3 hours
Methods and Materials for Elementary Teachers
An integrative approach of utilizing a variety of effective instructional methods and
resources with content areas, including science and social studies, appropriate for
elementary children.  Strategies for working with diverse student populations and
incorporating current educational technology competencies are included.  JuMP field
experience.  Prerequisites: EDU 150, EDU 260, and approval into the teacher education
program.  Offered Fall semester.

EDU 355
3 hours
Early Literacy Experiences and Assessments: K-3
Course focuses upon the teaching and assessment of literacy in the early classroom.
Topics include emergent literacy, word identification and recognition, fluency, and
assessments.  JuMP field experience.  Prerequisites: EDU 150, EDU 260, and approval into
the teacher education program.  Corequisites: EDU 355L and EDU 371.  Offered Fall semester.

EDU 355L
1 hour
Elementary Education Junior Block Field Experience Lab
This lab experience is to be taken concurrently with elementary education junior
block methods classes.  Corequisite with EDU 355.  Offered Fall semester.

EDU 356
3 hours
Middle Childhood Literacy Experiences and Assessments: 4-6
Course focuses upon the teaching and assessment of literacy in the middle childhood
classroom.  Topics include vocabulary, comprehension, study skills, content area literacy,
and assessments.  JuMP field experience.  Prerequisites: EDU 150, EDU 260, EDU 355, and
approval into the teacher education program.   Corequisite: EDU 351 and EDU 356L.  Offered
Spring semester.

EDU 356L
1 hour
Elementary Education Junior Block Field Experience Lab
This lab experience is to be taken concurrently with elementary education junior
block methods classes.  Corequisite with EDU 356.  Offered Spring semester.

EDU 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

EDU 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.




154
EDU 371
3 hours
Literature for Children and Adolescents
The various genres of children’s literature and young adult literature are explored.
Course focuses upon new literacy, multicultural literature, special needs, and other
appropriate literature.  Materials range from emergent books to young adult
literature.  JuMP field experience.  Prerequisites: EDU 150, EDU 260, and approval into
the teacher education program.  Corequisite: EDU 355.  Offered Fall semester.

EDU 384
1 hour
Perspectives on Diversity
This seminar focuses on education in diverse settings.  Emphasis is given to the impact
of learning of social class, race/ethnicity, and English language proficiency through
readings and discussions.  The roles of local, state, and federal agencies in relationship
to public educational policy are discussed and analyzed.  Field-trip exploration of
various schools and organizations serving diverse populations is a key component of
the course.  A class fee is necessary to cover field trip expenses.  Prerequisite: EDU 150.
Meets foundational core civic engagement requirement.  Offered Fall and Spring semesters.

EDU 385
3 hours
Diversity in the Classroom
This courses provides a pre-student teaching experience working in either an
urban public school or overseas in a school with English as the medium of
instruction.  Placements are in diverse settings. Emphasis is given to application
of and written reflection on issues explored in EDU 384.  Observation,
participation, and a limited amount of supervised classroom teaching are
expected. Prerequisites: EDU 260 and EDU 384.  Meets foundational core cross-
cultural (CC) requirement.  Offered January interterm.

EDU 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally, one
hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.  Offered
primarily during Summer.

EDU 421
17 hours
Supervised Internship in Elementary Schools
Full-time teaching experiences for the intern at two grade levels under the
supervision
of
public
and
private
school
and
college
personnel.
Multicultural/multiethnic education placement is required in one of the experiences.
Prerequisites: (a) approval by the Teacher Education Committee; (b) EDU 150, 255, 260,
306, 351, 355, and 356.  Credit only.

EDU 431
17 hours
Supervised Internship in Secondary Schools
Full-time teaching experiences for the intern at two grade levels under the supervision of
public school and college personnel.  Prerequisites: (a) approval of the Teacher Education
Committee; (b) EDU 150, 222, 260, 307, 309.  See individual majors for additional prerequisite
courses.  Credit only.

EDU 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.

EDU 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with emphasis
on directed readings and discussion.

EDU 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.  Open
to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

EDU 493
3 hours
Elementary Education Senior Capstone
Students address current and future issues related to education through lectures,
readings, school visits, and discussion.  The integration of Christian philosophical
concerns with the current role and responsibilities of teachers and schools are
emphasized.  Required overnight, multiple-day field trip.  Fee required.  Prerequisite:
Approval into the teacher education program.  Offered January interterm only.












Special Education Courses
SED 220
3 hours
Exceptional Children
This course is designed to prepare the teacher for the challenge of meeting the needs
of exceptional children in the regular classroom.  A general study of exceptional children
focuses on mainstreamed and included special education students.  Various topics
included are identification of exceptional children, their characteristics and special needs,
delivery of services, instructional methods and techniques, and evaluation.

SED 330
3 hours
Foundations of Special Education
A study of the profession of special education, this course deals with the philosophical,
historical, ethical, and legal foundations of special education.  The responsibilities and
rights of students, their parents, all involved educators and other professionals are
studied as they relate to meeting the needs of exceptional learners.  Prerequisite: SED 220.
Offered Spring.

SED 340
3 hours
Assessment of Exceptional Learners
This course focuses on formal and informal assessments used to identify, plan for, and
teach students with exceptional needs, including the use of that information to develop
individual education plans.  Communication of that information with students, parents,
and other professionals is discussed.  Includes a field experience lab.  Prerequisites: SED
220 and SED 330.  Offered Fall semester.

SED 350
3 hours
Behavior Management and Disorders
Managing the learning environment of students with special needs is the focus of this
course.  Topics covered include behavioral assessments and their use in developing
behavior intervention plans for exceptional students, as well as the legal implications of
laws and regulations regarding the implementation of these plans in various learning
environments.  JuMP field experience.  Prerequisites: SED 220, SED 330, and approval into
the teacher education program.  Offered Spring semester.

SED 355
3 hours
Methods of Special Education
Methods and materials used in the intervention of exceptional learners are
presented in this course.  Strategies of instruction in the least restrictive
environment, modification of curriculum, and collaboration and consultation
across the spectrum of services are presented in conjunction with the daily
teaching and planning required of students’ individual education plans.  Includes a
field experience lab.  JuMP field experience.  Prerequisites: SED 220, SED 330, and
approval into the teacher education program.  Offered Fall semester.

SED 375
3 hours
Low-Incidence Disabilities-Instruction and Learning
A study of the curriculum principles related to the design of systematic instruction for
individuals with intense disabilities.  The focus is on research-based strategies for promoting
academic and social-emotional success for students from preschool through adolescence.
The roles and types of technologies in the teaching and learning process are included.  To
apply knowledge of systematic instruction with assessment, candidates will gain understanding
of the history, legal, characteristics, and etiological background of children and adolescence
with intense disabilities.  Includes a field experience teaching students with intense disabilities.
Prerequisites: SED 350 and SED 355.

SED 380
3 hours
Low-Incidence Disabilities-Independence and Self-determination
This course provides candidates with the skills to understand and interpret the instructional
needs of students with intense disabilities related to independence and self-determination.
The student, family, and diagnostic procedures to inform decision-making is the focus.
Theories and principles related to the development of skills for independence and self-
determination are used to integrate daily living, job and community, and behavior self-
management into individualized programs for students.  This course includes a field
experience teaching students with intense disabilities.  Prerequisites: SED 350 and SED 355.

SED 390
3 hours
Low-Incidence Disabilities-Collaboration and Individualized Programs
The course focuses on the strategies of effective communication and collaboration for
promoting the success of children and adolescents with intense disabilities.  The consultative
and collaborative skills and roles of special education teachers will be studied to advance the
learning experiences and outcomes for students.  Content includes the functions and roles
of various professionals, settings, programs, and services.  Culturally competent services,
parent involvement, and the role of students with intense disabilities are addressed.  This
course includes a field experience teaching students with intense disabilities.  Prerequisites: SED
350 and SED 355.

SED 440
3 hours
Special Education Integrative Seminar
This special education capstone course provides students with the opportunity to approach
the field of special education holistically, examining contemporary and critical issues in special
education as these issues are examined through a theological lens.  Prerequisites: SED 220,
SED 330, SED 340, SED 350, and SED 355.  Offered Spring semester.





155

Teaching English to Speakers of Other Languages (TESOL) Courses

TSL 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

TSL 201
3 hours
Introduction to SLA and the Field of Teaching ESOL
This course discusses the role of the English language in the contemporary world and
how language and culture shape human interactions.  It provides an introductory
understanding of the field of second language acquisition, from the perspective of
both learning and teaching a new language.  It also explores the teaching of English in
ministry in U.S. and international contexts.  Includes 5 hours of TESOL/cross cultural
experience.

TSL 202
1 hour
Introduction to the ESOL classroom
Geared towards non-education majors, this course introduces elements of effective
English language instruction in an ESOL (English for Speakers of Other Languages)
classroom. Includes 3 hours of practical TESOL experience. Must be take concurrently
with TSL 201. Offered Fall and Spring semesters.

TSL 203
1 hour
Introduction to ESOL in American Public Schools
Geared towards future teachers in American public schools, this course introduces
elements of effective English language instruction in the P-12 classroom. It presents
effective ways of scaffolding and making accommodations for English language learners
in content- and standards-based instruction. Includes 3 hours of practical TESOL
experience.  Must be take concurrently with TSL 201.  Offered Fall and Spring semesters.

TSL 210
3 hours
Teaching ELL in P-12 Classroom
Intended for future US public school ESOL professionals, this course addresses
English language learners (ELLs) in P-12 classrooms.  Investigates TESOL-related
legislation and its effect on schools, students, and teachers, as well as types of ESOL
programs used in U.S. schools and their effectiveness.  Studies effective advocacy,
strategies for collaboration with families and non-ESOL colleagues and
paraprofessionals, and helpful resources and services.  Prerequisites: EDU 150 and TSL
201.  Offered Spring semester.

TSL 211
3 hours
Teaching English Internationally
This course provides an analysis of background issues in teaching English to speakers
of other languages outside the U.S.  Primary focus will be on covering non-
pedagogical aspects of preparing for an English teaching position overseas.  This will
include better understanding the cultural and classroom challenges of teaching English
internationally as well as helping students more effectively assess prospective
teaching opportunities.  Offered Fall semester of even years.

TSL 212
1 hour
Adult ESL Literacy Development
Examines aspects of teaching literacy skills to adult ESL students such as refugees or
immigrants with limited or interrupted education.  Prerequisites: TSL 201; and TSL 202
or TSL 203.  Offered Fall semester of odd years.

TSL 240
3 hours
Introduction to Linguistics
Linguistics is the scientific study of spoken or signed human Language.  This course
introduces the core areas of linguistics (i.e., phonology, morphology, syntax,
semantics, pragmatics) that are common to all human languages.  The goal is to
understand the basic structure of Language, and develop the analytical skills to
observe and describe any human language. It will also explore how languages are
learned, and how language is tied to a sense of identity.

TSL 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

TSL 302
3 hours
Language and Culture
Introductory course providing brief overview of phonology, morphology, syntax,
semantics and pragmatics. Examines areas of phonetics and language variations (such
as language and power, socioeconomic status, regionalisms, ethnicity, bilingualism,
multilingualism, globalization) in more depth.  Prerequisites: TSL 201; and TSL 202 or
TSL 203.

TSL 303
3 hours
Methods and Assessment in TESOL
This course develops understanding and skill in classroom instruction of English
learners including lesson planning, teaching, and assessment.  Topics covered include
teaching methods and techniques for all aspects of English language development,
educational technology, curricular planning, and formative assessment.  Includes a 20-
hour field experience lab.  Prerequisite: TSL 201.

TSL 304
3 hours
Issues in Second Language Acquisition
This course offers a review of second language acquisition theory and research and
introduces current issues in second language acquisition.  Prerequisites: TSL 201, TSL 305,
and TSL 303.

TSL 305
3 hours
Pedagogical Grammar and Applied Linguistics in TESOL
This course introduces applied linguistics and its practical implications in language
teaching.  It provides study of English grammar and how English structures are taught
and explained to English learners.  Prerequisite: TSL 201.

TSL 310
3 hours
Teaching the Skill Areas in TESOL
This course develops understanding and skill in classroom instruction of English
learners in the skill areas of reading, writing, speaking, and listening.  Students will
apply their growing knowledge of how English learners develop these language skills
to their own current or intended teaching context and age group.  Prerequisites: TSL
201, TSL 303, and TSL 305.

TSL 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

TSL 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

TSL 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Offered primarily during Summer.

TSL 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.

TSL 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with emphasis
on directed readings and discussion.

TSL 482
3 hours
Seminar with Field Experience in TESOL
This course is comprised of a supervised ESOL field experience totaling a minimum
of 40 hours, plus accompanying seminar sessions focused on reflection, development
of teaching skill, and TESOL professionalization.  Prerequisites: TSL 201, TSL 303, and
TSL 305.  This course has a minimum 40-hour field experience.

TSL 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.  Open
to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

PSY 100
3 hours
Introductory Psychology
An introduction to the subject matter and methods of psychology.  Topics on
human development, personality, learning, sensation, perception, motivation,
emotion, mental health and social psychology are considered.  Meets foundational
core general social science requirement.

PSY 105
3 hours
Foundations and Applications of Psychology
An exploration of worldviews and philosophical views in psychology, current
perspectives and ethical issues in psychology, and models of integration of psychology
and Christianity.  Self-reflection and development of a sense of calling/vocation in
psychology are explored as the breadth and depth of the field are introduced.  Does
not meet a foundational core requirement.  Prerequisite: PSY 100 or instructor’s permission.

PSY 125
2 hours
Intrapersonal Psychology
The study of how to process the emotional dynamics of anger, guilt, anxiety, and
grief while becoming mature, emotionally integrated social beings.

PSY 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.




PSY 205
3 hours
Psychology of Adjustment
This course is designed to provide students with the background and resources
necessary to investigate the psychological and social variables that contribute to the
dynamics of human adjustment.  The desired outcome is for students to use this
knowledge to actively take charge of their own lives, effectively adjusting to an ever-
changing world.  Further, students will be encouraged to use the concepts and
information presented in this class to develop a fuller understanding of the self, along
with greater awareness of personal and social relationships.

PSY 210
2 hours
Ethics in Psychology
A study of various models of ethics, with a desire to develop a Christian model.  The
Christian model is then applied to various issues in counseling, psychopathology,
research, human development, law, and educational psychology.  Prerequisite: PSY 100.

PSY 220
3 hours
Sport Psychology
This course investigates the interpersonal, societal, and cultural variables that
surround athletics and sports in our contemporary culture.  Topics include
personality variables of the successful athlete; anxiety and arousal in sports, as well
as strategies to assist in the control of these states; motivation; casual attributions
for success and failure in athletes and coaches; the role of the direct and indirect
contexts of sports and competition; and exercise psychology.  Prerequisite: PSY 100.
159
PSY 240
3 hours
Child Psychology
This course deals with the subject matter of developmental psychology (cognitive,
physical, and socio-emotional development) and applies the subject matter to those
actively working with children, including parents, teachers, coaches, etc.  Meets
foundational core general social science requirement.

PSY 250
3 hours
Life Span Development
This course is designed to provide a general overview of the developmental process
in humans from conception through death and dying.  Included is attention to the
physical, cognitive psychosocial and spiritual developments.  Meets foundational core
general social science requirement.

PSY 251
1 hour
Life Span Development: Adolescence, Adulthood, and Aging
This course is designed to provide a general overview of the developmental processes
in humans from adolescence through, adulthood, aging and the dying process.  Included
is attention to the physical, cognitive, psychosocial, and spiritual developments.
Intended for majors and non-majors (e.g., Social Work, Christian Ministries, Exercise Science)
who have taken Child Psychology (PSY 240) or Child and Adolescent Psychology (PSY 350)
but need a life span perspective as required by their program or as recommended for their
future graduate school plans.  The class meets with PSY 250 for the second half of the
semester.  Does not meet a foundational core requirement.  Prerequisite: PSY 240 or PSY 350.

PSY 260
3 hours
Applied Psychology
An introduction to practical uses and applications of psychology.  Topics cover a variety
of fields of psychology (e.g., industrial/organizational psychology, educational psychology,
clinical/counseling psychology) and applications within each field with different
psychological degrees, developing a career identity that intersects with values and beliefs.

PSY 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

PSY 272
3 hours
Research Methods in Psychology
Research methods in psychology are studied and critiqued.  Students are involved
in practical research and writing assignments.  Prerequisite: PSY 100.

PSY 275
3 hours
Introductory Statistics
An introduction to descriptive and inferential statistics used in research.  Students
will be involved in the computation, application, and interpretation of various
elementary statistics.

PSY 280
3 hours
Introduction to Autism Spectrum Disorders
This course will help students develop an understanding of the social, behavioral, and
developmental issues for individuals with ASD across the life span.  After the course,
students will know and understand the etiology, symptoms, and diagnostic criteria of
Autism Spectrum Disorder.

PSY 281
3 hours
Applied Behavior Analysis and Autism Treatments
The course focuses on understanding autism spectrum disorders through the life span.
Diagnostic criteria, identification, assessment, and the variety of treatment and
interventions used with individuals with autism spectrum disorders are reviewed.

PSY 300
3 hours
Abnormal Psychology
A study of the nature, causes, and treatment of maladaptive behavior, with special
consideration given to the symptoms and dynamics of psychological disorders.
Prerequisite: PSY 100 or instructor’s permission.

PSY 305
3 hours
Behavior Problems of Children and Adolescents
A study of major behavioral disorders, with emphasis on empirical research and
clinical description, relative to etiology, assessment, prognosis, and treatment.
Cultural influences on child and adolescent behavioral disorders will also be
explored.  Prerequisite: PSY 240 or PSY 250 or PSY 350.

PSY 313
3 hours
Statistics for Behavioral Sciences
The major concepts covered in the class will be descriptive statistics, basic
probability theory, and inferential statistics.  Demonstrations of Microsoft Excel
competency will be assigned for each segment of the class.  This course is offered
through Taylor University Online (TUO).

PSY 317
3 hours
Psychology of Learning
In this course, students will become acquainted with the major theories of the
psychology of learning, along with basic biblical principles about humanity.  Through
personal investigation, observation, and basic research, students will learn to
recognize and apply the theories of psychology of learning to their own lives as well
as in the lives of others.  This course is offered through Taylor University Online (TUO).

PSY 320
3 hours
Multicultural Psychology
An introduction to the psychological development of differences in worldviews,
cultural identity development, discrimination and racism, acculturation processes,
and building multicultural skills and competence.  The course provides students an
opportunity to begin to build knowledge, skill, and awareness in serving, working,
and/or being with individuals of different ethnic and cultural groups from a
psychological and Christian worldview.  The goal of this course is to facilitate self-
reflection and self-growth among participants, preparing them to more critically,
actively, and effectively participate in a diverse environment.  Prerequisites: PSY 100
and PSY 272 or instructor’s permission.

PSY 321
3 hours
Social Psychology
A study of how the thought, feeling, or behavior of individuals is influenced by the
actual, imagined, or implied presence of others.  Topics include social perception,
conformity prejudice, aggression, attitudes and their change, affiliation, and altruism.
Prerequisites: PSY 100 and PSY 272 or instructor’s permission.

PSY 325
1 hour
Career and Vocational Issues Seminar
A career and vocational seminar with an emphasis on reading and discussion.
Prerequisites: PSY 100 and PSY 272; junior standing required.

PSY 331
3 hours
Biblical Psychology
A survey of biblical teaching on the nature of the person, its relationship to
emotional and behavioral problems, and solutions to those problems.

PSY 340
3 hours
Adolescent Psychology
This course deals with the problems of adolescent development and resulting
issues, including peer pressure and conformity, adult-adolescent conflicts, cognitive
changes, adjustments to physical changes, struggles with identity, etc.
Contemporary issues, including drug and alcohol use, eating disorders, and teen
sexuality are also discussed.  The focus is on a practical application of research
literature with an integration of biblical principles.  Meets foundational core general
social science requirement.

PSY 341
3 hours
Neuroscience and the Soul
This course is a study of the human brain and the question of the existence of a
soul or immaterial mind.  Content to be studied will include areas of the brain
related to this question of the existence of the soul.  The course will study leading
researchers in neuroscience as well as key experiments examining the issue.
Parallel to this search on neuroscience, the class will also examine some philosophy,
theology, and the biblical content in order to keep the larger question of the
immortal soul in view.

PSY 345
3 hours
Applied Research
This lab experience allows students to apply their research and statistical skills on
meaningful service learning projects.  Prerequisite: PSY 272; Prerequisite or Corequisite:
PSY 275.

PSY 350
3 hours
Child and Adolescent Psychology
This course surveys the characteristics of growth and development of children
through adolescence, including physical, psychological, social, cognitive, and
emotional aspects.  School-related contemporary issues such as child abuse, drug
and alcohol use, peer pressure, and teenage sexuality are discussed.  Meets
foundational core general social science requirement.

PSY 357
3 hours
Peace, Reconciliation, and Justice
This course provides a basic introduction to the role of psychology in helping to
establish peaceful societies around the world.  It will seek to integrate a Christian
worldview with current trends in peacemaking, including topics such as forgiveness,
reconciliation, and social justice.  Attention will be given to ethnopolitical conflicts
from a multi-disciplinary perspective.  Prerequisites: PSY 100 and PSY 272 or
instructor’s permission.

PSY 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.



160
PSY 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

PSY 375
3 hours
Loss and Bereavement
This course examines the journey through loss and grief and includes not only
death-related bereavement but also psychological, physical, developmental, and
situational losses that occur throughout the life.  While the course is designed with
a systemic perspective, a more general grieving paradigm is also presented through
current theories and research.  Students have the opportunity to practice helpful
responses to loss and learn how to facilitate healthy adaptation to change.  The role
of culture in the experience of loss and grief is explored.  Prerequisite: PSY 100 or
instructor’s permission.

PSY 380
3 hours
Ethical and Professional Issues in Autism Intervention Seminar
This course covers specific issues related to work in autism related fields.  Students
are exposed to legislation, rights, and ethical issues related to working with individuals
with autism across the life span.  At the completion of the course, all students must
pass the RBT exam to be certified as a Registered Behavior Technician.  Prerequisites:
PSY 280 and PSY 281.

PSY 381
3 hours
Single Subject Research and Behavioral Assessment
This course will introduce students to methods of conducting single subject designs
for behavioral intervention.  Students will also learn the salient features of common
single subject designs as well as the advantages and disadvantages of these
methodologies.  Students will learn to visually inspect data and make treatment
decisions regarding intervention effectiveness.  Additionally, students will learn how to
review published research based on single subject methods and will have opportunities
to explore how these methods can be used to answer applied and basic science
research questions and how results inform therapeutic intervention choices.

PSY 382
3 hours
Sensation and Perception
Examination of how observers perceive their environment through sensory
information; emphasis on major sensory systems including vision, audition, spatial
orientation, touch, taste, and olfaction.  In addition, the integration of these sensory
systems and subjective experience will be explored.

PSY 390
3 hours
Christian Marriage
A practical and applied course that integrates psychological literature and biblical
teaching in the subject areas of the marriage relationship.  These areas include
marriage foundations, dating and engagement, premarital sexual behavior,
singleness, mate selection, marriage success and satisfaction, love and infatuation,
marriage roles, communication and conflict and divorce.

PSY 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Offered primarily during Summer.

PSY 395
3 hours
Health Psychology
This course provides an overview of the research and practice of psychology as
applied to health and health systems.  Topics include the biopsychosocial model,
personality and psychological issues related to health behaviors, stress and coping,
patient-provider relationships, use of health services, pain management, chronic
illness, advancing and terminal illness, heart disease, hypertension, stroke, diabetes,
psychoneuroimmunology, aids, cancer, and arthritis.  Students also explore
psychological issues related to personal health behavior change.

PSY 400
3 hours
Theories of Personality
A study of the major current systematic psychological theories of personality.
Consideration is given to their underlying assumptions and usefulness for research
and therapeutic practice.  Prerequisites: PSY 100 and three additional hours in
psychology or social work.

PSY 410
3 hours
Motivation
This course is designed to provide a theoretical, Christian, practical understanding
of motivation.  Motivation is addressed by looking at its historical development and
models of volition, affection, intellect, and biology.  Prerequisites: PSY 100 and six
additional hours in psychology or instructor’s permission.

PSY 411
3 hours
Learning: Theory and Application
The study of major learning theories and their application to advertising, education,
counseling, and daily problems of life.  Prerequisite: PSY 100.
PSY 420
3 hours
Cognition
The scientific study of the cognitive functions of memory, attention, perception,
learning styles, imagery, decision making, problem solving, and metacognition, with
application for implementing this information.  Prerequisites: PSY 100 and six
additional hours in psychology.

PSY 422
3 hours
Psychological Testing
A study of the principles of psychological testing, considering both the theoretical
and practical foundations underlying the construction, use, and interpretation of
various psychometric instruments.  The student is given opportunity to administer,
score, and interpret selected instruments.  Prerequisites: PSY 100 and PSY 275.

PSY 425
3 hours
Industrial-Organizational Psychology
This course is designed to provide an introduction to applying psychological
principles, theory, and research to the work environment.  Topics include hiring,
job fit, performance, assessment, training, motivation, stress, leadership, teams, and
interpersonal relationships.  Students will complete an applied project examining
and evaluating the hiring process and performance evaluation of an organizational
job.  Prerequisite: PSY 100 or instructor’s permission.

PSY 435
3 hours
Applied Advanced Psychological Statistics
The course provides students with knowledge of statistical methods, how to
effectively use them in real world settings doing meaningful projects and when to
use the methods based on the data and research design that is utilized.  The SPSS
statistical package is integrated into the structure of the course content that
includes Repeating Measures ANOVA; multiple comparison tests; Two-Way and
Three-Way ANOVA Independent groups; One-Way and Two-Way ANCOVA;
Simple and Multiple Regression; One-Way, Two-Way, and Mixed factors
MANOVA; Point Biserial Correlation; statistics for validity and reliability; Path
Analysis; and effect sizes that these statistics tests.  Prerequisite: PSY 275.

PSY 441
3 hours
Physiological Psychology
A study of the neurophysiology underlying human behavior.  Emphasis is given to
central nervous system mechanisms that mediate sensation, consciousness,
learning, motivation, and emotional behavior.

PSY 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.  Prerequisites: PSY 100 and PSY 272.

PSY 461
3 hours
Fundamentals of Counseling
An analysis of the major theories and approaches to counseling, correlating them
with counterpart theories of personality and learning.  Each major theory is dealt
with in the light of biblical revelation.  As a result, the student is encouraged to
formulate a tentative theory of counseling consistent with biblical truth.  Prerequisite:
PSY 100 or instructor’s permission.

PSY 462
3 hours
Counseling Skills
This course introduces and provides foundational communication and interpersonal
counseling skills from therapeutic listening and empathy to interviewing skills.  It is
experiential and aimed at helping students develop a foundation of strong, effective
therapeutic people helping skills.  Prerequisite: PSY 461.

PSY 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with
emphasis on directed readings and discussion.  The content of the readings and
discussions will focus on integrative material in the discipline, as well as contemporary
issues confronting not only professional psychologists, but lay persons as well.

PSY 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.
Open to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

PSY 495
3 hours
Integration of Psychology and Christianity
An examination of the relationship between psychology and Christian beliefs about
human nature.  Topics involve the presuppositions of modern psychology, the
Christian view of the person, and tension areas between psychology and theology.
Prerequisites: PSY 100 and completion of 38 total hours in the major.

ANT 200
3 hours
Cultural Anthropology
An introduction to the principles of cultural anthropology, including the analysis of
major anthropological theories and concepts and an examination of social
institutional arrangements in small-scale societies.  Meets foundational core civic
engagement or general social science requirement.

ANT 280
3 hours
Anthropology of Study Abroad, Short-term Mission, and Tourism
The recent explosion of global travel for relatively short periods brings travelers
into transient contact with people in different places.  Such travel may have
educational, recreational, religious, or service goals.  Through anthropological
readings, this course examines the nature of the intercultural encounters
experienced on these trips, the motivations and outcomes of these trips for both
travelers and hosts, and considers a wide variety of related dynamics.  Students will
be coached in engaging in research on course-related themes or in conducting
research in preparation for their own upcoming global trip.  Meets foundational core
cross-cultural requirement; and civic engagement or general social science requirement.




Criminal Justice Courses
JUS 100
3 hours
Introduction to Criminal Justice
A survey of the organization, administration, and function of law enforcement, the
courts, and corrections in an historical, legal, and contemporary context.  An
emphasis is placed on both offenses and offenders at each stage of the process.  This
course is offered through Taylor University Online (TUO).


JUS 347
3 hours
Courts
This course will examine the American court system and the components of the
legal system that feed cases into the system, in both the civil and criminal legal
process.  Students will learn about the many elements of the court system and their
interlocking relationships to the judicial process. Jurisdictional issues between state,
local, and federal courts will be examined, as well as the trial and appellate process.
Students will have the opportunity to do a paper on a high profile case and review
the social impact of decisions.  Emphasis will be on the criminal justice system since
criminal cases make up the majority of court cases.  This course is offered through
Taylor University Online (TUO).





Social Work Courses
SWK 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

SWK 200
3 hours
Explorations in Social Work
This course intends to assist the prospective social worker in gaining awareness and
understanding of basic tenets of the social work profession, Code of Ethics, guiding
principles and values, and of practice settings. Throughout the course, students are given
the opportunity to explore their interest in and potential for a career in social work.  The
course will also assist students in understanding social welfare systems and their
development, and how social welfare policy affects people across the globe.  As students
learn about the various social issues that social workers help to change, students will explore
how their Christian faith commands their reflection and action in tackling these issues.
Meets foundational core civic engagement or general social science requirement.

SWK 225
3 hours
Diversity and the Disenfranchised
A hybrid course integrating theory and application of concepts through case study
dealing with issues related to diversity, oppression, discrimination, human rights, and
social justice.  Dimensions related to women’s issues, immigration and acculturation,
religion and spirituality, social class, and sexual orientation will be explored.

SWK 231
3 hours
Social Welfare: Historical Perspectives and Development
This course follows the development of social welfare efforts from early civilizations
to the present time.  The course focuses on the emergence of the profession of
social work and explores the question “Am I my brother’s keeper?” in the light of
biblical principles.  This course is offered through Taylor University Online (TUO).



164
SWK 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

SWK 320
3 hours
Unleashing the Oppressed
This course is designed to provide the student with the necessary knowledge, values
and skills to empower people who fall into “at-risk population” groups.  Those groups
who are at-risk for prejudice and discrimination typically include mental disability,
developmental disability, sexual orientation, women, elderly, and religious diversity.
Service-learning component provides interaction with a variety of community-based
agencies.  Meets foundational core civic engagement or general social science requirement.
Open to all students.

SWK 340
3 hours
Trauma-informed Work with Children
This course is a social work elective that is designed to provide an overview of the
broad field of child welfare. Topics include the role of the family in the care of
children, the history and current state of care of children, current problems such as
child abuse and neglect, the impact of poverty and diversity in the well-being of
children, and responses to children in need such as foster care, adoption, residential
programs, the courts and school-based services.  Application is made through
readings, experiential activities, agency visits, and guest speakers.  A service learning
component provides interaction with community-based agencies.  Open to all students.
Offered Fall semester of odd years.

SWK 351
3 hours
Social Work Process and Practice I
First in a 4-course practice sequence designed to provide the student with the
necessary knowledge, values for ethical decision making and skills for successful
practice with individuals at the generalist social work practitioner level. Develops
understanding of the nature and process of social work practice, principles and
techniques of the planned change process. Develops students’ ability for self-
awareness and for understanding the nature of clienthood. Prerequisites: PSY 100;
SWK 200; SWK 225; COM 210 or COM 320; ANT 200 or SOC 100 or SOC 210.   Offered
Fall semester.

SWK 354
3 hours
Social Work Process and Practice II
Second in the 4-course practice sequence.  Enables further development of generalist
social work skills with various client systems.  Areas of group dynamics, ethical issues,
developmental levels and diversity are emphasized.  Participation in a group
experience is required.  Prerequisite: SWK 351.  Offered Spring semester.

SWK 355
3 hours
Helping Troubled Families
Introduces family systems theory, as well as the history and development of family
interventions. Presents the major approaches of working with families and provides
the opportunity to role play application of these approaches. Open to all students.
Offered Fall semester.

SWK 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

SWK 362
3 hours
Social Policy
Discusses topics related to social welfare history, public policy, and social welfare
policies that exist in today’s society and how they impact those most dependent on
social programs.  Examines social programs in light of the problems they address, the
service they provide, and their effectiveness.  Addresses contemporary social issues
in light of public funding decisions.

SWK 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

SWK 380
3 hours
Understanding Suffering, Grief, and Loss
Provides a basic introduction to crucial issues related to suffering and affliction, both
self-imposed and those related to the human condition.  Bereavement, grief and loss
across the life span will be explored.  Contemporary issues related to death and dying
and the roles of social institutions and services to persons affected by suffering, death
and loss will be covered.  Issues will be examined based on difference in gender,
culture, ethnicity and religion and in light of historic and contemporary Christian
faith.  Open to all students.  Offered Spring semester of odd years.

SWK 393
4 hours
Junior Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum
experience.  Students spend time in a social work setting learning how an agency functions,
how professional social work practice is implemented, and how the professional interacts
within an agency.  Pass/fail only.  Practicum course credit requires 140 hours of observation
and practice.  Prerequisites: SWK 351, junior status, and approval of the Junior Practicum
Coordinator.  Offered January interterm.

SWK 395
4 hours
International Practicum
During the January interterm of the junior or senior year, students would spend time
in an international social work setting gaining knowledge of social work in a different
country.  They learn how an agency functions, how social work practice is
implemented abroad, and specific needs within another culture.  This practicum
opportunity provides 140 hours of field lab work.  Class fee assessed to cover travel
and in country experience.  Prerequisites: SWK 351 and permission of Director of Social
Work.  Pass/fail only.

SWK 441
3 hours
Human Behavior and the Social Environment
This course serves as a capstone course for the human behavior in the social
environment sequence in the social work major.  The primary purpose of this course
is explore the question, “Why do people behave as they do?”  This question will be
explored from a multi-dimensional systems social work perspective.  It is designed
to prepare students for multi-dimensional assessments that will be required for the
senior field placement and generalist practice after graduation.  Prerequisites: PSY 250;
SWK 362; SWK 354; BIO 106 or 310.  Offered Fall semester.

SWK 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.

SWK 451
3 hours
Social Work Process and Practice III
The third in the 4-course generalist social work practice sequence.  This course
integrates social work practice, intervention and professional skills with regards to
intervention and assessment at the organizational and community level. The course
also focuses on macro social work practice, community organizing and development.
Students will also participate in a grant writing project as they begin to develop grant
writing and fundraising know-how and skills.  As in the other courses in the practice
sequence in our social work program, there will be a focus on the integration of
micro, mezzo, and macro skills to empower students for effective generalist social
work practice.  Prerequisite: SWK 354.  Offered Fall semester.

SWK 452
3 hours
Advanced Social Work Practice
Last in the 4-course sequence for developing generalist practice skills.  The
professional helping relationship and interview process are emphasized.  Simulated
client-worker situations provide opportunities to practice skills.  Employment
interviews and strategies are also discussed.  Beginning-level professional writing skills
are developed through documentation exercises.  Prerequisite: SWK 354.  Offered Fall
semester.

SWK 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with emphasis
on directed readings and discussion.

SWK 482
2 hours
Integrative Social Work Seminar
A seminar class taken by all social work majors during interterm of the senior year.
The focus is holistic integration of: (1) faith and the social work profession; (2) self
and the social work profession; (3) liberal arts education and the knowledge and
practice of social work; (4) self- and civic-mindedness; and (5) self as global citizen.
Students begin to develop the CSWE content portion of their professional portfolio.
Focused presentations are conducted with regard to stress and time management
and burnout prevention.  Pass/fail only.

SWK 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.  Open
to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

SWK 492

12 hours
Senior Practicum
A professional semester of supervised field practicum in a social work setting; 480
hours are required.  Prerequisite: Completion of all required courses in the social work
major.  Offered Spring semester.



165
Sociology Courses
SOC 100
3 hours
Introduction to Sociology
A study of the principles and concepts of sociology in the context of present day social
systems.  Attention is given to major contemporary analyses of social events, processes,
and institutions.  Meets foundational core civic engagement or general social science
 requirement.  Offered Fall semester.
SOC 110
3 hours
Introduction to Global Societies
This course explores the nature of contemporary societies around the world by
considering societal stages and development, cultural and social structural aspects of
societies, international inequality, and globalization.  Meets foundational core civic
 engagement or general social science requirement.  Offered Spring semester.
SOC 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

SOC 210
3 hours
Contemporary Social Issues
An introduction to the study of social problems from several perspectives.  Problems
in areas such as drug abuse, crime, education, and the family are examined in the light
of basic principles of sociology.  Meets foundational core civic engagement or general social
science requirement.  Offered Fall semester.

SOC 220
3 hours
Ethnic and Minority Issues
An analysis of inter-group relations in the United States.  Topics include a
consideration of the mechanisms of group interaction between dominant and
subordinate groups and the experiences and histories of the primary minority groups
in the United States.  Meets foundational core civic engagement or general social science
requirement.  Offered Spring semester.

SOC 250
2 hours
Principles of Research and Analysis
Intended to prepare students to effectively make sense of the bewildering variety of
numbers available in contemporary societies about people, organizations, and social
outcomes, this course is an introduction to the key principles of social measurement
and basic ways numbers are used to represent patterns in the social world.  Offered
Fall semester.

SOC 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

SOC 310
3 hours
Religion and Society
An examination of the cultural and structural influences that guide the forms religion takes
in society and the processes through which religious ideas, behaviors, and institutions are
constructed.  Attention is given to the sociological theory and research that underlies
religious behavior.  Meets foundational core general social science requirement.  Offered periodically.

SOC 313
3 hours
Statistics for Behavioral Science
The major concepts covered in the class will be descriptive statistics, basic probability
theory, and inferential statistics.  Demonstrations of Microsoft Excel competency will
be assigned for each segment of the class.  This course is offered through Taylor University
Online (TUO).

SOC 315
3 hours
Social Inequality and Stratification
This course examines the social systems (cultural and structural) that determine
outcomes in wealth, power and social prestige. The primary focus is on class systems.
Meets foundational core civic engagement or general social science requirement.  Offered
Spring semester.

SOC 330
3 hours
Social Change and Social Movements
This course focuses on the basic premises of social change including the evolutionary,
conflict and cyclical theories of social change, and the organized activities of collective
behavior and social movements that encourage or discourage social change.  Special
attention is given to the theoretical contributions of the structural strain, resource
mobilization and social constructionists’ perspectives.  Meets foundational core general
social science requirement.  Offered periodically.

SOC 340
3 hours
Sociology of Children and Families
This course examines the sociological foundations of childhood including family
formation, childhood socialization and the changing cultural significance of children.
This course also examines the divergent roles, styles and functions of parenting.
Offered Fall semester of every other year (alternates with SOC 381).

SOC 350
3 hours
Social Research Methods
An exploration of the primary methods of social research and data collection.  Topics
include defining a research question and design, and data collection from
operationalization to data entry.  Prerequisite: SOC 250.  Offered Fall semester.

SOC 355
3 hours
Applied Social Statistics
An introduction to statistical analysis for social research issues.  The course focuses on
the uses of statistics, choosing appropriate statistics for a given problem and interpreting
statistical output.  Meets foundational core mathematics requirement.  Prerequisite: SOC 250.
Offered Spring semester.

SOC 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

SOC 361
3 hours
History of Social Thought
Primary emphasis is placed upon the contributions of sociologists since the time of Comte.
The writings and concepts of leading sociologists in both Europe and America are studied.
Meets foundational core general social science requirement.  Offered Fall semester of every other
year (alternates with SOC 365).

SOC 365
3 hours
Contemporary Social Thought
An analysis of social theory as it is practiced today.  Building on the classical works of
Marx, Durkheim, Weber, Simmel and Mead, this course focuses on how modern
sociologists have incorporated the classical writers to explain social developments.
Special attention is given to postmodernists, social constructionists, functionalists, neo-
Marxists, neo-Weberians and leading feminist thinkers.  Meets foundational core general
social science requirement.  Offered Fall semester of every other year (alternates with SOC 361).

SOC 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

SOC 381
3 hours
Marriage and Family Systems
A study of the changing state of family systems in America.  The course also examines
how work, social class, ethnicity and gender affect family structure and function.  Meets
foundational core general social science requirement.  Offered Fall semester of every other year
(alternates with SOC 340).

SOC 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally, one
hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.  Offered
primarily during Summer.

SOC 410
3 hours
Community and Urban Affairs
Consideration of problems relating to community structure, development and process,
beginning with a historical overview of the development of cities.  Special emphasis is
placed upon the interrelationships of various groupings within communities, particularly
within the urban scene.  A field trip to a major urban center provides “hands-on” learning.
Meets foundational core civic engagement or general social science requirement.  Offered Spring semester.

SOC 420

3 hours
Organizational Policies and Programs
A study of the social dynamics that guide and shape organizations in modern societies.  The class
prepares students to see and work with the structures of organizations like the church,
government agencies, for-profit companies and nonprofits.  The focus is on the application of
organizational theories to organizational settings and includes projects on the development of
organizational programs.  Offered periodically.

SOC 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities as
the library or laboratory.

SOC 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with emphasis on
directed readings and discussion.

SOC 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.  Open to
students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

SOC 493
2 hours
Sociology Integrative Seminar
This course provides students with the opportunity to approach the field of sociology
holistically and integrate faith and sociological insight.  Offered Spring semester.

SOC 498
1 hour
Sociology Senior Thesis
Students will complete a senior thesis that demonstrates an ability to apply sociological
perspective through a theoretical or methodological analysis of a sociological topic they
have chosen.  Offered Spring semester.

BIO 100
4 hours
General Biology
Concepts and principles are studied to provide basic knowledge that assists
students to meet the obligations of an informed citizen.  The Spring semester of
General Biology is intended for elementary education majors as a content course
that emphasizes instructional methodologies in science education.  Three hours of
lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Meets foundational core life science
requirement; not available to biology majors.

BIO 102
4 hours
Biology for Educators
Introductory principles of biology taught with materials appropriate for future
teachers.  Topics include cell biology, inheritance, diversity, evolution, and ecology.
Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Meets foundational core
life science requirement; not available to biology majors.

BIO 104
3 hours
Animal Biology
A foundational core course designed to provide a broad look at life science through
the study of the Kingdom Animalia.  Includes a consideration of tissues, anatomy,
ecology, natural history, and human interaction with representative vertebrates and
invertebrates.  Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week.  Meets foundational
core life science requirement.  Offered Fall semester of even years.

BIO 106
4 hours
Human Biology
This course is designed as a one semester anatomy and physiology course covering all
body organ systems and the interrelatedness of human health and lifestyle, environment,
etc.  Three hours lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Meets foundational core life
science requirements.  Offered Fall semester.  Preference given to Social Work majors.

BIO 107
4 hours
Introduction to Wildlife
This course looks at the wide range of adaptations, behavior, life history, and
geographical distribution of vertebrates from fishes to mammals.  Labs focus on
observation (and sometimes capture) of vertebrates in their natural habitat and
involve several outdoor sessions.  Three hours of lecture and two to three hours of lab
per week.  Meets foundational core life science requirement.  Not available to biology
majors.  Offered Spring semester.

BIO 112
3 hours
Topics in Biology
A study of some areas of biology most relevant to today's students with an emphasis
on concepts and principles that will best assist students to meet the obligations of
an informed citizen.  Topics to be considered include process of science, structure
and function of plants and animals, the relationship of organisms to one another
and their environment, genetics, microbiology, biotechnology, bioethics, and
evolution.  Two hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Meets
foundational core life science requirement.

BIO 113
3 hours
Botany for Beginners
An introductory course designed for the non-science major to provide a basic
understanding of the processes through which plants function, the role of plants in
the environment, and to equip students with skills that will allow them to continue
to enjoy plants long after the course is over.  Topics covered will range from
subcellular processes to ecological roles.  Plant adaptation, diversity, ecological
interactions, basic plant identification, plant propagation, and plants of economic
importance are included.  Two hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per
week.  Meets foundational core life science requirements.
BIO 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

BIO 185
1 hour
Biology Major Orientation
This course is required for all new biology majors and will provide students with the
opportunity to explore the field of biology and begin to develop their professional
portfolio.  Information will be shared through guest, faculty and student
presentations, discussions, and writing assignments.  Open to biology majors only.
Offered second half of Fall semester.

BIO 201
4 hours
Biology I: Foundations of Cell Biology and Genetics
Study of cellular structures and metabolism emphasizing form and function on
structure; the cellular pathways of energy and matter transformation; the information
flow, exchange, and storage; and the molecular, mitotic, and meiotic mechanism of
inheritance.  Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Meets
foundational core life science requirement.  Open to Biology majors only in the Fall; open to
all majors and minors requiring BIO 201 in the Spring.

BIO 202
4 hours
Biology II: Organisms and Diversity
This course is the second of the two-course sequence for freshman biology majors.
In this course we will examine the diversity of organisms, including algae, protozoa,
fungi, plants, and animals, as they appear through the fossil record from the Paleozoic
Era to the present time.  Majors/Minors only.  Prerequisite: BIO 201.

BIO 203
4 hours
Principles of Genetics
Fundamental principles of Mendelian inheritance, introduction to molecular genetics,
along with quantitative and evolutionary genetics will be examined.  Three hours of
lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Meets foundational core life science
requirement.  Prerequisite: BIO 201.

BIO 210
3 hours
Medical Terminology
This course is designed to assist students in learning medical terminology, as well as
to provide instruction in word-building skills so that words can be identified by their
parts.  It provides a solid vocabulary foundation for those individuals who anticipate
taking the MCAT or plan to enter an area of allied health studies.

BIO 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

BIO 285
1 hour
Biology Colloquium I
This course is for sophomore biology majors and will provide students with the
opportunity to explore the field of biology, to begin developing professional skills,
and to add artifacts to their professional portfolio.  The course will be delivered via
seminar format with guest, faculty and student presentations, class discussions, and
writing assignments.  Prerequisite: BIO 185.  Offered first half of Fall semester.

BIO 300
4 hours
Human Medical Physiology
Human Medical Physiology is an advanced study of human physiology as it examines
the functional processes of the organ systems.  The course covers human physiology
in a clinical setting as well as laboratory experiences.  Class is approached from a
pathology problems based curriculum with laboratories in the university hospital.
The course is part of the Global Engagement Centre program.
175
BIO 301
4 hours
Taxonomy of Vascular Plants
Identification, classification, and systematics of vascular plants are studied.  Topics
include basic population genetics, the process of speciation, phylogeny
reconstruction, and molecular patterns of diversification.  Laboratory emphasis is
on local flora, plant family characteristics, and modern systematic techniques.  Two
hours of lecture and four hours of laboratory per week.  Prerequisite: BIO 202; BIO 203
 is recommended.  Offered Fall semester of odd years.
BIO 304
4 hours
Field Natural History of the Black Hills
Field Course: Introduction to basic field and lab methods used in field natural
history.  Includes basic nomenclature of spring flora and fauna in terrestrial as well
as aquatic systems.  Examines the principles of geology/paleontology, ecosystems,
communities, and wildlife as exhibited in the Black Hills region of South Dakota,
including Mt. Rushmore, Badlands National Park, Custer State Park, Devils Tower
National Monument, the Black Hills National Forest, and Yellowstone and Grand
Teton National Parks.  Prerequisites: BIO 202 and ENS 204 or permission of instructor.
 Offered Summer at the Wheaton College Science Station, Black Hills South Dakota.
BIO 306
3 hours
Introduction to Bioinformatics
This course is designed to introduce students to concepts of bioinformatics, as well
as basic bioinformatics skills, using the R programming language.  The course will
explore methods and datasets spanning from the level of DNA (genomics) up to
the organismal and ecosystem level.  Bioinformatics is an interdisciplinary field
combining concepts of biology, computer science, and statistics to analyze and
interpret biological datasets and solve complex questions.  Two hours of lecture and
one hour of one hour of coding/data analysis in a computer lab per week.  Prerequisite:
 BIO 203 or instructor permission.  Offered Fall semester of even years.
BIO 307
4 hours
Vertebrate Natural History
This course looks at the adaptive anatomy, feeding relationships, behavior, life
history, and geographical distribution of vertebrates from fishes to mammals.  Labs
focus on methods currently employed for study and observation of vertebrates in
the field and involve several outdoor sessions.  Three hours of lecture and three hours
of lab per week.  Prerequisite: BIO 202 or permission of the instructor; ENS 204 is
 recommended.  Offered Spring semester.
BIO 309
4 hours
Directed Field Experience
Investigative learning involving closely directed field research or field experience.
 Instructor permission required.
BIO 310
4 hours
Human Anatomy and Physiology I
The lecture portion focuses on structure and function of the skeletal, muscular,
nervous and endocrine systems, and examines core concept of homeostasis and
feedback loops.  The lab portion of the course consists of detailed laboratory
dissections of the dogfish shark and domestic cat, serving as models of human
anatomy, coupled to computer aided examination of human anatomy and some
histology.  Three hours lecture and three hours of laboratory per week.  Meets
foundational core life science requirement.  Prerequisites: BIO 201 or CHE 201 or CHE
 211.  Offered Fall semester.
BIO 311
4 hours
Human Anatomy and Physiology II
A continuation of BIO 310, the lecture focuses on the respiratory, cardiovascular,
urinary, and digestive systems, and examines several core concepts demonstrated
by these systems.  The lab portion of the course focuses on common experimental
techniques and physiological measures relevant to respiratory, cardiovascular, and
urinary systems.  Three hours of lecture and two hours of lab per week.  Prerequisite:
 BIO 310.  Offered Spring semester.
BIO 312
4 hours
Cellular and Molecular Biology
Analysis of the eukaryotic cell with regard to its molecular and biochemical
characteristics, including bioenergetics, protein kinesis, cell signaling, cell-division
cycle, cell junctions and extracellular matrix, cancer, stem cells and tissue renewal,
and the adaptive immune system.  Three hours lecture and three hours of lab per week.
Prerequisites: BIO 201; BIO 203; CHE 201 or CHE 211; CHE 202 or CHE 212; and
 minimum junior status or permission of the instructor.
BIO 331
4 hours
Comparative Anatomy
Classification, characteristics, and comparison of typical chordate animals with
emphasis on the vertebrates.  Lab contains detailed dissection of representative
vertebrates.  Three hours of lecture and three hours laboratory per week.  Prerequisite:
BIO 202 or permission of instructor.  Offered Fall semester of odd years and Summer at
 discretion of faculty.
BIO 345
3 hours
Evolution and the Nature of Science
This course introduces the conceptual and theoretical foundations of evolution and
the nature of science. Students will be introduced to the longer-term processes of
change. Evaluation of theories of species dynamics will be understood within the
framework of the nature of science.  Prerequisite: Junior standing as a biology major or
instructor permission.
BIO 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
 An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.
BIO 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
 A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.
BIO 381
3 hours
Research Methods
Research Methods will introduce students to essential components of experimental
design and the research process in Biology.  The goal is to prepare students to critically
interpret the research of others and to undertake research projects in course-based
labs, through independent or summer research projects, and post-graduation research
programs.  Class topics will include defining a research question, hypothesis formulation,
experimental design (correlation vs. necessity or sufficiency), controls, power and the
role of statistics, interpreting results, and presenting and publishing results.  The course
will also include a series of instructor and student led seminars on articles and
techniques relevant to a targeted research field.  Prerequisites: BIO 201; and BIO 202 or
 BIO 203.
BIO 385
1 hour
Biology Colloquium II
This course is for junior biology majors.  Students will have the opportunity to
prepare for employment and graduate school, to continue developing professional
skills, and to add artifacts to their professional portfolio.  The course will be delivered
via seminar format with guest, faculty and student presentations, class discussions,
 and writing assignments.  Prerequisite: BIO 285.  Offered Spring semester.
BIO 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally, one
hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.  Offered
 primarily during Summer.
BIO 410
3 hours
Bioethics
An introduction to bioethics, comprising an overview of ethical theory, uniquely Christian
contributions to ethical theory, and a consideration of specific bioethical problems.  The
interaction of bioethics in the worlds of ideologies, politics, and economics, and the unique
contribution a Christian bioethical perspective brings to the public square, will also be foci
of the course.  Designed for upper level biology students, but open to any upper division
student willing and able to acquire the necessary biological competence to knowledgably
 deal with the biology of the course material.
BIO 432
4 hours
Developmental Biology
A study of development at the molecular, cellular, and organismal levels. The class
sessions focus on current concepts in developmental biology. The lab utilizes living
model organisms (e.g. urchin, fly, chick) to conduct inquiry-based projects. Three hours
of lecture and three hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisites: BIO 201; BIO 203; and BIO
 312 or BIO 462 recommended. Offered Fall semester.
BIO 440
1 hour
Research Proposal
Research Proposal prepares students to complete their research project by guiding
them through the literature review and research proposal process.  Students will work
with the course instructor and intended research supervisor to prepare a written
 research proposal.  Prerequisite: BIO 381.
BIO 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.  The student must accumulate 42 hours of experience (e.g.,
research, class/group meetings, assignments) per credit hour earned.  Departmental
 approval required.
BIO 455
0 hours
Supervised Summer Research
This course is a student-initiated alternative to BIO 450 Directed Research, to be
completed during the summer months. The research project, approved in advance
by the department and supervised by a formal research advisor (eg. a professor on-
or off-campus), must include applied, hands-on learning and must involve a minimum
 of 300 documented hours.  Prerequisite: BIO 381.  Prerequisite or Corequisite: BIO 440.
BIO 452
4 hours
Animal Physiology
A study of the physiological nature of living organisms with special consideration of the
functions of vertebrate organ systems.  Practical experience is given in working with live
animals and the instrumentation used to examine the functional processes of various
systems.  Three hours of lecture and three hours of laboratory per week.  Prerequisites: BIO 331;
 CHE 201 or CHE 211; and CHE 202 or CHE 212.  Offered Spring semester.
BIO 460
1 hour
Research Communication
Research Communication will be taken following the student’s research experience
(BIO 450 or BIO 455).  Each student will use the semester to write a formal report
of his or her research findings and prepare a poster or oral presentation of his or her
research.  Students will present their research to the class and possibly in an on- or off-
campus venue.  Prerequisites: BIO 440; and BIO 450 or BIO 455; or instructor permission.

176
BIO 462
4 hours
Molecular Genetics
The current understanding of what a gene is, how it functions, and how it is
regulated, particularly from a molecular perspective, is the essence of this course.
Viral, prokaryotic, and eukaryotic systems are studied.  Current scientific literature
as well as a published textbook serve as sources.  Three hours lecture and one four-
hour laboratory per week.  Prerequisites: BIO 201, BIO 203, and two courses in chemistry;
BIO 471 is recommended.  Offered Fall semester of even years.

BIO 471
4 hours
Microbiology and Immunology
An introduction to general microbiology and to the human immune response.
Included are microbial growth and control, diversity and taxonomy, the ecological
role of microorganisms, and medical microbiology.  The laboratory provides basic
bacterial culture techniques, including the identification of unknowns.  Three hours
lecture and three hours of laboratory per week.  Prerequisites: BIO 201 and BIO 203.
Two courses in chemistry are recommended.  Offered Spring semester.

BIO 472
4 hours
Histology
The study of minute structure, composition, and function of tissue.  Lectures and
laboratories help expose students to both the normal tissue formation found in
animal tissues (chiefly mammalian) and many of the abnormal tissue developments
associated with pathological dysfunctions. Prerequisites: Completion of the biology core
courses before enrolling or permission of the instructor.

BIO 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with emphasis
on directed readings and discussion.

BIO 485
1 hour
Biology Colloquium III
This course is for junior biology majors.  Students will have the opportunity to
prepare for employment and graduate school, to continue developing professional
skills, and to add artifacts to their professional portfolio.  The course will be delivered
via seminar format with guest, faculty and student presentations, class discussions,
and writing assignments.  Prerequisite: BIO 385.  Offered Spring semester.

BIO 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.  Open
to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

BIO 493
4 hours
Biology Senior Capstone
An integrative, senior-level course in which major themes from within the biology
major and from the Taylor foundational core program are intentionally revisited at a
depth appropriate to college seniors.  Such themes include the nature of biology as
a natural science, the historical and philosophical foundations of the natural sciences,
and the interaction and integration of biology with the Christian faith.  Students will
also actively engage in the process of doing current biological science, as well as
consider several ethical issues that arise from current biology.  Prerequisite: Senior
standing as a biology major.  Offered January interterm.

Environmental Science Courses
ENS 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

ENS 201
4 hours
Introduction to Geology in the Field
Introduction to earth’s materials, processes, and history as discovered through field
observations of minerals, rocks, fossils, strata, caves, rivers, canyons, and mountains.
Emphasis is placed on field experiences and observations, complemented by study of
maps, laboratory work, and discussions.  Offered during select Summers at the Black
Hills Science Station near Rapid City, South Dakota.

ENS 204
4 hours
Principles of Ecology
An introduction to the relationships existing between organisms and their environment.
Lectures focus on the structural and functional aspects of populations, communities, and
ecosystems in the context of the major North American biomes.  Three hours lecture and
two hours laboratory per week.  Meets foundational core life science requirement.
Prerequisite: Four hours of BIO or ENS or permission of the instructor.

ENS 240
3 hours
Introduction to Geology
Basic course dealing with the fundamental concepts of physical and historical
geology.  Three hours of lecture and two hours of lab per week.  Meets the
foundational core earth science requirement.

ENS 241
4 hours
Physical Geology
A general introduction to the earth’s internal and external physical, dynamic systems.
Topics include occurrence and formation of minerals and rocks, processes that shape
the earth’s surface, and the internal structure and dynamics that lead to plate
tectonics and crustal deformation.  Special emphasis is placed on the environmental
aspects of humans’ interaction with the earth.  Three hours of lecture and two hours of lab
per week.  Meets foundational core earth science requirement.

ENS 242
3 hours
Geology of Indiana
An introduction to the concepts of physical and historical geology in the context of
Indiana. Topics include rocks, fossils, structure, landforms, and earth and
environmental resources of the state. Offered during Summer session and includes
a required field trip to several regions of Indiana for field observation and collection
of mineral, rock, and fossil specimens.  Meets foundational core earth science requirement.

ENS 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

ENS 302
4 hours
Environmental Law and Policy
Lectures introduce the major elements of U.S. environmental law: NEPA, EIS, CAA,
CWA, RCRA, CERCLA, TSCA, FIFRA and CRTK.  The administrative process,
cost/benefit analysis and the role of litigation in enforcement are also discussed.
Presentation techniques and debate skills are introduced.  Three hours of lecture and
a discussion section per week.  Prerequisite: Senior environmental science majors and
minors or permission from the instructor.
ENS 319
4 hours
Principles of Soil Science
An introduction to soil science with an emphasis on soil formation and taxonomy in
the context of the landscape.  Soil physical properties, water relations, and chemistry
and biological properties will be the central focus.  Special emphasis is placed on
human interaction with the soil resource.  Agricultural and current environmental
issues as they relate to the soil resource are addressed.  Lab exercises focus on the
analysis of basic soil physical and chemical properties.  Soil fertility and conservation
are additional lab topics.  Prerequisite: SUS 200 or SUS 231.

ENS 341
4 hours
Earth Materials
Basic principles of mineralogy and petrology, with emphasis placed on description,
identification, classification, and interpretation of rock-forming minerals and the
igneous, sedimentary, and metamorphic rocks they comprise.  Also includes origin and
occurrence of earth materials and their uses in economic and environmental contexts.
Lab emphasizes observation of hand specimens and some thin-sections.  Three hours of
lecture and the equivalent of two hours of lab per week, including field trips to selected locations
throughout the state.  Prerequisite: ENS 241 or permission from the instructor.

ENS 355
4 hours
Geospatial Analysis
An introduction to methods of collection, management and analysis of geospatial data.
Topics include basic map properties, preparation and interpretation of thematic and
topographic maps, analysis of aerial photographs, surveying by traditional and global
positioning systems (GPS) techniques, and acquisition of remotely-sensed satellite data.
Special emphasis is placed on methods and applications of geographic information systems
(GIS) in geospatial analysis.  Prerequisite: ENS 241 or SUS 200 or SUS 231.

ENS 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

ENS 361
4 hours
Geomorphology
An applied approach to the study of earth surface processes and the landforms they
produce.  Topics include processes and landforms associated with weathering, mass
wasting, rivers, karst, tectonics, glaciers, shorelines, and wind.  Emphasis placed on
environmental and land-use applications.  Field and lab assignments include qualitative
descriptions and quantitative measurements from fieldwork, topographic and geologic
maps, and aerial photographs.  Three hours of lecture and three hours of lab per week.
Prerequisite: ENS 241 or permission from the instructor.

ENS 362
4 hours
Hydrogeology
Basic processes and measurement of the hydrologic cycle, including precipitation,
evaporation, surface runoff, stream flow, soil moisture, and groundwater.  Emphasis
placed on groundwater, including aquifer characteristics, principles of flow, conceptual
models of regional flow, geology of occurrence, well hydraulics, chemistry and quality,
detection of pollutants, contaminant transport and remediation, and resource
development.  Three hours of lecture and three hours of lab per week.  Prerequisite: ENS
241 or permission from the instructor.


177
ENS 364
4 hours
Water Resources and Appropriate Technology
Concepts and practices of water resource development and appropriate
technology in the context of environmental resources in a developing country.
Students participate in a service-learning project of design and implementation of
water resource related appropriate technology (such as well-drilling, water quality
protection, hygiene training, and sanitation system design) as part of a holistic
ministry toward transformational development.  Students develop a perspective on
the role of appropriate technology in the responsibility of individuals in cross-
cultural service, in issues of cross-cultural communication and interactions, and in
God’s purposes in missions and the worldwide church.  Prerequisite: IAS 120.

ENS 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

ENS 375


4 hours
Systems Ecology
The principles of systems theory are introduced in an integrated study of the
development, dynamics, and disruption of natural ecosystems.  Theoretical,
analytical, and experimental aspects of ecosystems are explored.  Students are
introduced to the use of microcomputers as a tool in ecosystem modeling.
Prerequisites: ENS 204 and one course in college-level mathematics or computer science.

ENS 383
4 hours
Environmental Ethics
An in-depth discussion of the ethical implications of major environmental problems,
such as world population and food supply, inequities in land and resource distribution,
animal rights, materialism and personal life styles, and exploitation versus stewardship
of the environment.  Three hours of lecture and a discussion section per week.  Prerequisite:
Junior or senior standing as an environmental science major or permission from the instructor.
ENS 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Offered primarily during Summer.

ENS 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.

ENS 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with emphasis
on directed readings and discussion.

ENS 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.  Open
to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

ENS 493
2 hours
Environmental Science Capstone
An integrative, junior/senior-level course in which major themes from within the
environmental science major and from the Taylor foundational core curriculum are
intentionally revisited at a depth appropriate to college seniors.  Offered in the Fall semester
of every other year.  Prerequisite: Junior or senior standing as an environmental science major.
Public Health Courses

PBH 100
3 hours
Introduction to Public Health
This course is a foundational course for the major and an elective for students
wishing only to be introduced to the field.  The course is built upon a population
perspective and ecological perspective on disease causation and prevention.  As a
general overview of the field, Introduction to Public Health provides an historical
perspective on the role that public health has played in improving the health status
of populations, both in the US and globally.  Moving beyond the biologic mechanisms
of disease causation, students will gain an understanding of the environmental, social
and behavioral determinants of health for populations, and factors that contribute
to disparities in health between subpopulations.  Students will be introduced to the
core functions and essential services of public health in the US and how these are
met in less economically developed societies.  The core disciplines of public health
will be defined and described, including epidemiology, biostatistics, environmental
health, policy and administration, and the social and behavioral sciences.  Students
will examine current public health challenges in the US and globally.

PBH 110
3 hours
Global Health
This course provides an overview of the determinants of health, burden of disease,
risk factors, health systems, and key measures to address the burden of disease in
populations for both industrialized and less developed nations.  The course will
have a global perspective, paying particular attention to links between health and
development, environment, human rights, and culture.

PBH 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

PBH 210
3 hours
Human Diseases
Introduction to biomedical concepts associated with human diseases. Emphasis is
on understanding the etiology, pathogenesis, diagnosis, treatment, and risk factors
of diseases affecting public health and how this impacts the prevention and control
of those diseases.  Offered Fall semester.  Prerequisites: PBH 100 or PBH 110.

PBH 213
2 hours
Substance Education
The course is designed to prepare professionals for drug education.  The scope of
the course is wide and includes the following basic areas: drug terminology,
pharmacology, psychodynamics, legal and law enforcement perspectives, social and
cultural determinants, ethical and moral alternatives, behavioral aspects, and educational
strategies.  A strong emphasis is placed on developing guidelines for decision making in
our society.  The purpose is to exchange the best amount of information on drug use,
misuse, and abuse available.  Offered Spring semester of even years.

PBH 224
2 hours
Healthy Aging
This course will provide an overview of issues related to public health and aging.
Topics such as demography and epidemiology of aging, perceptions of aging as viewed
in society today, myths and stereotypes of aging, and challenges faced by elders will be
addressed.  The course will support health promotion for older adults and highlight the roles
played by families, government, health care providers, and advocates.

PBH 244
3 hours
Health and Human Sexuality
The course examines the basic foundations of human sexuality and incorporates topical
issues of interest and importance.  In addition to the dissemination of cognitive
information, a strong emphasis of the course is placed on the psychosocial aspects of
human sexuality and its impact on individuals and society.  Students are encouraged to
develop and maintain a personal philosophy concerning sexual decision-making and
behavior.  The broad goals of the course include an increased knowledge of the
biological, developmental, and scientific aspects of human sexuality, in addition to
developing a greater awareness of self and others.

PBH 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

PBH 320
4 hours
Epidemiology
Study of the distribution and determinants of disease occurrence, including core
concepts such as incidence, prevalence, risk, risk factors, relative risk, attributable risk,
sensitivity, specificity, and different types of epidemiologic study designs.  Students will
use data from epidemiologic case studies to calculate odds ratios, relative risk, and
confidence intervals as well as calculate sensitivity and specificity of screening tests.
Offered Spring semester.  Prerequisites: PBH 100; MAT 210 or SOC 355 or PSY 275.

PBH 330
3 hours
Assessment for Program Planning
This course will examine intervention approaches in public health for the prevention
of infectious disease, chronic disease, injury and disability, and the promotion of
community health and wellbeing.  Intervention approaches through environmental
change, policy and systems change, social change, and behavioral change approaches
will be studied.  Case studies of interventions will be examined.  Offered Fall semester.
Prerequisites: PBH 100.

PBH 330L
1 hour
Service Learning in Community Assessment
Students will participate in a neighborhood assessment and mapping project in a local
community in partnership with a community organization.  This will include
neighborhood observations, neighborhood survey interviews, and participation in
neighborhood events.  Offered Fall semester.  Prerequisite: PBH 100.



178
PBH 335
4 hours
Environmental Health
This course will explore how both the natural and built environment affect human
health by looking at the impact of physical, chemical, biological, and socioeconomic
factors external to humans.  Environmental health is an interdisciplinary field that
focuses on the theory and practice of recognizing, assessing, controlling, and preventing
environmental and occupational hazards that may adversely affect the health of the
present and future generations.  Prerequisites: PBH 100; SUS 200 or SUS 231.

PBH 340
4 hours
Community Health Development in Practice
The course will examine the theory and practice of community health development as
it is practiced by organizations doing this work internationally.  The course will be
offered in partnership with a non-governmental organization doing transformational
development in one of the countries where they are working.  The course will include
a service component and discussions of those experiences will emphasize intercultural
competencies.  Offered Interterm of odd years.  Prerequisites: PBH 100 or PBH 110; PBH 330.

PBH 345
3 hours
International Humanitarian Response
This course examines the international humanitarian response to disasters from a
Christian and public health perspective.  Current crises from around the world will
be discussed, including causes; effects on population health; problems associated
with population displacement; public health responses; and challenges to
international collaboration between governments, international organizations, and
non-governmental organizations.

PBH 346
3 hours
Community Health Education
This course illustrates how the health of populations is promoted and protected by
organized public health practice.  Students are acquainted with current evolving
concepts and performance of these practices and are introduced to essential public
health services.  The problem-solving approach is emphasized through small-group
interaction, case-study method, and critical thinking skills.  Meets foundational core civic
engagement or general social science requirement.  Offered Spring semester.

PBH 347
3 hours
Health Policy and Law in National and Global Contexts
The course will provide a framework for understanding and analyzing a range of health
policy issues in domestic and global contexts.  The course will focus on the U.S. policy-
making and legal system in the domestic context.  It will provide additional focus on global
law and policy as it relates to vulnerable populations of refugees, displaced populations,
and populations living in poverty.  The course will consider essential issues in health policy
and law including health insurance, health economics, individual rights in health care,
gender equity, and health care access and quality.

PBH 350
3 hours
Determinants of Health and Health Equity
The focus of this course will be on examining the broad range of environmental,
social, cultural, and policy factors that contribute to disparate outcomes between
population groups.  This course will introduce students to the literature and
methods of social epidemiology.  Structured in a seminar format, with readings and
case studies, students will examine specific cases of disparate health outcomes
within communities including an analysis of the determinants of those disparities.
Approaches to health equity will be discussed.  Offered Spring semester.  Prerequisites:
PBH 100 and PBH 320; MAT 210 or SOC 355 or PSY 275.
PBH 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

PBH 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

PBH 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Offered primarily during Summer following junior year or Fall of senior year.  Prerequisites:
PBH 100, PBH 110, PBH 210, PBH 320, PBH 330, PBH 340, and PBH 350.

PBH 425
1 hour
CHES Preparation Seminar
This course provides a detailed review of the analysis and application of the Seven
Areas of Responsibilities and Competencies.  Focus is on helping increase knowledge
of the concepts and successfully pass the Certified Health Education Specialist
(CHES) examination in either the Fall or Spring semester of the senior year.  It is
designed to review the health educator responsibilities, competencies, and sub-
competencies and also provide an overview of the national certification examination.
Additional work will be required by the student to maximize success on the exam.
Prerequisite: Senior in Public Health major or permission of instructor.  Pass/fail only.

PBH 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.

PBH 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with emphasis
on directed readings and discussion.

PBH 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.  Open
to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

PBH 493
2 hours
Public Health Senior Capstone
This course will be structured as a seminar, pulling together the experiences of all
the students into a broad public health framework.  Major challenges faced during
practicum will be discussed.  Readings, videos, guest lectures, and optional workshops
will support the discussions that take place in class.  An integrative senior paper will
provide the structure for students to integrate their faith, public health coursework,
and practicum experiences.  Part of the comprehensive exam, paper, or project
required for graduation will be completed during the practicum.  Offered Spring
semester.  Prerequisites: PBH 100, PBH 110, PBH 210, PBH 320, PBH 330, PBH 393; and
PBH 340 or PBH 350.

Sustainable Development Courses
SUS 120
1 hour
Environmental Stewardship and Sustainable Living
Key topics related to stewardship and sustainable living are presented in a weekly
seminar.  Guest lecturers and discussions are focused on aspects of ecological and
social sustainability and its application in daily life and on campus.

SUS 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

SUS 200
3 hours
Environment and Society
Introduction to ecological principles and human impacts on the environment.  Issues
studied include population dynamics, natural resources, pollution problems, and
environmental ethics.  Lab exercises focus on experimental ecology and the basic
techniques used to describe and measure environmental quality.  Meets the
foundational core life science requirement.  Environmental science majors should elect SUS
231 rather than SUS 200.

SUS 211
4 hours
Crops and Society
This course will study the contribution of crops to society and society’s
development.  The course will cover cereal crops, legumes, herbs, spice, fibers,
medicinal plants, and tropical and temperate fruits and nuts.  Soil and water
conservation will be covered.  Emphasis will be on agriculture in developing nations
and development policies that affect agriculture, stewardship, the poor, and
malnourished.
SUS 231
4 hours
Environmental Science, Society, and Sustainability
An introduction to environmental science, including a discussion of ecological principles
and their application, energy systems, pollution problems, environmental policy and
decision making, and the scientific and ethical implications of human impacts on the
environment.  Lab exercises focus on experimental ecology and the basic techniques
used to describe and measure environmental quality.  This course serves three functions:
(1) it is the entry level course for environmental science majors; (2) it may be taken for
foundational core lab science credit; and (3) biology majors may count it as a 200-level
biology course when calculating course hour requirements in biology.  Three hours of
lecture and two hours of lab per week.  Meets the foundational core life science requirement.

SUS 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

SUS 310
3 hours
Poverty and Sustainable Development
An exploration of the key ideas and debates in development theory with an emphasis
on evaluating whether and how global poverty can be alleviated without irreparably
damaging the environment.  Case studies feature interdisciplinary approaches to
sustainable and transformational development drawn from agroecology, sociology,
public health, holistic missions, and political economy.


179
SUS 310L
1 hour
Poverty and Sustainable Development Lab
Labs feature community-based skills and interdisciplinary analytical approaches to
sustainable and transformational development applied to service-learning projects to
understand poverty in surrounding communities.  Corequisite: SUS 310.

SUS 315
4 hours
Sustainable Food Systems and Health
This course focuses on understanding agriculture and food systems from a
sustainability perspective and connecting that with human health.  Students learn
the principles of agro-ecology and how to apply them to various types of
agriculture.  They also critically evaluate global and local food systems, becoming
familiar with strategies that have been tried to improve the equitable distribution
of food and the environmental sustainability of food systems.  Students also learn
about the connection between food and chronic disease with specific skills in
preparing food to help reduce the risk of diabetes and cardiovascular disease.

SUS 325
4 hours
Sustainable Development in Practice
This field-based course explores contemporary trends in international
development through the lens of sustainable community development.  The
social, ecological, and economic sustainability of development are assessed
through a case-study approach.  The course will be offered in partnership with
a non-governmental organization doing transformational development in one of
the countries where they are working.  The course will include a service
component and discussions of those experiences will emphasize intercultural
competencies.  Offered Interterm of odd calendar years.  Prerequisite: SUS 231.

SUS 330L
1 hour

Assessment and Planning Lab for Sustainability
Students will participate in a community-based sustainability assessment and
mapping project.  This will include direct observations, carrying out interviews,
and gathering secondary data related to sustainability.  Offered Fall semester of
every other year.  Prerequisite: SUS 231.

SUS 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

SUS 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

SUS 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Offered primarily during Summer.

SUS 435
4 hours
Environmental and Sustainability Planning and Assessment
A culminating course involving application of interdisciplinary principles of
environmental and sustainability planning, monitoring, and evaluation involving
community-based projects and case studies.

SUS 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.

SUS 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with emphasis
on directed readings and discussion.

SUS 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.  Open
to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

SUS 493
2 hours
Sustainable Development Capstone
An integrative, junior/senior-level course in which major themes from within the
sustainable development major and from the Taylor foundational core curriculum
are intentionally revisited at a depth appropriate to college seniors.  Offered Fall
semester of every other year.  Prerequisite: Junior or senior standing as a sustainable
development major.
CHE 100
4 hours
Chemistry for Living
A course designed for students who have little or no background in chemistry.
Basic principles of chemistry are applied in a social context.  Three hours of
lecture and one two-hour lab per week.  Meets foundational core physical science
requirement.  No prerequisite, although high school algebra is recommended.

CHE 120
4 hours
Forensic Science
This course is a one semester introduction to forensic science which will focus on
the application of physical and life sciences to criminal investigation. Topics include
the crime scene, physical evidence, fingerprints, forensic toxicology, forensic
serology, as well as many others. There are no prerequisites.  Based upon the course
section selected, will meet either a life or physical science foundational core requirement.

CHE 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

CHE 201
4 hours
General, Organic, and Biochemistry I
This is the first semester of a two-semester sequence designed for students with minimal
backgrounds in chemistry yet need a solid foundation in chemistry for their major.
These students do not typically take other chemistry courses beyond this sequence.
The two semesters are a comprehensive overview of general chemistry, organic
chemistry, and biochemistry.  The first semester focuses on general chemistry with an
introduction to organic chemistry.  Three hours of lecture and three hours of lab per week.
Meets foundational core physical science requirement.  No college level prerequisites, but high school
algebra and chemistry are strongly recommended.

CHE 202
4 hours
General, Organic, and Biochemistry II
This is the continuation of CHE 201 (see CHE 201 description).  The second semester
continues with the introduction to organic chemistry and includes an overview of
biochemistry.  Three hours of lecture and three hours of lab per week.  Prerequisite: CHE 201.



183
CHE 211
4 hours
College Chemistry I
This is a general chemistry course for those intending to take later coursework in
chemistry, such as organic, inorganic, analytical, or environmental chemistries.  The
course thoroughly explores the basic concepts and theories of chemistry, using
quantitative skills to predict and characterize chemical properties and changes.  The
nature of atomic structure and chemical bonding and the properties of solids, liquids,
and gases are all presented and studied using lectures, demonstrations, and computer-
assisted teaching and testing methods.  Chemical change is studied in terms of reaction
classes, energy flows, and kinetic theories.  Three hours of lecture and three hours of lab
per week.  Meets the foundational core physical science requirement. High school algebra
and chemistry are strongly recommended.

CHE 212
4 hours
College Chemistry II
The second general chemistry course for those intending to take later coursework in
chemistry, such as organic, inorganic, analytical, or environmental chemistries.  This
course thoroughly explores the basic concepts and theories of chemistry using
quantitative skills to predict and characterize chemical properties and changes.  The
nature of organic chemistry, complexes, equilibria, electrochemistry, and advanced
acid-base properties are all presented and studied using lectures, demonstrations, and
computer-assisted teaching and testing methods.  Chemical change is studied in terms
of entropy, free energy, and kinetic theories.  Three hours of lecture and three hours of
lab per week.  Prerequisite: CHE 211.

CHE 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

CHE 301
4 hours
Analytical Chemistry I
Introduction to modern theories and methods used in separations and quantitative
determinations.  Topics include basic statistics and treatment of data, gravimetry,
titrations, and spectroscopy.  Topics correlate with the lab.  Lab includes gravimetric,
titrations, and spectroscopy.  Some instrumentation is used including AA and GCMS.
Three hours of lecture and three hours of lab per week.  Prerequisite:  CHE 212 or permission
of instructor.

CHE 302
4 hours
Analytical Chemistry II
A continuation of CHE 301 in which instrumental methods of analysis are emphasized.
A survey of instrumental methods used in modern analytical chemistry. Topics include
the general principles of basic instrument components and their integration into the
wide variety of modern instrumentation.  Students will gain hands-on experience with
a variety of spectroscopic (UV, VIS, AA), spectrometric (MS), electrochemical,
chromatographic (HPLC, GC, IC), and hybrid (GC/MS, LC/MS) analytical
instrumentations.  Three hours of lecture and three hours of lab per week.  Prerequisite:
CHE 301 or permission of instructor.

CHE 311
4 hours
Organic Chemistry I
The study of covalent carbon compounds.  Nomenclature, properties, and reactions
(including reaction mechanisms) of all classes of hydrocarbons, alcohols, ethers,
halides, and organometallic substances are studied.  NMR, IR, and MS spectroscopic
methods are learned and applied.  The lab includes development of advanced lab skills
and study of the kinetics and properties of organic substances in reactions.  Three
hours of lecture and three hours of lab per week.  Prerequisite: CHE 212.

CHE 312
4 hours
Organic Chemistry II
Continuation of CHE 311.  Focuses on carbonyl and carboxylate compounds and their
derivatives, amines, and polyfunctional compounds, including biomolecules.  Lab work
includes study of the properties of aromatic compounds, qualitative organic analysis,
and small group original research projects.  Three hours of lecture and three hours of lab
per week.  Prerequisite: CHE 311.

CHE 320
4 hours
Environmental Pollution and Toxicology
A course that emphasizes principles and analysis of pollution sources, movement,
distribution, and toxic effects in natural and biological environments.  The principles
of toxicology related to industry and the environment, including dose response,
mechanisms of toxicity, hazard evaluation will be explored.  The laboratory work will
provide experience in sampling and analysis of water, as well as common toxicology
techniques.  Three hours of lecture and three hours of lab per week.  One year of general
chemistry is recommended.

CHE 330
4 hours
Advanced Inorganic Chemistry
Coverage of the bonding and properties of the main group and especially transition
metal elements with a focus on their coordination and solid-state chemistry.
Molecular symmetry principles, spectroscopy, materials science and catalytic
applications of these substances are discussed in lecture and studied in lab.  Three
hours of lecture and three hours of lab per week.  Prerequisite: CHE 311.

CHE 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.
CHE 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

CHE 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally, one
hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.  Offered
primarily during Summer.

CHE 411
3 hours
Biochemistry I
An introduction to the fundamental principles of biochemistry focusing on the
structure and function of biomolecules such as carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, and
nucleic acids.  The relation between structure and function is explored in such topics
as enzyme kinetics, the chemistry of major metabolic pathways, and their regulation.
This course is designed for chemistry, biology, and Pre-Med related majors with a
background in organic chemistry.  Prerequisite: CHE 311.  BIO 201 and CHE 312 are
strongly recommended.

CHE 411L
1 hour
Biochemistry I Lab
This project-based laboratory class is designed for Biochemistry I (CHE 411) students.
The students will utilize science fundamentals to participate in a broad research topic.
Students will employ various biochemical investigative tools, including but not limited
to molecular modeling, protein expression, chromatography, DNA manipulation,
spectroscopy, and enzyme assays, to study structure-function relationships in major
biomolecules.  This course is designed for chemistry and biology majors with a background
in organic chemistry.  Prerequisite: CHE 311.  Corequisite: CHE 411.  BIO 201 is strongly
recommended.

CHE 412
3 hours
Biochemistry II
This course is a continuation of CHE 411 with emphasis on metabolism of major
biomolecules (i.e., carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, and nucleic acid).  Example topics
include synthesis and degradation of glycogen and nitrogen-containing (e.g., amino
acids, DNA and RNA bases) compounds, protein synthesis, and metabolic integration.
Prerequisite: CHE 411.  BIO 201 is strongly recommended.

CHE 412L
1 hour
Biochemistry II Lab
This project-based laboratory class is designed for Biochemistry II (CHE 412)
students.  The students will utilize science fundamentals to participate in a broad
research topic.  Students will employ various biochemical investigative tools, including
but not limited to molecular modeling, protein expression, chromatography, DNA
manipulation, spectroscopy, and enzyme assays, to study structure-function
relationships in major biomolecules.  This course is designed for chemistry and biology
majors with a background in organic chemistry.  Prerequisite: CHE 411 and CHE 411L.
Corequisite: CHE 412.  BIO 201 is strongly recommended.

CHE 420
1 hour
Chemistry Thesis
Students write a major paper, receive coaching and feedback, modify their paper if
necessary, and give an oral presentation.  Prerequisite: Successful completion of Fall term
paper writing workshop.  Required of all chemistry seniors.

CHE 431
4 hours
Physical Chemistry I
An introduction to the principles of thermodynamics, kinetic-molecular theory of
gases, and chemical kinetics.  The lab includes vacuum techniques, calorimetry,
electrochemistry, physical characterization of solutions, and optical techniques.  Three
hours of lecture and three hours of lab per week.  Prerequisites: CHE 211; CHE 212; PHY
211; PHY 204 or PHY 212; MAT 151; and MAT 230.

CHE 432
4 hours
Physical Chemistry II
Emphasis on elementary principles of quantum mechanics, molecular structure,
spectroscopy, and photochemistry.  The lab focuses on computational chemistry,
mathematical modeling, and spectroscopy.  Three hours of lecture and three hours of lab
per week.  Prerequisites: CHE 211; CHE 212; PHY 211; PHY 204 or PHY 212; MAT 151;
and MAT 230.

CHE 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.

CHE 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with emphasis
on directed readings and discussion.

CHE 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.
Open to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.
COS 101
2 hours
Information Technology Concepts
The course focuses on practical understanding and application of computing
technology in educational, small business, or organizational environments.  Specific
topics include an overview of operating systems, application software, computing
hardware, telecommunications, networking, and information management systems and
analysis.  In addition, it heavily emphasizes the impact of technology on modern society
and the ethical issues related to use of information and communication systems.  This
course is offered through Taylor University Online (TUO) and does not count toward any
major, minor, or foundational core curriculum requirement for residential students.

COS 102
3 hours
Fundamentals of Systems and Computing
An introduction to the basic concepts of “system” and “process” with particular
emphasis on computing systems.  Major topics include systems thinking, quality,
problem solving, and design.  Computing-specific topics include algorithms, networks,
computer hardware, and basic relational database concepts.  The learning experience
features field trips and guest lectures.  Offered Fall semester.

COS 103
1 hour
Computer Science and Engineering: New Majors Orientation
Provides an introduction to the Computer Science and Engineering majors focusing on
the habits, mindset, and requirements for success in the major.  The course includes
an overview of the discipline with an exploration of various career paths in computing
(e.g., industry, missions, graduate school).  A significant portion of the course involves a
weekend retreat with faculty, staff, and graduating seniors.  Lastly, students are introduced
to integrating faith and computing.  Offered Fall semester.

COS 104
2 hours
Computing and Culture – Applications and Context
An introduction to the ideas of computational technology including the use of
applications, ethical foundations and the understanding of the context of technology in
our world.  Analysis from a Christian perspective is emphasized.  Topics discussed
include algorithmic thinking, organization of data with spreadsheets and databases,
internet and security, hardware, software, and the history of computers.  Important
skills covered in the course include web design, spreadsheet and database applications,
video and photo manipulation, information literacy, and an introduction to the process
of programming.  Meets foundational core computation requirement.

COS 105
1 hour
Ethics, Computing, and Society
As computing technology becomes more complex and less visible, we understand less
about how the world functions.  Our worldview is impacted by technology in ways
that are not recognized and, therefore, not critically evaluated, particularly with a
Christian understanding.  This course is designed to introduce students to the context
of computation in their world.  Through writing, discussions, and class assignments,
students will gain an understanding of computing technology that goes beyond its use
and explores the impact of technology on our world view.  The context provided includes
an introduction to the issues in our society associated with ethics and technology.  Main
topics addressed include applying major ethical theories, intellectual property, privacy,
and putting technology into context with a Christian perspective.  This course is available
only to transfer students who have credit in an acceptable computer competency course and
will meet the foundational core computation requirement for such students.
COS 109
3 hours
Computer and Network Operations
A study of the concepts, principles, tools, and constraints related to computer and
network operations, including the following topics: shell scripting, information
technology system components, systems policy and governance, operating systems
management, network devices, and virtual machines.  Students will install and configure
commodity operating systems, manage users, analyze system logs, write scripts to
automate systems administration, review and write information technology policies,
and related activities.

COS 120
4 hours
Introduction to Computational Problem Solving
Approaches to computing solutions for problems from a variety of subject areas are
examined and provide motivation for the study of the development of algorithms and
their implementation. Programming concepts are introduced incrementally in order to
solve increasingly complex problems. Good algorithm design and program structure
are emphasized. Introductory data structures and software engineering principles are
stressed. An introduction to object-oriented programming is included.  Three hours of
lecture and two hours of lab per week.  Meets foundation core computation requirement.

COS 121
4 hours
Foundations of Computer Science
This course builds on COS 120 by emphasizing object-oriented programming and
including concepts of computer science such as computational complexity simulation
and recursion.  The use and implementation of data structures such as lists, stacks,
queues, and trees are introduced as they are needed in developing algorithms for
problems studied.  Additional topics include the Linux operating system and tools,
source code versioning, unit testing, and code refactoring.  Three hours of lecture and
two hours of lab per week.  Prerequisite: COS 120 or COS 130 or SYS 120.

COS 130
3 hours
Computational Problem Solving for Engineers
This introductory programming course will take a similar approach to solving problems
as COS 120.  The differences will be an accelerated pace and using computational tools
(emphasis on the C language) expected to be used in the various fields of engineering.
Meets foundation core computation requirement.

COS 143
3 hours
Interactive Webpage Development
A study of how to deliver interactive webpages through a web browser. Students will learn
to represent the data structurally with HTML, the presentation with CSS, and the
functionality with Javascript.  Students will explore good design strategies that promote useful
webpages. In order to deliver interactive sites, the students will utilize remote scripting
(AJAX) to connect with existing server functionality to receive XML or JSON data for page
updates.  Modern web technologies including HTML5, CSS3, DOM manipulation, etc. will be
explored.  Prerequisite: COS 120 or COS 130 or SYS 120.

COS 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.



189
COS 230
3 hours
Missions Technology
A survey and in-depth study of the range of technology applied to Christian
missions.  Theory and issues in sustainable application are developed.  Interaction
with mission agencies and a practical project are included.

COS 232
3 hours
Computer and Network Security I
A study of the fundamentals of operating system, network, and application security.
Major areas of exploration include fundamental security design principles,
application vulnerability analysis, network penetration testing, basic cryptography,
and defensive programming techniques.  Prerequisite: COS 121.

COS 243
3 hours
Multi-tier Web Application Development
The course will explore how to develop a complete web application with
implementation separating concerns between content delivery, business logic, and
data storage.  An emphasis on a modern MVC platform will be used to provide the
separation of concerns.  Additionally, core database knowledge for a functioning
application will be explored including data modeling for a relational database,
common SQL queries, data normalization foreign key constraints, and aggregate
operations.  Prerequisites: COS 121 and COS 143.

COS 265
4 hours
Data Structures and Algorithms
A survey of data structures and algorithms that operate on them, with an emphasis on
abstract data types and analysis of computational complexity.  Prerequisite: COS 121.

COS 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

COS 280
3 hours
Introduction to Artificial Intelligence
A survey of the field of artificial intelligence.  Major areas of exploration include
search, logic, learning, knowledge representation, problem solving, natural language
processing, computer vision, robotics, expert systems, and neural networks.  An
introduction to Lisp is included.  Prerequisite: COS 121.

COS 284
3 hours
Introduction to Computer Systems
An integrated introduction to computer hardware architecture, operating systems,
and their interaction.  Assembly language and operating system programming are
emphasized. Prerequisites: COS 121 and MAT 215.

COS 306
3 hours
Introduction to Bioinformatics
This course is designed to introduce students to concepts of bioinformatics, as well
as basic bioinformatics skills, using the R programming language.  The course will
explore methods and datasets spanning from the level of DNA (genomics) up to
the organismal and ecosystem level.  Bioinformatics is an interdisciplinary field
combining concepts of biology, computer science, and statistics to analyze and
interpret biological datasets and solve complex questions.  Two hours of lecture and
one hour of one hour of coding/data analysis in a computer lab per week.  Prerequisites:
BIO 203 or instructor permission.  Offered Fall semester of even years.

COS 310
1 hour
Current Literature Survey
A survey of classical and current literature in computer science.  A goal of the
course is to produce a concept for a research proposal with literature survey
appropriate for an undergraduate research project.  Students lead discussions on
papers and topics of interest.  Prerequisite: Junior or senior status.

COS 311
3 hours
Ethics in Computer Science
A study of the ethical implications of computers in society and the role of Christians
as computer science and engineering professionals.  Foundational concepts of
Western moral philosophy are presented.  Major ethical issues, such as privacy,
piracy, liability, equity, and whistle-blowing are explored.  Professional society codes
of conduct are examined and discussed.  Legal and ethical issues such as piracy,
copyright, and fair use related to media are also addressed.  Ethical concerns of
computer science and systems analysis and their relationship to one's faith are an
integral part of this course.

COS 320
3 hours
Algorithm Design
Algorithms and related data structures from a variety of areas are examined and
analyzed.  Parallel processing paradigms and theoretical topics, such as complexity
models, are introduced.  Prerequisites: COS 265 and MAT 215.

COS 321H
3 hours
Ethics and Technology
A study of the ethical implications of computing technology in society and the role of
Christians as users, people impacted by, and shapers of computing technology.
Foundational concepts of Western moral philosophy are presented.  Major ethical
issues, such as privacy, piracy, liability, equity, and whistle-blowing are explored.
Professional society codes of conduct are examined and discussed.  Legal and ethical
issues such as piracy, copyright, and fair use related to media are also addressed.
Ethical concerns of computer science and systems analysis and their relationship to
one's faith are an integral part of this course.  This course is intended for students in the
Honors Guild but will also meet the COS 311 requirement for majors in computer science
and engineering.  Meets foundational core computation requirement.

COS 323
3 hours
Computer and Network Security II
A study of operating system, network, and application security.  This course is a
continuation of COS 232 (Computer and Network Security).  Major areas of
exploration include software reverse engineering, static and dynamic program analysis,
basic cryptanalysis, and related current topics.  Prerequisite: COS 232.

COS 326
3 hours
Data Visualization
This course introduces explanatory and exploratory data visualization, including
principles, techniques, and tools, that facilitate understanding and action based on very
big data sets.  Principles from graphic design, visual perception, and cognitive science
are considered.  Students employ modern tools and languages to access, analyze, and
visualize Internet-scale data.  Participants are encouraged to take MAT 311 and a statistics
course before enrolling.  Prerequisites: COS 120 or SYS 120; and COS 143.

COS 331
3 hours
Data Communications
A study of the nature and applications of data communications in use today.
Fundamental concepts of types, modes, and media of transmission are studied.
Communication protocols and their encompassing architectures are analyzed and
compared.  Practical applications of data communications concepts are demonstrated
through networking projects and development of communications software.
Prerequisite: COS 121.

COS 333
3 hours
Missions Computing
Combining computer science and service to the missions community, students travel
to an international location during Interterm to undertake software development and
systems analysis for a missions partner. Students design, construct, test, document,
and deploy a non-trivial software system that meets the partner's requirements.
Students experience the local culture and participate in direct ministry as opportunities
arise.  Meets foundational core cross-cultural requirement.  Prerequisite: COS 121 or COS
143; and instructor permission.

COS 340
3 hours
Software Engineering
A study of the concepts, tools, best practices, and lifecycle phases associated with
developing large software systems, in groups, over prolonged durations.  Using an agile
software development process, students gather requirements, design, and begin
construction of a non-trivial software system.  Prerequisite: COS 121.

COS 343
3 hours
Database Systems
A study of the fundamental concepts of how database technologies work.  An emphasis
on relational databases will be explored, including normalization, advanced SQL
queries, indexing, physical data storage, performance and tuning strategies, and
concurrency control.  Students will be introduced to other database technologies,
possibly including object-oriented databases, NoSQL, replication, etc.  Prerequisites:
COS 121 and MAT 215.

COS 350
3 hours
Computer Graphics
An introductory course in computer graphics with an emphasis on 3D image
production using a variety of approaches, including ray tracing and raster graphics.
Basic algorithms, data structures, and GUI programming are introduced.  Prerequisite:
COS 121.

COS 351
3 hours
Computer Vision
A study of the fundamental concepts of digital image acquisition, manipulation,
enhancement, representation, analysis, and understanding.  Prerequisite: COS 121.
Offered Spring semester of even years.

COS 355
3 hours
Mobile Application Development
A study of the concepts, principles, tools, and constraints related to developing
mobile applications, including power-performance tradeoffs, sensor management,
location acquisition, and responsive user interface design. Students will develop
mobile applications within large software ecosystems (mobile operating system APIs
and web services) and as a result gain significant experience using current software
development tools, asynchronous programming techniques, and object-oriented
design patterns.  Prerequisite: COS 265.



190
COS 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

COS 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

COS 380
3 hours
Natural Language Processing
A study of the automation of human communication abilities, covering both textual
and vocal aspects.  Major topics include language parsing, understanding,
representation,
enhancement,
generation,
translation,
and
speaker/author
recognition.  Prerequisite: COS 280.

COS 381
3 hours
Computer Architecture
A study of the hardware structure of computer systems, including arithmetic/logic units,
memory organization, control unit design, pipelining, and instruction set design.  A brief
introduction to advanced topics, such as out-of-order execution, branch prediction,
multi-core systems, and parallel processing cache coherency will prepare the student
for graduate level courses in architecture.  Prerequisite: COS 284.

COS 382
3 hours
Language Structures
A study of the features and implementation issues of programming languages,
including a survey of language paradigms.  Grammars, syntax, semantics, translation,
lexical analysis, and parsing are introduced.  Prerequisite: COS 265.

COS 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Grade only.  Practicum course credit requires a minimum of 320 hours of work experience.
Offered primarily during Summer.

COS 394
1-4 hours
Advanced Project
Students complete an open-ended software development project or laboratory
experiment project.  The individual project depends on students and faculty
interest.  Specific learning outcomes vary depending on faculty, student, and project
selected.  Independent or small group projects are possible.  May be taken by any
Computer Science major with instructor permission.  May be taken multiple times for credit.

COS 411
3 hours
Digital Forensics
A study of the concepts, tools, methodologies, and analysis techniques used for host,
media, and network forensic investigations.  Students will learn how to capture, decipher,
reconstruct, and analyze digital data.  Prerequisite: COS 331.

COS 421
3 hours
Operating Systems
A study of the design considerations of computer operating systems and their
interaction with hardware features.  Topics covered include process management,
storage management, protection and security, file systems, and concurrency.
Prerequisites: COS 265 and COS 284.

COS 424
3 hours
Surfaces and Modeling
An advanced graphics course with emphasis on curve and surface representation and
geometric modeling.  Mathematics and algorithms are studied.  Topics include Bezier
and B-spline curves and surfaces and geometric modeling techniques.  Prerequisite:
COS 350.

COS 425
3 hours
Animation
An advanced graphics course with emphasis on techniques for rendering and
animation.  Mathematics and algorithms are studied.  Topics include light and
illumination models, ray tracing, methods to enhance realism, and standard animation
techniques.  A professional software package will be used to create a significant
animation.  Prerequisite: COS 350.

COS 432
3 hours
Software Reverse Engineering and Analysis
A study of defensive programming techniques, platform security, secure software
engineering, software reverse engineering, and vulnerability analysis.  Students will
perform static and dynamic software analysis, identify and analyze malicious software,
and apply tools and techniques for identifying software vulnerabilities.  Prerequisite:
COS 284.

COS 433
3 hours
Missions Computing Senior Project
Combining computer science and service to the missions community, students travel
to an international location during Interterm to undertake software development and
systems analysis for a missions partner. Students design, construct, test, document,
and deploy a non-trivial software system that meets the partner's requirements.
Students experience the local culture and participate in direct ministry as
opportunities arise.  Students share their experience on campus in a formal paper,
presentation, and poster.  Satisfies the senior project requirement.  Meets foundational
core cross-cultural requirement.  Prerequisites: senior standing and instructor permission.

COS 435
3 hours
Theory of Computation
A theoretical treatment of what can be computed and how efficiently computation can be
done.  Topics include models of computation and automata, deterministic and non-
deterministic computations, and formal language theory.  Prerequisite: COS 265.

COS 436
3 hours
Parallel and Distributed Computing
A study of concepts and models of distributed and parallel computing, including
concurrency, synchronization, algorithms, hardware organization, and common
programming environments. Implementation of parallel algorithms on multicore
CPUs and many-core GPUs.  Prerequisites: COS 265 and COS 284.

COS 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.  Independent or small group projects.  May be taken by any
COS major with instructor approval.  May be taken multiple times for credit.

COS 452
3 hours
Research I
Participation in a research project under faculty direction.  Prerequisite: COS 310 or
instructor permission.

COS 453
3 hours
Research II
Participation in a research project under faculty direction.  A formal presentation of
results is required.  Prerequisite: COS 452 or instructor permission.

COS 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with emphasis
on directed readings and discussion.

COS 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.  Open
to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

COS 491
1 hour
Computer Science Senior Capstone
A survey of topics useful for graduates of the department, but not covered by other
courses.  The emphasis is on non-technical issues such as making a budget, finding a
church, balancing career and family, etc. The course is conducted as a trip off-campus
to further strengthen relationships with the department.  Prerequisite: Senior status.

COS 492
3-4 hours
Senior Project
Designed to exercise each senior’s technical analysis, design, and development skills
and showcase his/her documentation and presentation skills.  The student develops
a project through multiple phases of the software lifecycle frequently beginning at the
design stage.  The project is typically chosen to reflect the student’s area of
concentration.  Prerequisite: Senior status.

COS 493
2 hours
Engineering Senior Capstone I
The first of a three course culminating experience preparing students for engineering
practice through a major design and implementation project.  Prerequisite: senior status,
CEN major.  Offered Fall semester.

COS 494
3 hours
Engineering Senior Capstone II
The second in a three course culminating experience preparing students for
engineering practice through a major design and implementation project.  Prerequisite:
COS 493.  Offered January interterm.

COS 495
1 hour
Engineering Senior Capstone III
The third of a three course culminating experience preparing students for
engineering practice through a major design and implementation project.  It includes
the Engineering poster session for assessment of the project.  Prerequisite: COS 494.
Offered Spring semester.
191
Systems Courses
SYS 101
3 hours
Introduction to Systems
An introduction to the basic concepts of “system” and “process”.  Systems thinking,
quality, and problem solving are major topics. Because almost every modern system
uses database to control processes, basic relational database concepts and
structured query language (SQL) are taught.  Field trips and guest lectures are
featured in the learning experience.

SYS 120
4 hours
Introduction to Problem Solving
An introduction to problem solving strategies applied to problems from numerous
domains, resulting in the development of algorithms that are programmed in
Python.  The basic control structures, functions and parameter passing, and the
concept of abstraction are all emphasized.  Simple data structures (e.g., lists and
dictionaries) and basic file processing are introduced.  Incremental construction of
large programs is practiced.  Three hours of lecture and two hours of lab per week.

SYS 125
2 hours
Introduction to Object Oriented Programming
This course is an introduction to object oriented design and programming.
Students will apply problem solving strategies to devise OOD descriptions of
problems formerly solved via procedural coding methods.  Implementation of
increasingly complex OOD solutions will be carried out in the Python programming
language.  Prerequisite: COS 120 or SYS 120.

SYS 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

SYS 214
3 hours
Principles of Human Computer Interaction
This course discusses the analysis, design, development, and evaluation of interfaces
allowing humans to interact with computers and the presentation of information in
formats designed for human understanding.   People-centered design is emphasized
through prototyping and information visualization are also discussed.

SYS 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

SYS 310
3 hours
E-Commerce
Examines the development of and future prospects for electronic commerce.  It
focuses on the use of electronic transmissions to engage in exchange of products
and services.  Students will consider the emerging changes in business as well as the
new opportunities for entrepreneurship brought on by e-commerce.  They will
explore the dynamics of technical innovations as well as the organizational and
societal consequences of moving commerce electronically.  They will also evaluate
the operations of a variety of web-based businesses.  Guest speakers from industry
will lecture regarding the technical, economic, and political/regulatory aspects of e-
commerce.  Prerequisites: COS 120 or COS 130 or COS 143 or SYS 120; and COS 102
or SYS 101.

SYS 330
3 hours
Human Relations in Organizations
The necessity of constructive conflict in organizations and the inevitability of
destructive personal conflict are the reasons for studying human relations.  Five
books, some classics like Carnegie’s How to Win Friends and Influence People,
some near classics like Covey’s The Seven Habits of Effective People, and possible
future classics like Sande’s The Peacemaker, are read and discussed. The goal is to
improve understanding of conflict: That constructive conflict is healthy and
necessary, how creative conflict can degenerate into destructive personal conflict,
the causes of team dysfunction, how to achieve team synergy, and personal
techniques for engaging in constructive conflict, avoiding destructive conflict and
redeeming it should it happen. The Bible is used as a discussion resource. The pre-
supposition of the course is that evangelical Christian culture encourages conflict
avoidance within the culture and often without. Some strive to be “meek and mild”
like Jesus, an aspiration that belies an incomplete understanding of Jesus’ character
and behavior. This is a writing course with a strong emphasis on discussion.  Meets
foundational core social science requirement.

SYS 352
3 hours
Knowledge Based Systems
Prominent knowledge-based system approaches are introduced including crisp
production rule systems and fuzzy logic systems.  Principles of knowledge
acquisition are taught and applied.  Various forms of knowledge representation are
experienced, including rules, nets, frames, and predicate logic.  Programming is
primarily in CLIPS.  Prerequisites: COS 121; and COS 102 or SYS 101.

SYS 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

SYS 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

SYS 390
3 hours
Information Systems Analysis
A study of the knowledge and skills needed to conduct the definition and analysis
phases of an information system project.  Central concepts are quality management
and business process reengineering.  Problem definition, information gathering, user
experience modeling, data and process modeling, and specification of logical system
requirements using a business event methodology are emphasized.  Learning is by
doing: a major project is begun in this course and completed in SYS 394.  Prerequisites:
Junior standing; COS 120 or COS 130 or COS 143 or SYS 120; and COS 102 or SYS 101.

SYS 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally, one
hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.  Offered
primarily during Summer.

SYS 394
4 hours
Information Systems Design
A study of the knowledge and skills needed to conduct the design and construction of
an information system project.  Central concepts are translating requirements into a
physical design, project management, and deployment of information systems
architectures.  Students will learn and use application technologies empowering
modern business systems.  Learning is by doing; the major project defined and analyzed
in SYS 390 will be designed and built.  Prerequisites: COS 120 or COS 130 or SYS 120;
COS 121 or COS 143; and SYS 390.

SYS 401
3 hours
Operations Research
An introduction to operations research (management science), which is quantitative
decision making.  Emphasis is on linear programming and its application to financial
decisions, distribution problems, project scheduling, and other network problems.
Decision analysis with probabilities and multi-goal decisions are discussed as well.
Prerequisites: COS 102 or SYS 101; COS 121 or COS 143; MAT 210 or MAT 352; MAT 151.

SYS 402
3 hours
Modeling and Simulation
A study of mathematical modeling and simulation methods, focusing on discrete
systems.  Simil and pysym are used in hands on exercises.  Many applications are
surveyed and group term projects are carried out.  Prerequisites: COS 121 or COS 143;
MAT 210 or MAT 352; MAT 151.

SYS 411
3 hours
Machine Learning
Classification learning systems of various types are explored.  These include statistical
pattern recognition, neural networks, genetic algorithms, and methods for inducing
decision trees and production rules induction.  Existing systems are reviewed.  Group
term projects allow development of and experimentation with a system of interest.
Prerequisites: COS 121; MAT 210 or MAT 352.

SYS 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.

SYS 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with emphasis
on directed readings and discussion.

SYS 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.  Open
to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.


Exercise Science Courses
EXS 111
3 hours
Foundations of Exercise Science
This course is an introduction to the field of exercise science. The content includes
definitions, objectives, and philosophies of the field; basic content of components of
exercise science, contemporary issues and research, and potential career options.
This introduction to the field of exercise science will have a foundation of the
Christian perspective of vocational gifting, calling, preparation and service to
humankind.  Offered Fall and Spring semesters.

EXS 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

EXS 214
3 hours
Health and Sexuality
This course is designed to prepare future health educators to teach the relationship
between health and human sexuality.  The class activities will include
lectures/discussions, peer teaching, development of an abstinence-based curriculum,
and lectures by outside resource personnel.

EXS 215
2 hours
Health, Exercise, and Aging
The course is designed to examine common health-related physiological changes,
current issues, and concerns as they pertain to the aging individual.  Prerequisite: EXS
111 or permission of instructor.

EXS 217
3 hours
Health Promotion Program Planning
This course is a study of the philosophy, goals, objectives, organization, content, and
methods of wellness programs.  Characteristics of various clientele and how
programs can be developed to meet their specific needs will be studied.  Prerequisite:
EXS 111.  Offered Fall semester of odd years.

EXS 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

EXS 273
1 hour
Introduction to Exercise Science Research
Students will gain a basic introduction to research through a field experience in an exercise
science research project.  Students will help with data collection, data entry, and data
analysis portions of the study.  May be repeated once for credit.  By permission of instructor only.

EXS 274
1 hour
Introduction to Exercise Testing
This course will introduce students to the basic skills of cardiovascular disease risk
assessment, anthropometric measures, basic muscle strength and endurance
assessment, EKG preparation, and data collection.

EXS 280
1 hour
Exercise Techniques for Physical Fitness
A course designed to teach various motor skills needed to effectively improve
physical fitness such as proper running mechanics, basic lifting techniques, and
common stretches.  Students will also develop presentation and group exercise
leadership skills.  Meets foundational core stewardship of the body requirement beyond
KIN 100.  Exercise Science majors and Coaching minors only.

EXS 290
3 hours
Principles of Strength Training and Conditioning
This course is the study of the essentials of strength training and conditioning for
practitioners and prepares students for certification with the National Strength and
Conditioning Association (NSCA).  The course will cover the following: biomechanics of
exercise, rehabilitation, bioenergetics of training, aerobic exercise prescription, resistance
training, and speed and plyometric training.  Prerequisites: EXS 111 or permission of instructor.
Offered Spring semester of even years.

EXS 306
3 hours
Physiology of Exercise
A study of how the body adapts and responds to acute and chronic exercise.
Attention is given to skeletal muscle structure and function, neurological control of
movement, metabolic systems, and cardiovascular and pulmonary systems.
Prerequisite: BIO 310 or permission of instructor.  Offered Spring semester.

EXS 316
3 hours
Applied Nutrition
This course is a study of basic principles of human nutrition including fundamentals
of digestion, absorption, and metabolism; nutrients and their roles for the lifespan;
eating disorders; and nutrition for performance.  Exercise Science, Health Science, and
Human Physiology and Preventative Medicine majors only or by permission of instructor.
Offered Fall and Spring semesters.

EXS 317
2 hours
EKG and Stress Testing
This course is designed to provide the undergraduate exercise science student with
the basic knowledge and skills needed to interpret resting and exercise EKG’s.
Emphasis will be placed on 1) learning normal vs. abnormal EKG patterns at rest and
during exercise; and, 2) the effects of cardiovascular medication on the resting or
exercise EKG and various physiologic responses to exercise testing. An additional
purpose of the course is to introduce the undergraduate exercise student to selected
cardiac assessment techniques.  Prerequisite: EXS 306 or permission of instructor.
EXS 318
3 hours
Therapeutic Exercise and Pharmacotherapy
A detailed study of the role exercise plays in preventing and treating chronic diseases
and conditions including metabolic diseases, obesity, cardiovascular conditions,
systemic inflammatory diseases, neurological diseases, cancer, orthopedic conditions,
and aging.  Prerequisite: EXS 306 or permission of instructor.  Offered January interterm.

EXS 320
3 hours
Community Health Promotion
This course introduces students to health promotion in a community setting.  The
content explores the theoretical and practical issues of the field of community health
that enable students to identify and apply health education principles to health
challenges facing individuals, groups, and communities.  Local cultures will be
explored throughout the trip and students will be expected to reflect on their
experience.  Meets foundational core cross-cultural requirement.  Offered: January
interterm of even years.  Prerequisite: Permission of instructor.

EXS 353
3 hours
Physical Fitness Assessment
This course will provide a comprehensive study of the components of physical
fitness and methods of assessing fitness levels within each component.  Health
assessment and risk analysis instruments will also be examined.  The course consists
of classroom work, practical assessment projects, and some field experiences.  Each
student will participate in “hands-on” fitness assessments of various population
groups.  Prerequisites: EXS 111, EXS 274, and EXS 306; or permission of instructor.
Offered Fall and Spring semesters.

EXS 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

EXS 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

EXS 381
3 hours
Kinesiology
An analysis of human movement based on anatomic and mechanical principles.
Emphasis is given to the application of these principles to the understanding of
athletic performance.  Prerequisites: BIO 310 or permission of instructor.  Offered Fall semester.

EXS 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Prerequisite: Permission of KIN department.

EXS 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.  Prerequisite: Permission of instructor.

EXS 453
3 hours
Physical Fitness Prescription
This course provides a study of the prescription and development of appropriate
exercise programs based on accurate assessment of each component.  Appropriate
programs for various populations groups will be considered.  The course will
consist of classroom work, practical prescription projects, and some field
experiences.  Each student will participate in “hands-on” prescription and program
development for a variety of individuals.  Prerequisite: EXS 306.  Offered Spring semester.

EXS 480
2 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with
emphasis on directed readings and discussion.

EXS 482
3 hours
Lifespan and Environmental Physiology
This is a seminar-style course which will examine the differences in pediatric
physiology and geriatric physiology as well as address physiological adaptations to
different natural environments.  A variety of topics related to pediatric and geriatric
physiology will be explored including growth, maturation and aging, underlying
mechanisms for changes in fitness in children and older adults, and specific health
challenges facing these populations.  Topics relevant to environmental physiology
that will be explored include adaptations related to hot, humid, and hypoxic
environments.  Prerequisite: EXS 306.  Offered Fall semester.

EXS 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.  Open
to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

196

Human Physiology Courses
HPH 310
3 hours
Cardiorespiratory Physiology and Chronic Disease
This course explores the physiology of the cardiac, respiratory, and vascular
systems, pathophysiology of the most common cardiorespiratory diseases, and
current evidence and mechanisms for disease prevention through lifestyle
modification.  Prerequisites: BIO 201; BIO 310; BIO 311; and CHE 202 or CHE 212.
Offered Spring semester.

HPH 315
3 hours
Pathophysiology of Immunological & Metabolic Chronic Diseases
This course explores the pathophysiology of immunological and metabolic chronic
diseases with specific emphasis on cancer, hyperlipidemia, diabetes, obesity, and
frailty, as well as the major organ systems most commonly impacted by those
diseases and current evidence and mechanisms for disease prevention through
lifestyle modification.  Prerequisites: BIO 201; BIO 310; BIO 311; and CHE 202 or CHE 212.

HPH 320
3 hours
Neuromuscular Physiology and Chronic Disease
This course explores the physiology of the central and peripheral nervous system
with specific emphasis on neuromuscular control, the pathophysiology of the most
common neurological and neuromuscular diseases (e.g., stroke, Parkinson's,
Alzheimer's, mental illness), and the current evidence and mechanisms for disease
prevention through lifestyle modification.  Prerequisites: BIO 201; BIO 310; BIO 311;
and CHE 202 or CHE 212.  Offered Fall semester.

HPH 493
3 hours
Human Physiology Capstone
This course will revisit and add to the theological and philosophical underpinnings
of human health and medicine that were initially explored in KIN 221 Exercise as
Medicine.  Students will review their reflective writings from their freshmen year
and develop an updated philosophy of human health and flourishing and the practice
of medicine.  In addition, students will be required to research a specific chronic
disease and present an in depth presentation of the current scientific evidence for
disease prevention.  This course will culminate in a multi-day retreat where
students will give their presentations and engage their peers and faculty in
discussions centered around their philosophy papers.  Must be a graduating senior to
enroll.  Offered Interterm.

Kinesiology Courses
KIN 100
2 hours
Living Well
This course will assist students in developing an understanding of human flourishing
founded on biblical principles and scientific evidence in the areas of sleep, stress
and time management, nutrition, and various aspects of physical fitness.  Students
will engage in various assignments and physical activities related to these areas with
the purpose of providing the abilities to make healthy lifestyle and behavior choices.
This course satisfies two of the three hours of foundational core requirements for
stewardship of the body.

KIN 150
3 hours
Faith and the Embodied Life
The main objective of this course is to aid students in understanding how their faith
intersects with an embodied existence.  Throughout the course, students will
engage in physical (cloister walks, etc.), mental, and spiritual exercises to assist them
in the formation of their personal health philosophies.  Students will gain a better
understanding of how care (or lack thereof) for our bodies has spiritual
ramifications and that we may worship the One who created our bodies through
proper care and respect of them.

KIN 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

KIN 200I
1 hour
Individualized Physical Education
The individualized physical education course is designed for students who fit into
one of the following categories: (1) the student has a physical problem that prohibits
completion of another KIN 200 course; (2) the student would like to do an activity
that is not offered as a KIN 200 course; or (3) the student is near graduation and
cannot schedule another KIN 200 course.  Students design a program with the
instructor’s supervision and then engage in that program throughout the semester.
Physical fitness assessments may be included as well as cognitive assignments.
Students must apply for acceptance into the class and be approved by the instructor
in order to register for the course.  Prerequisite: EXS 111, KIN 100, or KIN 221.

KIN 200Z
1 hour
Athletic Participation
The athletic participation course is designed for students who compete on an NAIA
intercollegiate athletic team.  Students must be approved by the athletic department to
receive academic credit for this course.  Credit is awarded only during the sport season
and credit will not be granted retroactively for athletic participation from a previous season.

KIN 200
1 hour
General Physical Education Activity Courses
These courses encourage students to adopt an active physical lifestyle and maintain
physical fitness and wellness throughout their lives.  Students learn about activities
and develop skills for participation in lifetime activities. One KIN 200 course is taken
after KIN 100 to meet the three-hour foundational core requirement.  Prerequisite: EXS

KIN 220
3 hours
Principles of Coaching
This course is a study of the duties and responsibilities of coaches and the potential
problems and issues they may face.  The content will include the four major areas
of coaching certification programs: medical aspects, physiological aspects,
psychological aspects, and organizational and administrative aspects.  Methods and
strategies of handling the responsibilities and the problems will be studied.

KIN 221
3 hours
Exercise as Medicine
This class examines the impact of physical activity, exercise, nutrition, and lifestyle
related factors on health and the prevention and treatment of chronic disease.
Students will learn the physiological basis of cardiorespiratory and musculoskeletal
fitness, how these are influenced by exercise and physical activity, and their relation
to health and disease.  The therapeutic effect of exercise will be compared to
traditional pharmacological treatment approaches where applicable.  In addition
students will be challenged to consider the personal, spiritual, and social
responsibilities of maintaining an optimal level of fitness as they apply course content
to their own life.  Meets the 3 hour foundational core stewardship of the body requirement.
Open to Pre-Med students and Public Health, Pre-Nursing, and Human Physiology and
Preventative Medicine majors only or by permission of instructor.

KIN 223
3 hours
Emergency Health Care
Prevention, treatment, and emergency care of various health problems and injuries
will be examined. Skills will be obtained in CPR, AED, first aid, blood and airborne
pathogens, and use of PPEs according to guidelines of the Emergency Care and Safety
Institute and American Red Cross.  Offered Spring semester.

KIN 231
2 hours
Officiating Sports
A study of the officiating skills and techniques needed for various sports.  The
opportunity to earn official’s rating is provided.

KIN 250
2 hours
Elementary School Health Program
A course designed to equip the elementary education student with a basic
understanding of teaching concepts associated with physical education activities and
appropriate health and safety practices.  Fundamental content of the areas of physical
education, health, and safety, as well as teaching methods, are explored.  Meets
foundational core stewardship of the body requirement beyond KIN 100.  Prerequisite: KIN
100.  Open to Elementary Education and Public Health majors only or permission of
instructor.

KIN 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

KIN 271
1 hour
CPR for Healthcare Providers
Successful completion of this course will certify participants in the techniques of CPR
and AED use for adults, children, and infants; foreign body obstruction; and cardiac
emergency management according to American Red Cross standards.  Priority
registration for this course is given to students in the KIN majors.

KIN 300
1 hour
Basic Swimming Skills
For KIN majors who have satisfactorily completed a basic swimming, intermediate
swimming, or emergency water safety course at another institution.  Students will
receive credit for basic proficiency in swimming skills and water safety upon
submission of official transcript.  Meets foundational core stewardship of the body
requirement beyond KIN 100.

KIN 302
2 hours
Lifeguard Training
This course is designed to train an individual in the proper methods for rescue, water
safety, first aid, CPR, and other skills necessary for lifeguarding.  Meets foundational
core stewardship of the body requirement beyond KIN 100.  Prerequisite: KIN 100.

KIN 324
2 hours
Motor Learning
A study of the theories and research of the processes of learning motor skills.  The
application of appropriate methods of teaching motor skills is studied and practiced
to enable the students to understand how they can be used effectively.  Prerequisite:
EXS 111 or permission of instructor.

KIN 333
2 hours
Water Safety Instructor
Instruction in the skills, terminology, and progressions of teaching swimming strokes
and water safety.  The course includes knowledge of the skills, physical performance
of the skills, and teaching skills.  Successful completion of the American Red Cross
requirements leads to certification in Red Cross WSI. Advanced swimming skills are
necessary.  Meets foundational core stewardship of the body requirement beyond KIN 100.
Prerequisites: KIN 100 and permission of instructor.
KIN 334
1 hour
Lifeguard Training Instructor
Acquisition of the skills, terminology, and progressions for teaching American Red
Cross Lifeguard Instructor Training. The course includes both knowledge of the
skills and physical performance of the skills.  Successful completion of the American
Red Cross requirements leads to certification as a Red Cross LGI.  Meets
foundational core stewardship of the body requirement beyond KIN 100.  Prerequisites:
KIN 302 and permission of instructor.

KIN 355
3 hours
Research Methods
An exploration of the basic methods of research and data collection in the realms
of sport management, physical education, and exercise science in a lecture format.
Topics include defining a research question, reviewing and analyzing past research,
designing a research project, collecting and analyzing data, and interpreting results.
Students will also learn basic statistics and Excel and PowerPoint table and figure
making skills.  Prerequisite: EXS 111 or KIN 221.  Exercise Science, Health Science, and
Human Physiology and Preventative Medicine majors only.  Offered Fall and Spring
semesters.

KIN 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

KIN 367
3 hours
Coaching Methods
This course will assist the student in learning how to teach the skills and strategies
of selected sports and how to utilize that information to be an effective coach.  The
content includes basic sport skills, types of offenses and defenses, special situation
strategies, and other strategies specific to selected sports.  The student will learn
correct techniques of skills and skill progressions as well as drills to teach skills and
strategies.

KIN 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

KIN 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Prerequisite: Permission of KIN department.

KIN 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.  Prerequisite: Permission of instructor.

KIN 472
2 hours
Psychology of Coaching
This course is a study of the role of psychology in coaching and how coaches can use
psychology to enhance the performance of athletes and teams.  Topics include
psychology, philosophy of sport, motivation, self-confidence, goal setting,
attention/concentration, imagery, arousal, self-talk, stress management, and mental
skill methods/training.  An application of appropriate mental skills will be addressed
for each topic.  Biblical principles of psychology will be integrated into topics.

KIN 480
2 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with emphasis
on directed readings and discussion.  Students examine contemporary issues in sport.

KIN 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.  Open
to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

KIN 492
4 hours
Internship
This field experience is designed to have the students apply what they have learned
in their courses and to extend that learning by working in an organization that is
appropriate for their major.  Students work on a regular basis at the organization
under the supervision of approved staff members.  Students are also under the
supervision of a member of the Taylor University Department of Kinesiology.  Each
student must comply with the guidelines for credit hours, clock hours, and other criteria that
are specific for the internship in his/her major.  To register for this internship, the student
must submit a proposal for the internship and have it approved by the KIN department and
the internship organization.  Prerequisites: All designated prerequisites for the internship in
that major.

MAT 100
1 hour
Mathematics Fundamentals
A study of the basic arithmetic operations, exponents, ratios, linear and quadratic
equations, graphs, and story problems.  This course is specifically designed to assist
those students who need help for the mathematics proficiency examination.  Pass/fail
only.  Does not count toward a mathematics major or minor.

NOTE: MAT 100 or proficiency by an approved exam
 is a prerequisite to all other Mathematics courses.

MAT 110
3 hours
Finite Mathematics
A study of selected topics from set theory, matrices, systems of linear equations and
inequalities, linear programming, counting and probability, statistics, and mathematics of
finance.  Prerequisite: A good understanding of algebra.  Does not count toward a mathematics
major or minor.  Meets foundational core mathematics requirement.

MAT 120
3 hours
Investigations in Mathematics
A course designed to engage students in relevant college-level mathematics and its
connection to the Christian faith and everyday life.  Students will experience
interesting questions and real-life applications of mathematics from a variety of
contexts while using appropriate technology.  Emphasis will be on thinking, reasoning,
and exploring patterns as well as communicating mathematical ideas.  Topics will be
chosen from data analysis, modeling, probability, statistics, mathematics of finance, logic,
infinity, geometric applications, and fundamentals of problem solving.  Does not count
toward a mathematics major or minor.  Meets foundational core mathematics requirement.

MAT 130
4 hours
Strategies for Calculus
Topics include rational, exponential, logarithmic, and trigonometric functions.  Study
of these functions include algebraic manipulation, graphing, applications, and
trigonometric identities.  Function concepts such as asymptotes, zeroes, domain,
range, continuity, and function composition are also studied.  This course is only
intended for students who need further preparation before taking MAT 151 Calculus I.
Does not count toward a mathematics major or minor.  Does not meet a foundational core
requirement.  Prerequisite: MAT 100 or equivalent proficiency.  Online only.

MAT 140
3 hours
Fundamental Calculus for Applications
An introductory study of derivatives, series, and integrals with a wide range of
applications, including maximum and minimum problems.  Prerequisite: A good
understanding of algebra.  Does not count toward a mathematics major or minor.  Meets
foundational core mathematics requirement.

MAT 145
3 hours
Introduction to Functions and Calculus
The MAT 145-146 sequence aims to provide a deep understanding of topics from
precalculus and calculus as well as a strong sense of their usefulness.  Fundamental
ideas of calculus, specifically rates of change, are introduced early and used to
provide a framework for the study of mathematical modeling involving algebraic,
exponential, and logarithmic functions.  Applications to business, economics, and
science are emphasized.  Meets foundational core mathematics requirement.  MAT 145-
146 may be taken as a two-semester substitute for MAT 151.

MAT 146
3 hours
Functions and Calculus
MAT 146 is the second of a two-course sequence which begins with MAT 145, and
continues the investigation of functions, including trigonometric functions, and their rate
of change.  Students are introduced to integrals and methods of integrations with
applications.  Further topics, such as infinite series and differential equations are included.
Prerequisite: MAT 145.  MAT 145-146 may be taken as a two-semester substitute for MAT 151.

MAT 151
4 hours
Calculus I
A study of functions, including algebraic and trigonometric functions.  An introduction
to the algebraic, numerical, and graphical approaches to calculus, including limits,
continuity, derivatives, integrals, and applications.  Prerequisite: A good understanding of
algebra and trigonometry.  Meets foundational core mathematics requirement.  MAT 145
and MAT 146 may be taken as a two-semester substitute for MAT 151.

MAT 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

MAT 180
3 hours
Problem Solving
An introduction to the mathematical sciences through the study of problem solving.
An overview of various methods of problem solving to discover patterns, construct
and modify conjectures and develop proofs of those conjectures.  There will be an
emphasis on developing creativity, confidence, and concentration.  Content areas
studied will include algebra, combinatorics, number theory and calculus, all from a
problem-solving point of view.  Prerequisite: MAT 151 or one semester of high school
calculus.  Meets foundational core mathematics requirement.

MAT 205
2 hours
Explorations in Elementary School Mathematics
An introductory math course for elementary education majors that focuses on
helping prospective teachers develop an understanding of the topics of algebra,
probability, and data analysis as they relate to the elementary school curriculum.
Two hours of lecture and one hour of lab.
202
MAT 210
4 hours
Introductory Statistics
A study of basic statistical methods with a focus on applied data analysis in a group
setting using statistical software.  Develops proficiency in the use of descriptive
methods, sampling, linear regression and correlation, probability theory and
distributions, statistical inference techniques for estimation and hypothesis testing
and experimental design.  Meets foundational core mathematics requirement.

MAT 215
3 hours
Discrete Mathematics for Computer Science
Discrete mathematics concepts are studied that are foundational for further study in
computer science.  Topics include propositional logic and quantifiers, proofs with
emphasis on induction, relations and functions on sets, graph theory, solution of
certain classes of recurrence and equivalence relations, combinatorics, and discrete
probability.  Prerequisites: COS 120 or COS 130 or SYS 120; and MAT 146 or MAT 151.

MAT 220
4 hours
Ways of Knowing
Topics studied include number, logic, Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometry,
algebraic structures, dimension, and infinity.  A study is made of the deductive
method in mathematics and its relationship to ways of knowing in other areas.  There
is an emphasis on the beauty of mathematics and the relationship of mathematics to
science and other forms of culture including the arts and religion.  Course is offered
within the Honors Guild.  Meets foundational core mathematics requirement.  Offered Spring
semester of even years.

MAT 230
4 hours
Calculus II
A study of analytic geometry, functions, limits and derivatives, differentiation and
integration of algebraic functions and elementary transcendental functions,
applications of the integral, the definite integral, sequences, series, Taylor’s formula,
and special techniques of integration.  Prerequisite: MAT 146 or MAT 151.

MAT 240
4 hours
Calculus III
This is the final course in the three-course sequence that is the standard complete
introduction to the concepts and methods of calculus.  The emphasis is on concepts
and solving problems rather than on theory and proof.  The course presents the
concepts of calculus from three points of view: geometric, numeric, and algebraic.
Topics typically include multivariable functions; contour diagrams and cross-sections;
vectors; the dot product and the cross product; vector projection; partial derivatives;
the gradient; directional derivatives; local linearity; local extrema and critical points;
double integrals in Cartesian and polar coordinates; triple integrals in Cartesian,
cylindrical, and spherical coordinates; parametric curves; vector fields; line integrals;
gradient fields, path-independence, and the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus for
Line Integrals; Green's Theorem; flux integrals; and the Divergence Theorem and
Stokes' Theorem.  Prerequisite: MAT 230.

MAT 251
4 hours
Differential Equations
This course is about analytic, graphical, and numerical techniques for solving ordinary
differential equations and systems of ordinary differential equations.  Students will
also study "real world" phenomena using ordinary differential equations.  Topics
typically include separation of variables; slope fields; linear first-order equations and
the method of integrating factors; Euler's method for both first- and second-order
autonomous equations; phase lines; methods for solving second-order linear
equations with constant coefficients having exponential, polynomial, or sinusoidal
forcing functions, including the method of undetermined coefficients, the method of
integrating factors, and the method of finding series solutions; spring-mass systems;
linear systems of equations of the form x' = Ax; the trace-determinant plane; Laplace
transforms; and existence and uniqueness theorems for various families of equations.
Prerequisite: MAT 240.  Offered Spring semester.

MAT 255

3 hours
Justifications in Mathematics
The purpose of this course is for students to acquire the ability to create and express
mathematical arguments through the exploration of mathematical ideas.  In addition
to gaining an understanding and appreciation for important and interesting
mathematics, students will develop an ability to think creatively, to analyze critically,
and to communicate clearly and correctly using mathematical reasoning and
argumentation.  Students are introduced to logic, number theory, sets, functions,
infinity, graph theory, and abstract algebra, with an emphasis on proof techniques
throughout.  Prerequisite: MAT 151.  Offered Fall semester.

MAT 261
1 hour
Special Problems
Selected topics in mathematics.  Prerequisite: Consent of the department chair.

MAT 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

MAT 280
3 hours
Mathematics in the Junior High/Middle School
An integrated content-methods course for middle school and introductory high
school preparation.  This course includes the mathematical strands of reasoning
and algebra, rational numbers, geometry/measurement, and data analysis and
probability, interwoven with the connections to appropriate pedagogical strategies
for middle grades’ teaching and learning.  Should be taken with an education course
with a field-based teaching lab component (e.g. JuMP, EDU 222, EDU 332).  Mathematics
and elementary education majors only or permission of the instructor.  Offered Spring semester
of even years.

MAT 285
3 hours
Technology for Mathematics Education
The course will cover effective use of technology in a mathematics classroom and
the inextricable connection between technology, pedagogy, and content
knowledge.  Students will also explore and think critically about how technology
use relates to their faith.  The course will focus on free, web-based technologies
and pedagogical principles that are relevant regardless of the technology used.  All
student artifacts (e.g., homework, lesson plans, and personal statement of
technology) will be collected into a digital portfolio for future use.  Meets foundation
core computation requirement.  Prerequisites: MAT 151 and EDU 150; or permission of
instructor.

MAT 301
3 hours
Number Concepts for Elementary Teachers
A junior-level integrated content-methods course for elementary teacher preparation.  The
course includes a study of number systems and operations with emphasis on current
standards and research-based pedagogical practices which focus on communication,
reasoning, and representation standards.  Each student will also participate in corresponding
field experience (JuMP practicum).  Prerequisite: Approval into the teacher education program.
Does not count toward a mathematics major or minor.  Open to majors in elementary education.
The MAT 301-302 sequence meets the mathematics foundational core requirement.

MAT 302
3 hours
Geometry and Measurement for Elementary Teachers
A junior-level integrated content-methods course for elementary teacher
preparation.  The course utilizes a problem-solving approach to the study of
geometry and measurement with emphasis on current standards and research-
based pedagogical practices which focus on communication, reasoning, and
representation.  Each student will also participate in a corresponding field
experience (JuMP practicum).  Prerequisite:  approval into the teacher education program
and MAT 301.  Does not count toward a mathematics major or minor.  Open to majors in
elementary education.  The MAT 301-302 sequence meets the mathematics foundational
core requirement.

MAT 306
3 hours
Introduction to Bioinformatics
This course is designed to introduce students to concepts of bioinformatics, as well
as basic bioinformatics skills, using the R programming language.  The course will
explore methods and datasets spanning from the level of DNA (genomics) up to
the organismal and ecosystem level.  Bioinformatics is an interdisciplinary field
combining concepts of biology, computer science, and statistics to analyze and
interpret biological datasets and solve complex questions.  Two hours of lecture and
one hour of one hour of coding/data analysis in a computer lab per week.  Prerequisites:
BIO 203 or instructor permission.  Offered Fall semester of even years.

MAT 309
2 hours
Teaching Math in Secondary Schools
This course is designed to assist teacher candidates in developing their pedagogical
content knowledge in the area of mathematics.  It addresses such topics as lesson
planning, higher-order thinking, professional development, content-appropriate
teaching strategies, standards-based instruction, assessment of student learning,
educational technology, motivational techniques, and instructional resources.
National and state math standards are examined as a basis for reflective teaching
and best practices.  Should be taken with an education course that has a field-based
teaching lab component (e.g., EDU 222 or EDU 332).  Prerequisites: EDU 150 and
EDU 260.  Offered Spring semester of odd years.

MAT 310
3 hours
Mathematical Modeling with Numerical Analysis
An introduction to modeling and the methods, techniques, and pitfalls in scientific
computing and numerical analysis.  The course will emphasize projects, writing,
technology, and applications.  Topics include iterative and algorithmic processes,
error analysis, numerical integration and differentiation, curve fitting, and numerical
solutions to different equations.  Prerequisites: COS 120 or COS 130 or SYS 120; and
MAT 240.  Offered Fall semester of even years.

MAT 311
3 hours
Introduction to Data Science
Provides a practical foundation to data science through the data analysis cycle of
data acquisition, cleaning, transforming, modeling, and interpretation.  An
introduction to data wrangling and management with real world applications.  The
statistical program R will be introduced.  Prerequisites: MAT 210 or MAT 240; COS 120
or SYS 120.
203
MAT 312
4 hours
College Geometry
Advanced Euclidean plane geometry with a brief survey of some of the non-Euclidean
geometries and vector and transformational geometry.  Prerequisites: MAT 180 or MAT
345.  Offered Spring semester of odd years.

MAT 340
4 hours
Advanced Calculus
An introduction to a rigorous development of the fundamental concepts of calculus.
The real numbers and their standard topology, sequences, series, limits,
differentiation, and integration are developed rigorously.  Prerequisites: MAT 240; MAT
180 or MAT 255.  Offered Spring semester of even years.

MAT 345
4 hours
Linear Algebra
A course on matrix theory, linear equations and linear dependence, vector spaces
and linear transformations, characteristic equation, quadratic forms, and the singular
value decomposition.  Prerequisite: MAT 240.  Offered Spring semester.

MAT 352
4 hours
Mathematical Statistics
A theoretical, as well as applied, study of counting outcomes, probability, probability
distributions, sampling distributions, confidence intervals, tests of hypotheses, linear
regression, and correlation.  Prerequisite: MAT 240.  Offered Fall semester.

MAT 353
1 hour
Actuarial Exam Preparation (P1)
The focus of the course is to prepare students to take the Society of Actuaries Exam P in
probability.  Topics include applications of calculus, probability, and statistics to risk
management.  Sitting for the Society of Actuaries Exam P is required for successful
completion of the course.  Prerequisite: MAT 352 or equivalent.

MAT 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

MAT 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

MAT 382
3 hours
Advanced Statistical Methods
Introduction to a variety of topics including nonparametric statistical methods linear
models, with simple linear regression, multiple regression, and analysis of variance as
special cases of the linear model.  The emphasis will be on translating applied
questions into an appropriate statistical model, checking model assumptions, and
interpreting analyses in applied contexts.  A brief introduction to time series is
included.  Prerequisites: MAT 210 or MAT 352; and MAT 146 or MAT 151.

MAT 385
3 hours
Mathematics of Finance
This course is an introduction to the mathematical models used in finance and
economics with a focus on interest theory (discrete and continuous).  The goal is to
provide an understanding of the fundamental concepts of financial mathematics and
how those concepts are applied in calculating present and accumulated values for
various streams of cash flows. Topics include the mathematical foundations of
interest theory, annuities, loans, stocks, financial markets, arbitrage, and financial
derivatives. The course can be used as a foundation for the FM actuarial exam.
Prerequisite or corequisite: MAT 230.  Offered Fall semester of odd years.

MAT 386
1 hour
Actuarial Exam Preparation (FM1)
The focus of the course is to prepare students to take the Society of Actuaries
Exam FM in Financial Mathematics.  Topics include the fundamental concepts of
financial mathematics, calculating present and accumulated values for various
streams of cash flows.  Sitting for the Society of Actuaries Exam FM is required for
successful completion of the course.  Corequisite: MAT 385 or equivalent.

MAT 392
1 hour
Mathematics Seminar
Each student in the seminar researches a mathematical topic and makes a
presentation to the entire group.  Prerequisite: MAT 240.  Offered Fall semester.

MAT 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Offered primarily during the Summer.

MAT 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.

MAT 455
3 hours
Abstract Algebra
The development of the postulates of group theory, rings, integral domains, and
fields.  Applications to cryptography.  Prerequisites: MAT 180 and MAT 240.  Offered
Spring semester of odd years.

MAT 456
3 hours
Advanced Algebra
A continued study of Abstract and Linear Algebra.  Topics include Galois Theory,
cryptography, and field extensions.  Prerequisite: MAT 455.

MAT 461
3 hours
Real Analysis
A study of the Lebesgue integral and its consequences, including convergence
theorems, function spaces, and introductions to measure theory and operator theory.
Metric spaces, uniform convergence of functions, and topological approaches to
continuity are also considered.  Prerequisite: MAT 340.  Offered Fall semester of even years.

MAT 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with
emphasis on directed readings and discussion.

MAT 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.
Open to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

MAT 493
3 hours
Senior Capstone
An overview of mathematics with an emphasis on the integration of all areas in
undergraduate mathematics with an exploration of the relationship between
mathematics and the Christian faith.  Open to senior status mathematics majors only.
Offered during January interterm.

NAS 125
1 hour
Preparing for a Career as a Health Professional
This course is designed to introduce beginning pre-medical students to the
variety of careers available within the medical sciences.  Speakers from different
medical disciplines will discuss their careers, the types of opportunities available
within these careers, and how to prepare for a career in their discipline.  This
class does not meet any foundational core requirement and is not required for any
major.  It is recommended for freshman students taking the Pre-Medical options.

NAS 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

NAS 201
3 hours
Nature of Science
A lecture and seminar based introduction to the nature of science in three main
areas: life sciences, physical sciences, and earth and space sciences.  The course
will examine the scientific paradigm, the nature of science, and the
characteristics of good science applied in these three main areas.  The course
will have three laboratory projects examining the nature of science in each area.
Offered Fall or Spring semesters.  Meets any foundational core lab science requirement.

NAS 220
4 hours
Natural Science Research Methods
To introduce general science research in the fields of biology, chemistry,
computer science, engineering environmental science, mathematics, and
physics.  An overview of selected representative research topics, problem
solving approaches, instrumentation, and analysis techniques.  The lab
emphasizes the use of scientific instrumentation and advanced computer
software tools.  For students enrolled in pre-college summer experience.  Meets any
foundational core lab science requirement.

NAS 230
2 hours
Health Education for Behavior Change
This course prepares students interested in various health care careers to
perform health education in community settings.  Topics include disease
prevention, principles of exercise and movement, nutrition, helping skills, and
behavior change theories.  After successful completion of course, students are
able to work in the Invitation Diabetes Prevention Program.

NAS 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

NAS 309
2 hours
Science Education Methods
This is a junior-level science education methods course for biology, chemistry, and physics
majors obtaining certification in secondary education.  This course covers the philosophy of
science, science educational psychology, the science standards (both national and state), science
curriculum development, classroom management and assessment, laboratory management and
development, and technology and professional development in the sciences.  Prerequisites: EDU
150 and EDU 260.

NAS 325
1 hour
Medical Career Admissions Preparation
The purpose of this course is to prepare students for the application and interview
processes you will go through in pursuing a career in the medical professions.  There
are four tracks to the course, each focused on a specific career: medical school, dental
school, optometry, and careers that require the GRE (e.g., veterinary, physical therapy).

NAS 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

NAS 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

NAS 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally, one
hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.  Offered
primarily during Summer.

NAS 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities as
the library or laboratory.

NAS 480
1 hour
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with emphasis
on directed readings and discussion.  Seminar focuses on the integration of topics from
contemporary science with an emphasis on recent research reports of interdisciplinary
interest.  Guest lecturers, faculty, and student reports serve as the method of instruction.
Offered Fall semester.

NAS 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.  Open to
students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

ENP 104
3 hours
Introduction to Engineering and Software Tools
This course introduces the students to the engineering discipline, providing a hands-
on overview of the tools they will acquire and use over the course of their major.
These tools include process and methodology tools, analytical tools, software tools,
and hardware tools.  A goal of the course is to provide the students with a frame-
work for their engineering studies along with a practical ‘hands-on’ example of what
engineering might “look like.” This framework should help the student better
understand the role, need, and benefit of each successive course in their major.  A
group hardware project will be carried out as part of the course, helping to engage
the students’ learning and interest, and re-enforcing the concepts taught in class.
One hour of lecture and three hours of lab.  Offered January interterm.  Prerequisite: PHY
211.

ENP 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

ENP 231
4 hours
Introduction to Electric Circuits
First course in electric circuits, where DC, time-dependent, and AC circuits are
each introduced.  Network analysis, network reduction techniques, time-domain
solutions to simple 1st and 2nd order circuits, and steady-state analysis of
sinusoidally excited circuits are each developed.  Weekly lab introduces
breadboarding, debugging, and testing of basic electric and electronic circuits using
common test equipment.  An introduction and use of basic electronic devices such
as op-amps, the Shockley diode and BJT or MOSFET transistors is also included.
An emphasis is placed on SPICE circuit simulation throughout the semester.  A
course project introduces students to ECAD software, where they create, build,
and test a custom printed circuit board (PCB) circuit.  Prerequisites: PHY 212 and
ENP 104, or permission of instructor.  Offered Fall semester.

ENP 252
4 hours
Principles of Engineering
This course focuses on the mathematical modeling and analysis of lumped-element
physical systems—translational and rotational mechanical systems, electrical
systems, heat transfer systems, and fluid systems.  Unifying concepts of flow, effort,
and impedance are emphasized, along with the use of transfer function descriptions,
frequency domain analysis, and Laplace Transform analysis.  The laboratory
component focuses on modeling and simulation, design of experiments with a
directed design process, and software skill development, including MATLAB and
Simulink.  This course includes a major project component.  A formal presentation
of technical work including research, analysis, critical thinking, and original thought
is required.  Prerequisite: ENP 231.  Corequisite: MAT 251.  Offered Spring semester.
Offered Spring semester.

ENP 253
4 hours
Electrical Circuits II
Building on the foundations of electric circuits, this second course focuses on topics
including operational amplifiers (ideal and non-ideal), transient responses of circuits,
frequency response of operational amplifiers, frequency domain analysis, transfer
functions, filters, Bode plots, and Laplace Transform analysis.  The laboratory
component focuses on modeling and simulation, design of experiments with a
directed design process, and software skill development, including MATLAB and
Simulink.  This course includes a major project component.  A formal presentation
of technical work including research, analysis, critical thinking, and original thought
is required.  Prerequisite: ENP 231.  Corequisite: MAT 251.  Offered Spring semester.

ENP 261
3 hours
Digital Systems Design
Digital Systems are explored, including combinational (e.g., multiplexors and
decoders) and sequential (e.g., flip-flops and registers) logic.  Circuit minimization
techniques such as Boolean algebra and Karnaugh maps are examined.  Mealy and
Moore finite state machines will be developed to model systems.  Designs will
culminate in projects that simulate circuits with a hardware description language
and then synthesized on an FPGA.  Offered Spring semester of even years.

209
ENP 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

ENP 301
3 hours
Statics
This course is a one-semester introduction to the statics of particles and rigid
bodies.  Topics include forces, moments, equilibrium, and structures in equilibrium.
Course makes applications to engineering and uses software tools for engineering
mechanics.  Prerequisites: PHY 211 and MAT 230.  Offered Fall semester.

ENP 302
3 hours
Mechanics of Materials
Course investigates the fundamentals of the mechanics and strength of materials.
Topics covered include stress-strain relationships, Mohr's circle, axial loading,
torsion, beam loading, and linear buckling.  Prerequisite: ENP 301.  Offered Spring
semester of even years.

ENP 303
3 hours
Dynamics
This course covers the basic principles of dynamic mechanical systems, as derived
from Newtonian mechanics.  The main topics covered include kinematics of
particles, kinetics of particles (using both force and energy/momentum methods),
kinetics of systems of particles, kinematics of rigid bodies, and 2-D kinetics (plane
motion) of rigid bodies (using both force and energy/momentum methods).
Prerequisite: ENP 301.  Offered Spring semester of odd years.

ENP 321
2 hours
Applied Electromagnetics
The course considers the application and technology of electromagnetic field
theory to computing and communications systems.  Topics may include wave
propagation, transmission lines, fiber optics, high frequency communication
networks, antennas, and satellite communications.  Prerequisites: ENP 252, MAT 251,
and ENP 231.  Offered Spring semester of odd years.

ENP 332
4 hours
Control Systems
This is an introductory course in Signals, Systems and Controls.  A selection of
topics is chosen from a conventional two-course sequence of "Signals and Systems"
and "Automatic Control".  Mathematical tools for studying linear time invariant
(LTI) continuous time systems are developed.  These include describing and
analyzing LTI systems according to their 1) differential equation, 2) impulse
response, 3) state-space representation, and 4) frequency response representation.
Transform methods including Fourier series, Fourier Transform, and Laplace
Transform are also developed as needed.  The Controls portion of the course
includes time-domain transient response, steady-state response, and stability tests.
Frequency domain analysis such as root-locus and Nyquist stability are also
introduced.  Prerequisites: ENP 252 and MAT 251.  Offered Spring semester of odd years.

ENP 341
4 hours
Microcomputer Interfacing
Course develops the student’s ability to design, build and test embedded systems.
Hardware architecture and software programming of microcontrollers and other
embedded system devices are studied.  Operation and use of LCDs, A to D and D
to A converters, keypads and other interface devices are investigated.  Serial
communication through 12C, OneWire, USB, and RS232 are used.  In addition,
networking and RF techniques and protocols are studied.  Prerequisite: ENP 231 or
permission of instructor.  Offered Fall semester of even years.

ENP 351
3 hours
Engineering Thermodynamics
Course develops engineering thermodynamics including use of the first and second
law, phase diagrams, properties, heat transfer, second law consequences, power
and refrigeration cycles as well as other selected topics.  Prerequisites: ENP 252, MAT
251, and PHY 212.  Offered Fall semester.

ENP 352
3 hours
Materials Science
The structure, processing, and properties of engineering materials are studied with
an emphasis on metallic systems.  This includes crystal structure, defects, diffusion,
phase transformations, deformation mechanisms, strength, and fracture toughness.
Also covered are material selection, linear elastic fracture mechanics, and
dislocation theory.  Prerequisite: ENP 252.  Offered Fall semester of odd years.

ENP 355
3 hours
Fluid Mechanics and Water Flow
An introduction to the basic properties of fluids in motion.  Topics include
Differential fluid equations, streamlines, continuity, energy and linear angular
momentum, incompressible viscous flow, potential flow, Navier-Stokes equations,
open channel flow, pipe flow, laminar and turbulent boundary layers.  Prerequisite:
ENP 252.  Corequisite: MAT 251.  Offered Fall semester.

ENP 357
3 hours
Heat Transfer
Course investigates the fundamentals of heat transfer and applies those
fundamentals to engineering applications.  Topics covered include modeling of
conduction, convection, radiation, and mixed mode heat transfer problems.
Course covers both steady state and transient response.  Prerequisites: ENP 252,
ENP 351, and ENP 355.  Offered Spring semester.

ENP 359
2 hours
Mechanical Engineering Laboratory
In this course, laboratory experiments reinforce key concepts encountered in
mechanical engineering. Topics include materials science, fluid mechanics,
thermodynamics, heat transfer, dynamics, and mechanics of materials. Students
actively participate in the configuration of sensors and build data acquisition
programs as they develop familiarity with various aspects of experimental
measurements. Laboratory exercises include elements of data analysis, assessment
of experimental uncertainty, and technical writing. Prerequisite: ENP 252. Offered Fall
semester of even years.

ENP 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

ENP 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

ENP 386
3 hours
Shop Machining and Fabrication
Through hands-on engineering projects and instruction, this course provides skills
and knowledge in machining, metal fabrication techniques, and proper safety and
PPE practices.  Students learn and use machines such as a metal lathe, knee mill,
CNC mill, MIG, TIG, and stick welders, and a CNC plasma cutter.  Prerequisite: ENP
104 and an Engineering major or instructor approval.  Offered Fall semester.

ENP 392
2-4 hours
Junior Engineering Project
In the context of completing an engineering project, students learn and practice:
elements of the design process, the ability to be innovative and think creatively, the
ability to acquire new knowledge and skills, the ability to solve engineering
problems, the application of analytical and software tools to engineering problems,
and the ability to communicate effectively.  Focus on the "thoughtful design process"
is particularly emphasized.  Prerequisite: ENP 252.  Offered Spring semesters.

ENP 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum
experience.  Practicum must involve significant engineering work experience and
preference is given to an experience away from the Taylor campus.  Offered primarily
during Summer.  Prerequisite: ENP 252 and junior or senior status.

ENP 394
1-4 hours
Advanced Engineering Project
Students complete an open-ended project, laboratory experiment or research
project.  The individual project depends on student and faculty interest.  Many
projects are externally funded.  Specific learning outcomes vary depending on
faculty, student, and project selected.  Prerequisite: ENP 252.

ENP 405
1 hour
Engineering Ethics
Course introduces students to the ethical requirements of the engineering
profession and the ethical issues associated with living in a technological intense
digital society.  Through the course, students should: appreciate the ethical use of
computers and dangers of computer misuses, have knowledge of professional codes
of ethics, be aware of the impact of technology on society, have an appreciation for
the needs of society and how engineering can meet those needs, and begin
developing an understanding of how their Christian faith integrates with their
engineering practice.  Prerequisite: ENP 493 or COS 493.  Offered Spring semester.

ENP 431
4 hours
Advanced Electronics and Microcircuits
Modeling and analysis of basic electronic devices—primarily diodes and transistors.
Applications are made to various analog and digital circuits, including single and multi-
stage amplifiers.  Prerequisites: ENP 231 and ENP 252.  Offered Fall semester of odd years.

ENP 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.

210
ENP 470
2-4 hours
Advanced Special Topics in Engineering
This course provides advanced engineering topics and coursework to all
engineering majors.  The topics serve to better equip students for specific
engineering fields or are designed to provide advanced technical knowledge.  This
course may be repeated with different advanced topics.

ENP 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with
emphasis on directed readings and discussion.

ENP 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.
Open to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

ENP 491
1 hour
Review of the Fundamentals of Engineering
Course reviews the fundamentals of engineering and prepares students to enter
the engineering profession.  Depending on students’ incoming ability, the course
will review subjects from chemistry, computers, dynamics, electric circuits,
engineering economics, ethics, fluid mechanics, materials science, mathematics,
mechanics of materials, statics, and thermodynamics.  Prerequisite: Senior status.
Offered Spring semester.

ENP 493
2 hours
Engineering Senior Capstone I
The first of a three-course culminating experience, this course prepares students
for engineering practice through a major design experience based on knowledge
and skills acquired in earlier course work.  Incorporating engineering standards and
realistic constraints, this course places value on economic, environmental,
sustainability, manufacturability, ethical, health and safety, social, and political
considerations.  Prerequisite: Senior Engineering major.  Offered Fall semester.

ENP 494
3 hours
Engineering Senior Capstone II
The second of a three-course culminating experience, this course prepares
students for engineering practice through a major design experience based on
knowledge and skills acquired in earlier course work.  Incorporating engineering
standards and realistic constraints, this course places value on economic,
environmental, sustainability, manufacturability, ethical, health and safety, social, and
political considerations.  This course also prepares students to serve God and
humanity through active service to their family, church, employer, and global
community.  Prerequisite: ENP 493.  Offered January interterm.

ENP 495
1 hour
Engineering Senior Capstone III
The third of a three-course culminating experience, this course prepares students
for engineering practice through a major design experience based on knowledge
and skills acquired in earlier course work.  Incorporating engineering standards and
realistic constraints, this course places value on economic, environmental,
sustainability, manufacturability, ethical, health and safety, social, and political
considerations.  In this third course of the sequence, the focus is on technical
documentation and presentation of work completed in the first two courses of the
capstone experience.  A formal presentation of technical work including research,
analysis, critical thinking, and original thought is required.  Prerequisite: ENP 494.
Offered Spring semester.

Physics Courses
PHY 120
4 hours
Renewable Energy Principles
Intended for non-science majors.  The continuum of energy use drives society to
consider renewable and sustainable resource models based on physical principles,
chemistry, and Earth science while connecting to theology and the "big picture" of
the universe.  Three hours of lecture and two hours of lab (focusing on renewable energy)
each week.  Meets foundational core physical science requirements.

PHY 170
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

PHY 201
3-4 hours
Introductory Astronomy
A descriptive course about the solar system, stars and stellar evolution, galaxies,
and the universe.  Recent findings of space exploration and radio astronomy are
included.  Telescopes are provided for viewing sessions.  Two or three hours of
lecture and two hours of lab.  Physics majors wishing to take PHY 201 for elective credit
must take the “majors-only” lab section that is offered intermittently.  Students interested
in this option should consult with the department chair to determine availability of this
special lab section.  Students taking PHY 201 for elective credit should also check to ensure
that they maintain the required minimum number of upper-division credit hours.  Meets
foundational core earth science requirement.

PHY 203
4 hours
General Physics I
A study of mechanics, thermodynamics, waves and sound, electricity, magnetism,
and optics.  Assumes mathematics at the algebra-trigonometry level.  For majors
that do not require a calculus-based treatment of physics.  Meets foundational core
physical science requirement.  Three hours of lecture and two hours of lab.  Offered
annually.

PHY 204
4 hours
General Physics II
See PHY 203.

PHY 211
4-5 hours
University Physics I
A calculus-based study of mechanics, waves and sound, electricity and magnetism,
optics, fluids, and the structure of matter.  The 4 hour course consists of four hours of
lecture (for three-quarters of the term) and two hours of lab (for the entire term).  The
five-hour version also incorporates the study of thermodynamics and consists of four hours
of lectures and two hours of lab.  Meets foundational core physical science requirement.
Corequisite: MAT 146 or MAT 151.  Offered annually.

PHY 212
5 hours
University Physics II
Four hours of lecture and two hours of lab.  See PHY 211. Prerequisite: PHY 211.
Corequisite: MAT 230.
PHY 270
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

PHY 310
3 hours
Modern Physics
An introduction to modern physics, including special relativity, quantum effects of
radiation and particles, and elementary particles.  Three hours of lecture per week.
Prerequisites:  PHY 211 and PHY 212.  Offered Fall semester.

PHY 311
4 hours
Modern Physics
An introduction to modern physics, including special relativity, quantum effects of
radiation and particles, atomic structure, and elementary particles.  Three hours of
lecture and two hours of lab per week.  Prerequisites: PHY 211 and PHY 212.  Offered
Fall semester.

PHY 313
2 hours
Nuclear Radiation Experimental Methods
A study of nuclear radiation and detection and experimental methods of measuring
nuclear radiation.  One hour of lecture and two hours of lab per week.  Prerequisites:
PHY 211 and PHY 212.  Offered intermittently.

PHY 321
3 hours
Electricity and Magnetism
The vector field approach to electromagnetic theory.  Includes electrostatics,
magnetostatics, induction, dielectric and magnetic materials, and Maxwell’s
equations.  Co-requisites: MAT 251 and PHY 341.  Prerequisites: PHY 211 and PHY 212.
Offered Fall semester of even years.

PHY 322
4 hours
Waves and Physical Optics
Applications of Maxwell’s equations, including electromagnetic waves, wave guides,
diffraction, and Fourier optics.  Three hours of lecture and three hours of lab per week.
Prerequisites: PHY 211, PHY 212, and PHY 321.  Offered Spring semester of odd years.

PHY 330
1-2 hours
Advanced Lab
Students complete an open-ended project, laboratory experiment or research
project.  The individual project depends on student and faculty interests.  Specific
learning outcomes vary depending on faculty, student and project selected.
Prerequisites: ENP 252 or ENP 301 or PHY 311 and junior classification.  Offered as
needed for physics and engineering physics majors.

PHY 341
3 hours
Math Methods in Physics and Engineering
An application of analytical and computational methods to various mathematical
topics, including linear algebra, matrices, eigenequations, vector field theory, partial
differential equations, Fourier series and transforms, orthogonal functions, and
complex analysis.  Use of a computer application such as MATLAB is required.
Prerequisite: PHY 212.  Corequisite: MAT 251.  Offered Spring semester.
211
PHY 342
3 hours
Analytical Mechanics
A formal treatment of mechanics covering harmonic motion, the translation and
rotation of rigid bodies, non-inertial reference frames, and gravitation.  The course
concludes with the Hamiltonian and Lagrangian formulations of mechanics.
Prerequisites: PHY 211, PHY 212, and PHY 341.  Offered Spring semester of even years.

PHY 350
4 hours

Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics
Develops thermal physics and statistical mechanics, with application to solid state
physics.  In the thermal physics portion of the course, the three laws of
thermodynamics are developed and applied to problems.  In the statistical
mechanics portion, the development of the partition function is accomplished
through the microcanonical formalism.  The partition function is then applied to
various problems, such as: Bose-Einstein and Fermi-Dirac statistics, Bose-Einstein
condensation, blackbody radiation, and the behavior of electrons and phonons in
solid materials.  Prerequisite: PHY 341.

PHY 360
1-4 hours
Independent Study
An individualized, directed study involving a specified topic.

PHY 370
1-4 hours
Selected Topics
A course offered on a subject of interest but not listed as a regular course offering.

PHY 393
1-4 hours
Practicum
Supervised learning involving a first-hand field experience or a project.  Generally,
one hour of credit is awarded for a minimum of 40 hours of practicum experience.
Offered primarily during Summer.

PHY 412
3 hours
Quantum Mechanics
A quantum mechanical treatment of the free particle, harmonic oscillator, and
hydrogen atom.  Includes creation and annihilation operators and an introduction
to angular momentum.  Prerequisites: PHY 211, PHY 212, PHY 311, and PHY 341.
Offered Spring semester of odd years.

PHY 413
2 hours
Quantum Mechanics II
An in-depth treatment of several advanced topics in quantum mechanics.  Topics
covered include spin, angular momentum, three-dimensional problems, matrix
mechanics, the density matrix, and perturbation theory.  Prerequisite: PHY 412.
Offered Fall semester of odd years.
PHY 441
3 hours
Advanced Mathematical Methods in Physics
Application of analytical and computational methods to various advanced
mathematical topics in physics, such as: group theory, complex analysis, partial
differential equations, Green’s functions, the Gamma function, Bessel functions,
Legendre functions, and Fourier analysis.  Prerequisite: PHY 341.  Offered Fall semester
of even years.

PHY 450
1-4 hours
Directed Research
Investigative learning involving closely directed research and the use of such facilities
as the library or laboratory.

PHY 480
1-4 hours
Seminar
A limited-enrollment course designed especially for upper-class majors with
emphasis on directed readings and discussion.

PHY 490
1-2 hours
Honors
Individualized study or research of an advanced topic within a student’s major.
Open to students with at least a 3.00 GPA in the major field.

PHY 491
1 hour
Preparation for the Physics GRE
A review of topics covered in the undergraduate physics curriculum.  The purpose
of the course is to help students prepare for the GRE Subject Test in Physics. Topics
reviewed include Classical Mechanics (including the Lagrangian formalism), Modern
Physics (including Quantum Mechanics and Special Relativity), Electricity and Magnetism,
Optics, Thermodynamics, and Electronics.  Prerequisite: junior or senior status.

PHY 493
3 hours
Physics Senior Capstone
A capstone course in which each senior’s technical, analytical, and laboratory skills,
along with coursework knowledge, are applied to an intensive physics or
engineering project.  Three weeks are devoted to the completion of the project,
and the remainder of the term is spent off-campus, strengthening interpersonal
relationships, integrating faith and learning, and examining topics critical to post-
baccalaureate life.  Prerequisite: Senior status.