Academy (ACAD) Course Descriptions

ACAD 1001 Introduction to Great Books I Prerequisite(s): None
Introduction to Great Books and Composition I is a literature and writing course centered on the Chronicles of Narnia, and selections from authors that students will read in depth in their dual-credit classes, such as Plato, Aristotle, Dickens, Chesterton, and the gospel writers. The class also uses Harvey’s Elementary Grammar and Composition for composition lessons, with a particular emphasis on the argumentative and persuasive essay.

ACAD 1006 Introduction to Great Books II Prerequisite(s): None
Introduction to Great Books and Composition II is a literature and writing course centered on selections from classic literature that students will read in depth.


Accounting (ACCT) Course Descriptions
ACCT 2301 Principles of Accounting I Prerequisite(s): None
An introduction to the identification and analysis of business transactions and the financial accounting information system that captures them. Included is the flow of activities within the system culminating in the four basic financial statements of a for- profit business. Emphasis is placed on the use of these financial statements to make business credit and investment decisions.

ACCT 2303 Principles of Accounting II Prerequisite(s): ACCT 2301
An introductory course designed for managers throughout the organization and the tools they use in performing the planning and controlling of operations. Students will be introduced to: internal use reporting developed from the accounting information system; budgeting; determining product costs; and analyzing costs as to function and behavior. Interesting questions are discussed such as: How does a manager use accounting goals to motivate employees? How does a marketing department determine price? How does an organization determine what data to capture in the accounting information system?

ACCT 3303 Cost Accounting Prerequisite(s): ACCT 2303
An in-depth study of the accounting tools managers use in performing the planning and controlling of operations. Students will develop and analyze internal reports for service as well as manufacturing companies; determine how the cost of a product is determined under several cost flow systems; allocate the costs of support departments; prepare detailed variances and interpret the results.

ACCT 3304 Individual Income Taxes Prerequisite(s): ACCT 2303
Current federal revenue acts affecting individual tax returns; procedures for computing the income tax liability of individuals. Practice in solving typical problems and in the preparation of tax returns.

ACCT 3315 Intermediate Management Accounting Prerequisite(s): ACCT 2303
An in-depth study of the accounting tools managers use in performing the planning and controlling of operations. Students will develop and analyze internal reports for service as well as manufacturing companies, determine how the cost of a product is determined under several cost flow systems, allocate the costs of support departments, and prepare detailed variances and interpret the results.

ACCT 3317 Accounting Information Systems Prerequisite(s): ACCT 2303
An active, hands-on class that equips the accountant with both knowledge and skills to evaluate and create an

accounting information system; work with a relational data base; evaluate and implement control systems; and assess and implement an accounting reporting system. Also included are current uses of technology in accounting utilizing several software applications.

ACCT 3321 Intermediate Financial Accounting I Prerequisite(s): ACCT 2301
This course aims at equipping students with the fundamental financial accounting concepts and techniques underlying the preparation and interpretation of financial statements of business organizations. It also covers the procedures involved in recording business transactions and events using the double-entry system, conceptual framework for financial reporting, codification of accounting standards, and the accounting for cash and receivables.

ACCT 3322 Intermediate Financial Accounting II Prerequisite(s): ACCT 3321
This course focuses on an in-depth study of the financial accounting concepts, practices and challenges of accounting for inventories, property, plant and equipment, depreciation, intangible assets, investments, current liabilities and contingencies, and non-current liabilities (bonds and notes).

ACCT 3324 Intermediate Financial Accounting Prerequisite(s): ACCT 2301
This course aims at equipping students with the fundamental financial accounting concepts and techniques underlying the preparation and interpretation of financial statements of business organizations. It also covers the procedures involved in recording business transactions and events using the double-entry system, conceptual framework for financial reporting, codification of accounting standards, and the accounting for all general ledger accounts.

ACCT 3381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisites: None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

ACCT 4181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

ACCT 4200 Accounting Communication Prerequisite(s): ACCT 3324
This course addresses basic writing mechanics; effective business writing principles, including organization, clarity, and conciseness; ability to exchange technical information and ideas with co-workers and other professionals; prepare documents and presentations that are concise, accurate, and supportive of the subject matter; document and cross- reference work performed and conclusions reached in an accurate manner; assist clients in recognizing and understanding implications of critical business issues by providing recommendations and informed opinions; and prepare and present written work products in the form of memos, letters, opinions, and reports (such as audit reports) to others.

ACCT 4201 Accounting Research Prerequisite(s): ACCT 4302
This course addresses the identification, organization, and integration of diverse sources of information such as online authoritative literature and pronouncements to reach a conclusion or make a decision. Additionally, this course addresses the analyzation of accounting and taxation issues by reviewing information, using empirical data and analytical methods, recognizing data in patterned activities, forecasting, and integrating data. CPA’s may be asked to conduct research and analysis when providing attest services, professional accounting services, or professional accounting work for clients and/or employers.

ACCT 4281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

ACCT 4301 Advanced Accounting Prerequisite(s): ACCT 3324
Study and application of generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) to specialized problems in mergers and acquisitions; consolidated financial reporting; partnership accounting; foreign currency transactions; foreign currency translation and remeasurements for reporting purposes. Study of GAAP for government and nonprofit entities, fund accounting and reporting practices.

ACCT 4302 Auditing Prerequisite(s): ACCT 3317 and ACCT 3324
Standards and procedures in making audits and examinations of the accounting records of business enterprises; preparation of work papers; the content and forms of qualified and unqualified auditor's opinions; types of audits; ethics of the profession.

ACCT 4311 Specialized Problems Prerequisite(s): ACCT 3303 and ACCT 3324
This course will cover the more complex problems in financial and managerial accounting not covered in ACCT 3303 Cost Accounting and ACCT 3324 Intermediate Financial Accounting.

ACCT 4314 Taxation for Corporations and Other Entities Prerequisite(s): ACCT 3304
Federal income tax determination for corporations and the impact of decisions on the corporation and shareholders; tax issues relating to "S corporations", partnerships, estates and trusts. Tax research is a substantial component of the course, representing one-third of the course content.

ACCT 4315 Advanced Management Accounting Prerequisite(s): ACCT 3315
This course integrates the content of the accounting program curriculum by exploring how managers utilize accounting principles and practices to improve organizational activities. An integrated reporting approach is utilized to understand methods that optimize the long-term value of the firm. An experiential approach to learning is applied to managerial topics like enterprise risk management, non-financial metrics of investment value, the impact of artificial intelligence on efficiency metrics, blockchain methods of capturing and presenting data, and the managerial effect of government accounting policies on for-profit and non-profit organizations.

ACCT 4316 Internal Control and Risk Assessment Prerequisite(s): ACCT 3315
This course integrates the content of the management accounting, accounting information systems, and auditing courses by exploring how managers utilize internal control and risk assessment principles and practices to improve organizational activities. An integrated approach is utilized to understand methods that optimize the long-term value of the firm.
ACCT 4322 Advanced Auditing Issues Prerequisite(s): ACCT 4302
Corporate governance issues and the impact on the auditing profession and accounting disclosures, additional attestation requirements from auditors, other non-attestation engagements, internal audit and audit committees, compliance and government audit, and legal liability of accounts. The course includes a substantial research and writing component representing two-thirds of the course content.

ACCT 4337 Financial Statement Analysis and Valuation Prerequisite(s): ACCT 3321 and MIS 3330 and FINA 3320
Study and application of analytical tools and techniques for analyzing corporate financial statements and related information. Financial statement analysis enables the user to assess the operating, investing, and financing activities of the corporation in an industry context to make inferences regarding historical success as well as prospective profitability and cash flows.

ACCT 4340 Accounting Internship I Prerequisite(s): ACCT 2303 and approval of the department chair
The course is an integrating field experience by which students learn actual business practices by undertaking responsible roles in an organization. The students develop interpersonal skills while acquiring practical knowledge in their disciplines. The students are exposed to various work roles and career choices. Open to junior and senior H- campus (residential) students only. This course may be repeated twice for credit.
ACCT 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

ACCT 5302 Auditing Prerequisite(s): ACCT 3317
The study of standards and procedures in making audits and examinations of the accounting records of business enterprises; preparation of work papers; the content and forms of qualified and unqualified auditor's opinions; types of audits; audit objectives, audit risk, materiality, and ethics of the profession.
ACCT 5311 Advanced Accounting Prerequisite(s): ACCT 3323
Study and application of various methods under generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) to specialized problems in mergers and acquisitions; consolidated financial reporting; partnership accounting; foreign currency transactions; foreign currency translations, derivatives, hedge accounting and remeasurements for reporting purposes. This course provides an introduction to International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS).
ACCT 5314 Taxation for Corporations and Other Entities Prerequisite(s): ACCT 3304
The study of federal income tax issues pertinent to various business entities and their owners. Consideration is given to how federal tax law affects the formation and operation of Corporations, Partnerships, and S Corporations. Distributions to owners and the liquidation of these entities are also covered. Tax research is a substantial component of the course, representing one- third of the course content.

ACCT 5360 Survey of Accounting Prerequisite(s): None
This course covers the basics of what accounting information is, what it means, and how it is used. Students will examine financial statements and determine what they do and do not communicate. This knowledge will help gain decision-making and problem-solving abilities that are needed outside the classroom. The course introduces both financial and managerial accounting to provide an overall perspective about the introductory accounting topics and presentation. The course is also intended to help students learn how to become effective users of accounting information. As such, the course provides a balance between the preparer and the user points of view. The course includes coverage of legal and ethical issues facing accountants as well as highlighting international accounting differences. Graduate Business programs only. This course must be taken within the first 12 semester hours in the program.

ACCT 5362 Accounting Principles Prerequisite(s): None
This course is designed to introduce students to the basic principles and techniques of both financial and managerial accounting. It examines the procedures and processes involved in the preparation of basic financial statements and cost-related reports for managerial use. It also covers the application of these principles in evaluation, interpretation, and utilization of accounting information in credit, investment, strategic, organizational and operational decisions.

ACCT 5381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

ACCT 6181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

ACCT 6281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

ACCT 6313 International Accounting Issues Prerequisite(s): ACCT 6320
As global corporations span national boundaries, they must interact with many different accounting practices and systems. This course deals with a wide variety of international accounting issues, including, but not limited to, the different types of accounting standards in the Americas, Asia, and Europe; issues of reporting and disclosure; issues of foreign translation when considering financial statements; issues of standardizing and harmonizing financial reporting; issues of managerial planning and control; and ethical issues of international accounting. Graduate Business programs only.

ACCT 6320 Accounting Theory Seminar Prerequisite(s): ACCT 5362
Study of current and alternative financial theories of measurement, valuation, and reporting, including relevant historical development. This readings course introduces the student to the body of literature that influenced the development and evolution of generally accepted accounting procedures.

ACCT 6322 Advanced Auditing Issues Prerequisite(s): ACCT 6320
An advanced review of the auditing and attestation function, as defined by the American Institute of CPAs. The review encompasses the areas of (a) ethics, professional responsibilities and general principles, (b) assessing risk and developing a planned response, (c) performing further procedures and obtaining evidence, and (d) forming conclusions and reporting.

ACCT 6345 Tax Seminar Prerequisite(s): ACCT 6320
Research and casework related to current topics in federal income taxation are presented. Particular attention is given to planning for tax minimization.

ACCT 6347 Seminar in Managerial Accounting Prerequisite(s): ACCT 3303
This course introduces principles and concepts of management accounting for strategic decision making and focuses on the use of managerial accounting information and its impact on business efficiency and effectiveness. Topics include management control, business unit evaluation, and strategic cost management. Also includes activity-based management, target costing, target pricing, balanced scorecard, and financial measures of performance.

ACCT 6348 Commercial Law and Regulation for Accountants Prerequisite(s): BUSA 6320
This course is the study of professional and legal responsibilities and legal implications of business transactions, particularly as they relate to accounting and auditing, and the application of that knowledge to common business transactions. This course provides knowledge of general business environment and business concepts needed to understand the underlying business reasons for and accounting implications of transactions. Our primary objective in this class is to transfer the body of knowledge needed to answer questions likely to appear on the CPA, CMA, CIA, or other professional examinations and to provide a foundation of knowledge of business law for accountants.

ACCT 6352 Accounting for Managers Prerequisite(s): ACCT 5362 and ECON 5363
The course covers accounting application and information relevant to managers in the current corporate environment.

It includes analyzing corporate financial statements to assess the operating, investing, and financing activities of the corporation in an industry context; internal accounting topics like C-V-P analysis; decision-making and budgeting. Topics relevant to a public company like the IPO process and SEC filings will also be covered. The course includes coverage of legal and ethical issues facing accountants as well as highlighting international accounting differences. Graduate Business Programs only.

ACCT 6355 Accounting for Sustainability Prerequisite(s): ACCT 6352
Several standard-setting and metric-defining organizations have emerged to create a “Big Four” of sustainability outcomes measurement. Students will review the promulgated standards of the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI), the Sustainability Accounting Standards Board (SASB), the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), and the International Integrated Reporting Council (IIRC). Key Concepts: Dow Jones Sustainability Indices, ESG Reporting, “Six Capitals” Model, and Triple Bottom Line.

ACCT 6365 Integrating Accounting and Finance for New Ventures Prerequisite(s): None
This course focuses on the integration of models and constructs from managerial accounting and corporate financial management - developing perspectives and applications specifically for entrepreneurs engaged in new venture development. The objective is to equip entrepreneurs with an exceptional working knowledge of accounting and finance matters directly related to managing an emerging firm. Topics include: a) detailed financial ratio analysis of the balance sheet and income statement, b) a comprehensive understanding of the time value of money - using both a financial analyst calculator and computer spreadsheets, c) pro forma modeling of cash flows, assets, debt, and equity, d) capital budgeting - net present value [NPV], internal rate of return [IRR], and benefit-to-cost ratios [B:C],
e) tax accounting issues for C-corporation, Subchapter-S, and LLC venture structures, f) Sources and Uses of Funds budgeting, and g) investor capitalization and valuation techniques for privately-held companies.

ACCT 6381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

ACCT 6390 Seminar in Accounting Research Prerequisite(s): None
Independent instructor-guided research in accounting topics of current interest. Research areas may include financial accounting, cost accounting, auditing, and taxation.


Armed Force Science (AFSC) Course Descriptions

AFSC 1201 Foundations of the USAF I Prerequisite(s): None
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Air Force ROTC at University of Houston.

AFSC 1202 Foundations of the USAF II Prerequisite(s): None
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Air Force ROTC at University of Houston.

AFSC 2201 Evolution of Air Power I Prerequisite(s): None
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Air Force ROTC at University of Houston.

AFSC 2202 Evolution of Air Power II Prerequisite(s): None
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Air Force ROTC at University of Houston.

AFSC 3301 Air Force Leadership I Prerequisite(s): None
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Air Force ROTC at University of Houston.

AFSC 3302 Air Force Leadership II Prerequisite(s): None
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Air Force ROTC at University of Houston.

AFSC 3801 Field Training Prerequisite(s): None
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Air Force ROTC at University of Houston.

AFSC 4301 National Security Affairs I Prerequisite(s): None
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Air Force ROTC at University of Houston.

AFSC 4302 National Security Affairs II Prerequisite(s): None
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Air Force ROTC at University of Houston.


Apologetics (APOL) Course Descriptions

APOL 3301 Worldview Apologetics: 'Testing Everything' with C.S. Lewis & Francis Schaeffer Prerequisite(s): Junior/Senior Standing
The course begins with a focused, in-depth reading of Lewis and Schaeffer. Then it examines thinkers who serve as models of how to extend and apply, or revise and modify, their apologetics arguments, and may include works by Nancy Pearcey, Alvin Plantinga, Herman Dooyeweerd, J. Richard Pearcey, Albert Wolters, Mark Noll, George Marsden, Gene Edward Veith, and many others, enriched by shorter readings such as articles, book excerpts, and primary source documents.

APOL 3302 Worldview Apologetics: Surviving and Thriving at the University Prerequisite(s): Junior/Senior Standing
This course provides students with tools to analyze the prevailing secular theories across a variety of fields, to think critically about underlying assumptions, and to argue persuasively for a credible Christian perspective. The course gives a worldview introduction to several subject areas, which may include math, English, science, business, political philosophy, the arts & humanities. Readings include books specific to each of the subject areas, enriched by shorter readings such as articles, book excerpts, and primary source documents.

APOL 3303 Apologetics for Everyone Prerequisite(s): None
A survey of the contemporary approaches to apologetics, including philosophical apologetics, cultural apologetics, and biblical apologetics. The course will also introduce students to some contemporary issues in apologetics, such as the relationship between science and faith, and common challenges to traditional Christian ethics.

APOL 3304 Scripture and Apologetics Prerequisite(s): CHRI 1301
A course designed to introduce students to biblical apologetics, including an analysis of contemporary methods of biblical criticism, views of the inspiration of scripture, defense of the trustworthiness of the scriptural narratives, and the historicity of the resurrection.

APOL 3381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

APOL 4301 Apologetics Communication Prerequisite(s): None
A practical course designed to help students develop the ability to communicate effectively through public speaking, social media, interpersonal communication, popular writing, and debate.

APOL 4302 Science and Faith Prerequisite(s): PHIL 1313
This course will examine the relationship between science and faith, including an examination of the reasons for a perceived tension between the two in modern history, and various models for how the two can be mutually enriching.

APOL 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

APOL 5111 Mentored Ministry Prerequisite(s): None
An internship in a ministry program. HCU faculty will provide oversight and mentorship in partnership with a ministry. Can be taken multiple times for credit.

APOL 5181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

APOL 5211 Mentored Ministry Prerequisite(s): None
An internship in a ministry program. HCU faculty will provide oversight and mentorship in partnership with a ministry. Can be taken multiple times for credit.

APOL 5281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

APOL 5310 Apologetics Research and Writing Prerequisite(s): None
A practical course designed to develop graduate-level writing and reading skills and introduce students to writing in the discipline of apologetics. The course will focus on developing a robust drafting, writing, and revision process; using primary and secondary source materials; writing with clarity and correctness; and writing for both academic and popular audiences. Readings will introduce students to both philosophical and cultural apologetics.

APOL 5311 Mentored Ministry Prerequisite(s): None
An internship in a ministry program. HCU faculty will provide oversight and mentorship in partnership with a ministry. Can be taken multiple times for credit.

APOL 5315 Evangelism for Everyone Prerequisite(s): None
An introductory study of personal evangelism designed to equip students to understand their cultural context, to share the gospel naturally and effectively, and to respond appropriately to issues raised as they communicate their faith in Christ.

APOL 5320 Philosophy of Religion: Faith & Reason Prerequisite(s): None
This course will deal with basic issues in philosophy of religion, such as: theistic arguments, the problem of evil, the relationship between faith and reason, miracles, and life after death. (Offered as PHIL 5320.)

APOL 5325 Introduction to Missions Prerequisite(s): None
This course of study is designed to introduce the student to the biblical, theological, historical, and practical basis for Christian missions. Special attention will be given to current practices and contemporary issues related to global missions.

APOL 5330 Ancient Philosophy and Culture Prerequisite(s): None
Christianity was shaped by Jewish, Roman, and Greek cultural forces. This class will examine the Classical heritage

of the Faith. Class will survey ancient philosophy, theater, and poetry. The course will survey texts such as Theogony, Odyssey, Bacchae, Frogs, Republic, Aeneid, and Metamorphosis to examine the roots of contemporary Western Christian faith.

APOL 5340 Medieval Philosophy & Culture Prerequisite(s): None
A survey of the ideas, cultural developments, and literature of Medieval Europe, from the Fall of Rome to the beginning of the Renaissance. The course will cover topics such as the medieval Christian contribution to science, philosophy, art, and education; the rise of Islam and the Christian response; and the integration of faith and reason as expressed in medieval literature, art, and philosophy.

APOL 5350 Modern and Postmodern Culture Prerequisite(s): None
An exploration of ideas and cultural developments from the 16th Century to the present, focusing especially on the relationship between reason and faith, the cultural consequences of modernity, and the apologetics challenges and opportunities of the present day. Students will read philosophical, cultural, and literary texts by a range of authors, including some non-Christians. Apologetics topics include issues such as doubt and suffering; pro-life issues; sexuality and marriage; and the integration of reason and imagination into apologetics.

APOL 5360 Film, the Visual Arts, and Apologetics Prerequisite(s): None
An exploration of the potential of film and visual art for use in apologetics, focusing on the principles of interpreting artworks, especially with regard to discerning the worldviews embodied in particular artworks and using artworks to foster dialogue on apologetics issues.

APOL 5370 C. S. Lewis and Imaginative Apologetics Prerequisite(s): None
C. S. Lewis is the most influential public apologist of the 20th century, and his influence continues to grow. This course will explore Lewis's thought as expressed in his fiction, poetry, apologetics, and/or academic works, and assess his contribution to the work of imaginative apologetics.

APOL 5380 'Mere Christian' Theology and Apologetics Implications Prerequisite(s): None
An examination of the rational coherence of core Christian doctrines, including the Trinity, the Incarnation, and the Resurrection. Other topics may include Christian Exclusivism, Substitutionary Atonement, Heaven and Hell, etc.

APOL 5381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

APOL 5382: Readings in Apologetics Prerequisite(s): None
Involves selected primary and secondary apologetics readings within specific areas as designated by the professor.

APOL 6310 Apologetics Communication Prerequisite(s): None
A practical course designed to develop techniques used in interpersonal, group, public, social media and other mass communication settings. The focus will be on developing individual ability to communicate Christian thought for effective engagement with culture.

APOL 6320 Science and Faith Prerequisite(s): None
This course will explore the history of the relationship between science and religion, including the alleged hostility between the two. It will examine various accounts of the compatibility between the two and ways they can be understood as mutually enriching. Other topics in the philosophy of science and how they interact with theism may

be considered. (Offered also as PHIL 6320.)

APOL 6321 Philosophy of History and the Resurrection Prerequisite(s): None
Philosophical assumptions affecting the study of history will be examined and dealing explicitly with miraculous occurrences, and most especially, evidences for the resurrection of Christ.

APOL 6322 Philosophical Theology Prerequisite(s): None
A rigorous examination of the coherence of theism that addresses the Biblical justification and the proper conceptual formulation (or qualification) of divine attributes such as incorporeality, necessary existence, aseity, eternality, simplicity, omnipotence, omniscience, divine goodness and moral perfection, and the philosophical formulation of historically orthodox doctrines of the Trinity, the Incarnation, justification and the Atonement, divine creation and providence, the nature of the Eucharist, the nature of the indwelling of the Holy Spirit, and questions of individual and universal eschatology.

APOL 6323 Philosophical Apologetics: Frameworks and Issues Prerequisite(s): None
An introduction to different apologetic methodologies and kinds of argument used in the defense of the Christian faith. The relative merits of classical apologetics/natural theology, evidentialism, presuppositionalism, reformed epistemology, and cumulative case methodologies will be discussed while addressing theistic arguments relying on reason, natural and historical evidences, revelation, and subjective religious experience.

APOL 6324 Theistic Arguments Prerequisite(s): None
An examination of the nature of theistic proofs that focuses on rigorous consideration of various theistic arguments from the standpoint of modern analytic philosophy of religion. Cosmological arguments, teleological arguments, ontological arguments, arguments from providence, moral arguments, arguments from consciousness, arguments from religious experience, arguments from miracles and historical evidences, prudential arguments (e.g., Pascal's wager), and more may be considered.

APOL 6325 Theistic Ethics and Moral Apologetics Prerequisite(s): None
Various arguments grounding objective morality in the existence of God will be considered, as will various forms of the moral argument for God's existence. The nature of divine moral perfection and the dialectic among divine love, mercy and justice may be considered, along with the philosophical problem of evil and moral tensions in the Bible (animal sacrifices, capital punishment for non-capital offenses, the Canaanite conquest, etc.).
APOL 6330 World Religions Prerequisite(s): None
A course exploring world religions and the Christian response to them. Particular emphasis will be on the way in which one can engage participants in non-Christian religions and communicate Christian thought in various cultures.

APOL 6331 Leadership and Evangelism in the Local Church Prerequisite(s): None
This course will study strategies for increasing the effectiveness of evangelism training and outreach in the context of the local church.
APOL 6332 Evangelism Through Small Groups Prerequisite(s): None
This class will train students to facilitate small groups designed to help non-Christians work through their spiritual questions, make biblical discoveries, and move toward faith in Christ. It will also examine strategies for churches and ministries to leverage evangelistic small groups to impact their communities.

APOL 6333 Apologetics and Evangelism in Practice Prerequisite(s): None
This advanced course in apologetics and evangelism will train students to incorporate apologetics in evangelism. It

will be heavily focused on examining individual and institutional case studies.

APOL 6336 Missional Church Planting Prerequisite(s): None
This advanced course in church planting addresses the biblical basis, missiological principles, and methods necessary for planting domestic and cross-cultural churches, with an emphasis on the cultural context.

APOL 6340 Eastern Philosophy and Culture Prerequisite(s): None
A course exploring Eastern philosophy and culture and the Christian response to them. Particular emphasis will be on the way in which one can engage participants in non-Christian religions and communicate Christian thought in various cultures.

APOL 6350 The Problem of Evil Prerequisite(s): None
This course will examine the problem of evil as a challenge to theistic and Christian belief, and explore different responses to the challenge, both classic and contemporary.

APOL 6360 Moral Realism Prerequisite(s): None
This course explores the question of whether moral realism is true. Standing at odds with moral realism are error theory, expressivism, constructivism, and sensibility theory. This course will examine each of these theories in some detail and subject them to critical scrutiny, as well as offering several reasons to think that moral realism is indeed true.

APOL 6361 Theistic Ethics Prerequisite(s): None
Designed to explore whether the facts and phenomena of morality, realistically construed, evidentially point to God, this course will answer the question in two ways. It first explores a variety of objections to such a notion, most deriving from the Euthyphro Dilemma, then investigates ways in which morality arguably suggests God as its best, only, only possible, possible, or plausible explanation.

APOL 6362 Secular Ethics Prerequisite(s): None
This course examines and subjects to critical scrutiny a range of ethical accounts. Secular and naturalistic theories will be discussed, both those among the Cornell realists and among the nonnaturalists. It will also look at the ethical frameworks of such worldviews as pantheism and panentheism, along with various religious accounts, asking how well such views account for binding moral obligations, the value of human persons, moral knowledge, moral evil, moral transformation, and moral rationality.

APOL 6363 History of the Moral Argument Prerequisite(s): None
This course draws the various threads together while examining the history of the moral argument. Among the luminaries of this history include Immanuel Kant, John Henry Newman, William Sorley, A. E. Taylor, Hastings Rashdall, and C. S. Lewis. The course will also canvass an array of more contemporary theorists, ranging from A. C. Ewing to Austin Farrer, George Mavrodes to Clement Dore, Linda Zagzebski to J. P Moreland, John Hare to Robert Adams, William Lane Craig to C. Stephen Layman.

APOL 6370 Literature and Apologetics Prerequisite(s): None
An exploration of the use of literature in apologetics, focusing on the theory and practice of imagination as a mode of knowing and communicating truth. Theoretical perspectives will include those of C.S. Lewis, George MacDonald, and J.R.R. Tolkien. Other materials will include a range of classic and contemporary texts that explore theological themes in both fictional and non- fictional modes, by Christian and even occasionally by non-Christian authors.

APOL 6375 Creative Writing and Apologetics Prerequisite(s): None
This course is an exploration of the practice of creative writing as a mode of cultural apologetics. Students will read and analyze classic and contemporary texts with regard to genre, form, style, and technique, and will write and workshop their own creative pieces, including poetry, fiction, and literary nonfiction, culminating in a critical reflection and portfolio. The course will also include theoretical perspectives on creative writing as a mode of imaginative apologetics. Other topics that may be covered include publication options, multi-media creative writing, and writing for children and young adults.

APOL 6380 Scripture and Apologetics Implications Prerequisite(s): None
A survey and evaluation of contemporary methods of biblical criticism and their implications for the authority of scripture, the historical reliability of scriptural narratives, and the doctrine of inspiration.

APOL 6381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

APOL 6390 Thesis Prerequisite(s): None
This course, which should be taken in the final semester of the program as a culminating project, focuses on independent research and writing to produce a thesis. The course is designed for students who intend to go on to a doctoral program or do academic research and publication in the field of apologetics.


Biblical Aramaic (ARAM) Course Descriptions

ARAM 4310 Biblical Aramaic Prerequisite(s): HEBR 2312 and HEBR 2322 and HEBR 3311
An introduction to the vocabulary, grammar, and syntax of biblical Aramaic designed to give the students the skills necessary for translation and interpretation of the Aramaic portions of the Bible.

ARAM 5310 Biblical Aramaic Prerequisite(s): HEBR 5301 and HEBR 5302 and HEBR 6301
An introduction to the vocabulary, grammar, and syntax of biblical Aramaic designed to give the students the skills necessary for translation and interpretation of the Aramaic portions of the Bible.

ARAM 5381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.


Art History (ARHS) Course Descriptions

ARHS 5319 Structures of Poetry Prerequisite(s): None
Structures of Poetry teaches students to read poetry thoughtfully, accurately, and wisely. Students who are experienced with reading poetry will emerge from this course as capable readers. Students who have read much poetry will emerge from this course with a much fuller understanding for the way a poem functions.

ARHS 5328 The Holocaust: After 50 Years Prerequisite(s): None
Students read poetry, fiction, personal narratives, and essays that reflect the Holocaust experience. Through their reading and research papers, a visit to the Holocaust Museum, and viewing films, students come to understand the

history of anti-Semitism and how it culminated in the greatest crime against humanity of the 20th century. Students also consider subsequent genocides and discuss whether or not the hope "Never again" can ever be realized.

ARHS 5340 Expressionism and the Arts Prerequisite(s): None
This course will examine the expressive aspects of the Hellenistic, Baroque, and Romantic eras, but will emphasize the artistic movement of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries known as Expressionism. Emphasis will be on the European and American experience.

ARHS 5382 The Greek World Prerequisite(s): None
This course introduces students to the world of Ancient Greece. The goals of the course are to read the foundational texts of the Archaic, Classical, and Hellenistic periods, to place them in their historical, philosophical, and archaeological contexts, and to consider their impact on western civilization. Authors read in this class may include: Homer, Aeschylus, Sophocles, Euripides, Aristophanes, Plato, Aristotle, and Thucydides.

ARHS 5383 The Roman World Prerequisite(s): None
This course introduces students to the world of Ancient Rome. The goals of the course are: to read the foundational texts of the Republican and Imperial periods, to place them in their historical, philosophical, and archaeological contexts, to understand the interrelationship between the Greek and Roman worlds, to discuss the emergence of Christianity in its classical context, and to consider the impact of Ancient Rome on western civilization. Authors read in this class may include: Vergil, Cicero, Lucretius, Horace, Plautus, Terrence, Suetonius, Tacitus, and Pliny.

ARHS 5384 The Medieval World Prerequisite(s): None
This course introduces students to the Medieval World. The goals of the course are to read the foundational texts of the Medieval period, to place them in their historical, philosophical, and architectural contexts, to understand the relationship between the Classical Antiquity and the emergence of Christian Europe, and to consider the impact of the Medieval period on western civilization. Authors read in this class may include: Boethius, Augustine, Aquinas, Dante, Bede, and Chaucer.

ARHS 5385 The Renaissance and Reformation Prerequisite(s): None
This course introduces students to the period of the Renaissance and Reformation. The goals of the course are: to read the foundational texts of the Reformation period, to place them in their historical, philosophical, and religious contexts, to understand the relationship between the Classical Antiquity, the middle ages, and the emergence of early modern Europe, and to consider the impact of the Renaissance and Reformation on western civilization. Authors read in this class may include: Luther, Calvin, Machiavelli, Erasmus, Petrarch, Shakespeare, Milton, and Donne.

ARHS 5386 The Enlightenment Prerequisite(s): None
This course introduces students to the period of the Enlightenment. The goals of the course are: to read the foundational texts of the Enlightenment period, to place them in their historical, philosophical, scientific and religious contexts, to understand the relationship between the Classical Antiquity, the scientific revolution, and the emergence of representative democracy, and to consider the impact of the Enlightenment on western civilization. Authors read in this class may include: Locke, Hobbes, Pope, Swift, Austen, Voltaire, Rousseau, and Kant.

ARHS 5387 The Modern World Prerequisite(s): None
This course introduces students to the period of Romanticism and Modernity. The goals of the course are to read the foundational texts of Romanticism and Modernism, to place them in their historical, philosophical, scientific, and religious contexts, to understand the relationship between Romanticism and Modernism, and to consider the impact of these movements on the post-modern world. Authors read in this class may include Goethe, Wordsworth, Nietzsche, Eliot, Einstein, and Beckett.

ARHS 5388 The Last Fifty Years Prerequisite(s): None
This course introduces students to recent developments in western civilization. Special attention will be given to Postmodernism and how has it influenced American culture. The goals of the course are: to examine the critical, moral, political, economic, and social questions of the 20th century, and to understand the connection between this period and those that have preceded it. Special attention will be given to primary source readings.

ARHS 5390 Western Culture and Human Experience Prerequisite(s): None
These courses are a core component of the MLA program and offer a broad overview of history, politics, art, and philosophy. MLA 5390 will cover the years from the time of classical Greece through the medieval period; MLA 5391 will cover the Renaissance, Reformation, and Early Modern period; MLA 5392 will cover from the French revolution through Modern times.

ARHS 5391 Western Culture and Human Experience II Prerequisite(s): None
This course offers a broad overview of history, politics, art, and philosophy. ARHS 5391 will cover the Renaissance, Reformation, and Early Modern periods.

ARHS 5392 Western Culture and Human Experience II Prerequisite(s): None
ARHS 5392 offers a broad overview of history, politics, art, and philosophy. The course will cover the period from the French revolution through Modern times.

ARHS 5393 Turning Points of the 19th Century Prerequisite(s): None
This course explores turning points and upheavals in Europe in the context of the Post-Industrial Revolution. The course covers Genre painting and Realism, leading to rebellious movements in the art world, including Impressionism, Post-Impressionism, Symbolism, and the beginnings of Expressionism at the turn of the century. Attention is also given to the formation of fine arts academies and the acceleration of art production in the late 19th century.

ARHS 5394 Shaping Modernism Prerequisite(s): None
This course begins at the turn of the 20th century and continues into the 1930’s. The art world is seen through the lens of the political and societal effects of the World Wars. The material investigates the ideas and impact of important Modern Art movements, including Expressionism, Dada, Futurism, Surrealism, Cubism, as well as art for art’s sake (Whistler), the Vienna Secession (Klimt), and Fauvism (Matisse). Special attention will also be given to International Exhibition of Modern Art in 1913, which would become the first Armory Show.

ARHS 6324 The Art of Being Human Prerequisite(s): None
This course is an introduction to the humanities. It reaffirms the liberal arts tradition that maintains that the humanities constitute the best and brightest expressions of all people. The emphasis is on the interaction between the arts, religion, and philosophy, and on the humanities, believing that this approach helps us to see artists and philosophers at work, trying to solve real problems that we all know about.

ARHS 6375 Van Gogh and the Post-Impressionist Movement Prerequisite(s): None
The course deals with the major formative phase of the modern movement in art. Both Impressionist and Post- Impressionist styles and artists will be examined. The focus of the course is concerned with the expressive and lively paintings of this modern master. His style will be traced from his early days in this native Holland, through his contact with the Impressionists in Paris, to his final days in Southern France.

ARHS 6376 Michelangelo and Leonardo Prerequisite(s): None
This course is concerned with a study of the art of two of the great masters of the High Renaissance in Italy—

Michelangelo Buonarroti and Leonardo da Vinci. These two great individuals, who have had a tremendous impact in western culture from their own times through our own era, will be studied through a variety of their works.

ARHS 6377 Contemporary Art Movements Prerequisite(s): None
This course is designed to provide an overview of the major visual art movements of the 20th century and to extend an investigation into the current art scene. An introduction will begin with study of the influence of late 19th century movements such as Impressionism, Post-Impressionism, and Art Noveau.

ARHS 6378 The Gothic Cathedral Prerequisite(s): None
This course examines the architectural development of the Christian Basilica from the middle of the twelfth through the sixteenth century. The Gothic Cathedral is an enduring symbol of the Middle Ages and provides one of the most important links between ancient and modern times.

ARHS 6385 Modern Architecture Prerequisite(s): None
This course is designed to provide an overview of the major developments of architecture of the 20th century pioneers. The study will include the following: the innovations of the tall buildings in America, the Bauhaus in Germany, the development of major masters of the 20th century, and new forms from new materials. An important objective of the course is to explore current architects and their contemporary efforts, and a substantial part of the course will include an investigation of the architecture of the metropolitan Houston area.

ARHS 6386 Art Impressionism Prerequisite(s): None
This course is designed to cover the movement of Impressionism in art during the latter part of the 19th century. It is recognized as the beginning point of the modern era in art. Works by the major artists of the group to be examined include Degas, Monet, Manet, Renoir, and Pissaro.

ARHS 6392 Modern Masters – Picasso Prerequisite(s): None
This course consists of a thorough study of the life and art of the twentieth-century master artist, Pablo Picasso. His long and productive career is studied in the context of the complex arena of twentieth century art.

ARHS 6393 The New and the Avant-Garde Prerequisite(s): None
This course begins with a shift in Western Art from Paris to New York and the end of WWII. New international collectives in art and architecture begin to form in Europe and the US, including Constructivism and Suprematism, the Bauhaus, as well as avant-garde methods of Abstraction and Color Field Painting. The Neo-Dada group, Fluxus, and other global art collectives are formed in the postwar era. American artists gain momentum and begin to form historical 20th century art movements impacted by a postwar economic boom, the beginning of the Civil Rights Movements, and the Cold War.

ARHS 6394 Postmodern to Present Prerequisite(s): None
This course recognizes the effect of global communication and mass production in the postmodern world. With particular focus on the United States, the course includes the larger movements of Abstract Expressionism in the 1950’s, leading to Pop Art of the 1960’s, followed by Minimalism, Feminism, Earthworks, Performance Art, Public Art, and the current climate of globalization in the 21st Century. The course will also connect this recent past to our more local present, by including special attention to exhibitions and artworks in Houston’s art spaces, as well as current events in media with discussion on how today’s working artists are both part of history and making new history.


ART (ART) Course Descriptions
ART 1303 Art Methods and Materials Prerequisite(s): None
An introductory course concerned with basic art techniques and materials. The student will become acquainted with processes and the materials of painting, drawing, printing, sculpture, and ceramics.

ART 1313 2D Design Prerequisite(s): None
In this introductory course, the student makes a thorough study of the principles and elements of design and visual devices that make up a work of art. By means of two and three-dimensional problems, students make personal application of these concepts.

ART 1323 3D Design Prerequisite(s): None
In this more advanced course, the student continues with a thorough study of the principles and elements of design and visual devices that make up a work of art. By means of two and three-dimensional problems, students make personal application of these concepts.

ART 2181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

ART 2343 Art Appreciation Prerequisite(s): None
This course provides a comparative analysis of various modes of expression in all of the visual arts through description and evaluation. Emphasis is made upon historical movements, language, media, and stylistic identity. The survey is designed to prompt the student to see art as a personal experience and to respond more sensitively to the visual arts in a cultural context.

ART 2372 Water Media - Painting I Prerequisite(s): None
During this course students will be introduced to the use and development of water media techniques, both transparent and opaque. These courses will serve as preparatory for upper level painting classes both advanced and experimental.

ART 2380 Printmaking I: Basic Prerequisite(s): None
This course begins a series of introductory experiences to printmaking procedures in relief, intaglio, lithography, serigraphy, and experimental forms. The course will introduce the student to a broad understanding of the possibilities of the printmaking media. Individual solutions are encouraged after basic technical procedure has been learned.

ART 2381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

ART 2384 Sculpture I: Basic Prerequisite(s): None
In this course emphasis is placed on beginning a basic understanding of three-dimensional design problems and an initial exploration of various media in a variety of approaches including additive, subtractive, manipulative, and casting techniques.

ART 2387 Life Drawing I: Basic Prerequisite(s): ART 2394
This figure drawing class is a basic introduction to the following techniques, skills, and knowledge: gesture drawing, contour, cross contour, flash pose, memory drawing, descriptive poses, moving action, modeled drawing, descriptive poses, quick contour, extended contour, the long composition, studies of body parts, water color studies, oil studies.

ART 2391 Ceramics I: Basic Prerequisite(s): None
In this introductory course, students work with hand-built and wheel-thrown techniques of forming pottery. Experimentation with glaze formulation, glazing, firing and the search for a form language that expresses the individual are emphasized.

ART 2394 Drawing I: Basic Prerequisite(s): None
This course introduces students to basic exercises using various drawing media and subject matter with an emphasis on the human figure. Anatomical rendering, contour, and value drawing are studies that will be utilized in the student's ultimate development toward a personal approach to drawing.

ART 2397 Painting I: Basic Prerequisite(s): None
This introduction to studio experiences course is based on problems designed to acquaint the student with the possibilities of various painting media and approaches to painting. Students are encouraged to explore and develop a personal direction for their work.

ART 3305 Art for the Secondary School Prerequisite(s): Admission to the HCU Educator Preparation Program
This course involves the production of art using media and processes considered appropriate for middle school and senior high school art programs. Emphasis is placed on combining technique, exploration of media, and interrelation of art appreciation with art activities.

ART 3330 Gallery and Museum Practices Prerequisite(s): None
The course allows students a hands-on participation of fine arts gallery management and a formal study of museum operations. Students study major art facilities in Houston and collectively organize an art exhibition as part of their course of study.

ART 3331 Gallery and Museum Practices Prerequisite(s): None
The course allows students a hands-on participation of fine arts gallery management and a formal study of museum operations. Students study major art facilities in Houston and collectively organize an art exhibition as part of their course of study.

ART 3332 Gallery and Museum Practices Prerequisite(s): None
The course allows students a hands-on participation of fine arts gallery management and a formal study of museum operations. Students study major art facilities in Houston and collectively organize an art exhibition as part of their course of study.

ART 3335 Color Theory Prerequisite(s): None
An introductory course concerned with basic art techniques and materials of the study of color. The student will become acquainted with processes and the materials of understanding and applying color theory. The course will first develop the vocabulary of color followed by the construction of the color wheel and other significant color structure formations. A major part of the course will be dedicated to the studio application of painting, drawing and design color applications by the students. The course will include the following applications of color studies: vocabulary of color, theories of color, applying color theory, color wheels, naming colors, three attributes of color, mixing of color, moving from theory to practice, using value of color, using intensity of color, using harmony of color, color in nature, symbolism of color, and creating a personal palette of color.

ART 3353 History of Art: Prehistoric through Gothic Prerequisite(s): None
Painting, sculpture, and architecture are reflections of man's thinking (social, religious, and political) and the means through which he has sought to satisfy needs common to man of every age. The unique contribution made by each

culture toward our art heritage is stressed along with influences of one culture on another.

ART 3355 Experimental Drawing Prerequisite(s): ART 2394 or ART 2395 or ART 2396
Directed study of a minimum of thirty clock hours for each hour of credit. Topics and projects are selected based on student interest and need. Open to art majors only

ART 3363 History of Art: Renaissance through Modern Prerequisite(s): None
Beginning with the sixteenth century, this course traces the development of modern art movements. Stylization, social factors, and important innovations that shape the destiny of man and his arts will be considered.

ART 3370 Printmaking II: Basic Prerequisite(s): ART 2380
This course begins a more refined experience of learning printmaking procedures in relief, intaglio, lithography, serigraphy, and experimental forms. The course will give the student a more developed understanding of the possibilities of the printmaking media. Individual solutions are encouraged after basic technical procedure has been learned.

ART 3372 Water Media – Painting II Prerequisite(s): None
During this course students will have an intermediate experience in the use and development of water media techniques, both transparent and opaque. These courses will serve as preparatory for upper level painting classes both advanced and experimental.

ART 3373 History of Modern Art Prerequisite(s): None
This course is an overview of the development of the visual arts during the latter part of the nineteenth through the entire twentieth century. Beginning with the Post-Impressionist movement in Europe and continuing through the multitude of 'isms' of the twentieth century, the study will progress to the present day Avant Garde ideas of the art world. Modern art masters such as Matisse, Picasso, Duchamp, Pollock, and Rothko will be a focus of the course. Movements such as Cubism, Abstract Expressionism, Dadaism, Pop Art, and Avant Gardism will be presented as each flows through the entirety of the modern movement.

ART 3374 Printmaking II: Intermediate Prerequisite(s): ART 2380
This course continues a more refined experience of learning printmaking procedures in relief, intaglio, lithography, serigraphy, and experimental forms. The course will give the student a more developed understanding of the possibilities of the printmaking media. Individual solutions are encouraged after basic technical procedure has been learned.

ART 3375 Art of the Renaissance Prerequisite(s): None
Michelangelo, Leonardo, and Raphael created art in one of the most fascinating historical and artistic periods in Western culture, the High Renaissance. From debunking the Da Vinci code to treasure hunting for Bruegel's proverbs, this course not only focuses on some of the world's greatest achievements in art and the individuals responsible for making them, it sets the stage for art in Western culture for centuries to come.

ART 3376 Printmaking II: Advanced Prerequisite(s): ART 2380
This course concludes a more refined experience of learning printmaking procedures in relief, intaglio, lithography, serigraphy, and experimental forms. The course will give the student a more developed understanding of the possibilities of the printmaking media. Individual solutions are encouraged after basic technical procedure has been learned.

ART 3380 American Art Prerequisite(s): None
From New York to Los Angeles, from Native America to Jackson Pollock, this course traverses the US geographically, philosophically and socially in search of major influences on and developments in American Art. Students will explore art made outside the European canon and develop an awareness and appreciation for the American heritage in artistic production.

ART 3381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

ART 3383 European Heritage in Art History Prerequisite(s): None
This course will occur during art study in Europe such as the Artis Study abroad program in Florence. Students will be based in Florence where they will attend daily walking lectures at most of the churches, museums and galleries of Florence. On-site lectures will be held five or more days a week and will vary each day depending on the site visited. Renaissance is the major area studied, though students electing a side trip to Germany during the month stay in Florence will also encounter contemporary art. During this study abroad semester, students will record detailed journal notes from each daily lecture.

ART 3384 Sculpture II: Basics Prerequisite(s): ART 2384
In this course emphasis is placed on beginning a refined understanding of many three-dimensional design problems and continuing to explore various media in a variety of approaches including additive, subtractive, manipulative, and casting techniques.

ART 3385 Experimental Drawing Prerequisite(s): ART 2394
Directed study of a minimum of thirty clock hours for each hour of credit. Topics and projects are selected based on student interest and need. Open to art majors only.

ART 3386 Sculpture II: Intermediate Prerequisite(s): ART 2384
In this course, emphasis is placed on continuing to develop a refined understanding of many three-dimensional design problems and continuing to explore various media in a variety of approaches including additive, subtractive, manipulative, and casting techniques.

ART 3387 Life Drawing II: Basic Prerequisite(s): ART 2387
This figure drawing class introduces a more developed experience of the following techniques, skills, and knowledge: Gesture drawing, contour, cross contour, flash pose, memory drawing, descriptive poses, moving action, modeled drawing, descriptive poses, quick contour, extended contour, the long composition, studies of body parts, water color studies, oil studies.

ART 3388 Life Drawing II: Refined Prerequisite(s): ART 2387
This figure drawing class continues with a more developed experience of the following techniques, skills and knowledge: Gesture drawing, contour, cross contour, flash pose, memory drawing, descriptive poses, moving action, modeled drawing, descriptive poses, quick contour, extended contour, the long composition, studies of body parts, water color studies, and oil studies.

ART 3389 Sculpture II: Applied Prerequisite(s): ART 2384
In this course, emphasis is placed on accomplishing a refined understanding of many three-dimensional design problems and continuing to explore various  media in a variety of approaches including additive, subtractive,

manipulative, and casting techniques.

ART 3391 Ceramics II: Basic Prerequisite(s): ART 2391
In this refined skills level course, students begin to mature in their work with hand-built and wheel-thrown techniques of forming pottery. Experimentation with glaze formulation, glazing, firing, and the search for a form
language that expresses the individual are emphasized.

ART 3392 Ceramics II: Intermediate Prerequisite(s): ART 2391
In this second refined skills level course, students continue to mature in their work with hand-built and wheel-thrown techniques of forming pottery. Experimentation continues with glaze formulation, glazing, firing, and the search for a form language that expresses the individual are emphasized.

ART 3393 Ceramics II: Advanced Prerequisite(s): ART 2391
In this third refined skills level course, students continue to mature in their work with hand-built and wheel-thrown techniques of forming pottery. Experimentation continues with glaze formulation, glazing, firing, and the search for a form language that expresses the individual are emphasized.

ART 3394 Drawing II: Basic Prerequisite(s): ART 2394
This course introduces students to a more refined series of drawing exercises using various media and subject matter with emphasis on the human figure. Anatomical rendering, contour and value drawing are studies that will be utilized in the student's ultimate development toward a personal approach to drawing.

ART 3395 Drawing II: Intermediate Prerequisite(s): ART 2394
This course continues to guide students through a series of refined drawing exercises using various media and subject matter with emphasis on the human figure. Anatomical rendering, contour and value drawing are studies that will be utilized in the student's ultimate development toward a personal approach to drawing.

ART 3396 Drawing II: Advanced Prerequisite(s): ART 2394
This course completes the refined series of drawing exercise using various media and subject matter with emphasis on the human figure. anatomical rendering, contour and value drawing are studies that will be utilized in the student's ultimate development toward a personal approach to drawing.

ART 3397 Painting II: Basic Prerequisite(s): ART 2397
This course begins a series of more refined studio experiences. It is based on problems designed to acquaint the student with the possibilities of various painting media and approaches to painting. Students are encouraged to explore and develop a personal direction for their work.

ART 3398 Painting II: Intermediate Prerequisite(s): ART 2397
This course continues a series of more refined studio experiences. It is based on problems designed to acquaint the student with the possibilities of various painting media and approaches to painting. Students are encouraged to explore and develop a personal direction for their work.

ART 3399 Painting II: Advanced Prerequisite(s): ART 2397
This course concludes a series of more refined studio experiences. It is based on problems designed to acquaint the student with the possibilities of various painting media and approaches to painting. Students are encouraged to explore and develop a personal direction for their work.

ART 4181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

ART 4361 Apprenticeship I: Advanced Studio Prerequisite(s): Advanced Studio Art (Ceramics, Drawing, Painting, Printmaking, Sculpture, or Water Media) course at either the 3000 or 4000 level
The HCU Art Apprenticeship Program is an art studio concentration for individual art students who are accepted on an individual basis to do academic work in an apprentice capacity with one of the artist-in-residence members of the faculty. The students will be accepted into the program by invitation from the department chairman upon a review of the student's portfolio and academic records by the department's artists-in-residence. Upon acceptance into the program, the student will work toward individual semester hours designed as Apprenticeship credit hours.

ART 4362 Apprenticeship II: Advanced Studio Prerequisite(s): Advanced Studio Art (Ceramics, Drawing, Painting, Printmaking, Sculpture, or Water Media) course at either the 3000 or 4000 level
The HCU Art Apprenticeship Program is an art studio concentration for individual art students who are accepted on an individual basis to do academic work in an apprentice capacity with one of the artist-in-residence members of the faculty. The students will be accepted into the program by invitation from the department chairman upon a review of the student's portfolio and academic records by the department's artists-in-residence. Upon acceptance into the program, the student will work toward individual semester hours designed as Apprenticeship credit hours.

ART 4363 Apprenticeship III: Advanced Studio Prerequisite(s): Advanced Studio Art (Ceramics, Drawing, Painting, Printmaking, Sculpture, or Water Media) course at either the 3000 or 4000 level
The HCU Art Apprenticeship Program is an art studio concentration for individual art students who are accepted on an individual basis to do academic work in an apprentice capacity with one of the artist-in-residence members of the faculty. The students will be accepted into the program by invitation from the department chairman upon a review of the student's portfolio and academic records by the department's artists-in-residence. Upon acceptance into the program, the student will work toward individual semester hours designed as Apprenticeship credit hours.

ART 4364 Experimental Painting Prerequisite(s): ART 2397 and (ART 3397 or ART 3398 or ART 3399)
Directed study of a minimum of thirty hours for each hour of credit. Topics and projects are selected based on student interest and need. Open to art majors only

ART 4372 Water Media - Painting III Prerequisite(s): None
During this course, students will have an advanced experience in the use and development of water media techniques, both transparent and opaque. These courses will serve as preparatory for upper-level painting classes--both advanced and experimental.

ART 4380 Printmaking III: Basic Prerequisite(s): ART 3370 or ART 3374 or ART 3376
This course begins the final more complex series of printmaking learning experiences. Students in this course will start to apply more highly developed printmaking procedures in relief, intaglio, lithography, serigraphy, and experimental forms. The course will give the student a more sophisticated understanding of the possibilities of the printmaking media. Individual solutions are encouraged after basic technical procedure has been learned.

ART 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

ART 4382 Printmaking III: Intermediate Prerequisite(s): ART 3370 or ART 3374 or ART 3376
This course continues the final more complex series of printmaking learning experiences. Students in this course will apply more highly developed printmaking procedures in relief, intaglio, lithography, serigraphy, and experimental forms. The course will give the student a more sophisticated understanding of the possibilities of the printmaking media. Individual solutions are encouraged after basic technical procedure has been learned.

ART 4383 Printmaking III: Advanced Prerequisite(s): ART 3370 or ART 3374 or ART 3376
This course completes the final more complex series of printmaking learning experiences. Students in this course will apply more highly developed printmaking procedures in relief, intaglio, lithography, serigraphy, and experimental forms. The course will give the student a more sophisticated understanding of the possibilities of the printmaking media. Individual solutions are encouraged after basic technical procedure has been learned.

ART 4384 Sculpture III: Basics Prerequisite(s): ART 3384 or ART 3386 or ART 3389
In this course, students begin to develop a more advanced understanding of the many three-dimensional design problems associated with sculpture. Students will continue their exploration of various media in a variety of approaches including additive, subtractive, manipulative, and casting techniques.

ART 4385 Sculpture III: Intermediate Prerequisite(s): ART 3384 or ART 3386 or ART 3389
In this course, students continue to develop a more advanced understanding of the many three-dimensional design problems associated with sculpture. Students will continue their exploration of various media in a variety of approaches including additive, subtractive, manipulative, and casting techniques.

ART 4386 Sculpture III: Advanced Prerequisite(s): ART 3384 or ART 3386 or ART 3389
In this course, students complete a more advanced understanding of the many three-dimensional design problems associated with sculpture. Students will continue their exploration of various media in a variety of approaches including additive, subtractive, manipulative, and casting techniques.

ART 4387 Life Drawing III: Basic Prerequisite(s): ART 3387 and ART 3388
This figure drawing introduces students to an advanced experience with the following techniques, skills, and knowledge: Gesture drawing, contour, cross contour, flash pose, memory drawing, descriptive poses, moving action, modeled drawing, descriptive poses, quick contour, extended contour, the long composition, studies of body parts, water color studies, oil studies.

ART 4388 Life Drawing III: Refined Prerequisite(s): ART 3387 and ART 3388
This figure drawing class completes the advanced experience with the following techniques, skills, and knowledge: Gesture drawing, contour, cross contour, flash pose, memory drawing, descriptive poses, moving action, modeled drawing, descriptive poses, quick contour, extended contour, the long composition, studies of body parts, water color studies, oil studies.

ART 4390 Ceramics III: Basic Prerequisite(s): ART 3391 or ART 3392 or ART 3393
In this first advanced course, students begin to produce more complex work with hand-built and wheel-thrown techniques of forming pottery. Experimentation continues with glaze formulation, glazing, firing, and the search for a form language that expresses the individual are emphasized.

ART 4391 Ceramics III: Intermediate Prerequisite(s): ART 3391 or ART 3392 or ART 3393
In this second advanced course, students carry on with more complex work using hand-built and wheel-thrown techniques of forming pottery. Experimentation continues with glaze formulation, glazing, firing, and the search for a form language that expresses the individual are emphasized.

ART 4392 Senior Seminar: Studio Prerequisite(s): See Senior Seminar note in "Undergraduate Degree Requirements" in the HCU Catalog.
This course provides a format for the production of a body of art works in a studio setting. The student will go through a process in which s/h presents a written document presenting the proposal for the body of works, the process by which the works are to be made or produced, and the aesthetic ideas which are the basis of the works. Part of the research includes meeting with the entire Art faculty for the purpose of enriching the possibilities for the chosen media. The final grade will be determined by a jury of the entire Art faculty.

ART 4393 Ceramics III: Advanced Prerequisite(s): ART 3391 or ART 3392 or ART 3393
In this third advanced course, students complete complex work with hand-built and wheel-thrown techniques of forming pottery. Experimentation concludes with glaze formulations, glazing, firing, and the search for a form language that expresses the individual are emphasized.

ART 4394 Drawing III: Basic Prerequisite(s): ART 3398 or ART 3395 or ART 3396
This course begins the final series of drawing courses. This course introduces students to more complex exercises using various drawing media and subject matter with emphasis on the human figure. Anatomical rendering, contour and value drawing are studies that will be utilized in the student's ultimate development toward a personal approach to drawing.

ART 4395 Drawing III: Intermediate Prerequisite(s): ART 3394 or ART 3395 or ART 3396
This course continues the final series of drawing courses. Students in this course will work on more complex drawing exercises using various media and subject matter with emphasis on the human figure. Anatomical rendering, contour, and value drawing are studies that will be utilized in the student's ultimate development toward a personal approach to drawing.

ART 4396 Drawing III: Advanced Prerequisite(s): ART 3398 or ART 3395 or ART 3396
This course completes the final series of drawing courses. Students in this course will continue to work on complex drawing exercises using various drawing media and subject matter with emphasis on the human figure. Anatomical rendering, contour and value drawing are studies that will be utilized in the student's ultimate development toward a personal approach to drawing.

ART 4397 Painting III: Basic Prerequisite(s): ART 3397 or ART 3398 or ART 3399
This course begins the more complex series of studio experiences based on problems designed to acquaint the student with the possibilities of various painting media and approaches to painting. Students are encouraged to explore and develop a personal direction for their work.

ART 4398 Painting III: Intermediate Prerequisite(s): ART 3397 or ART 3398 or ART 3399
This course continues the more complex series of studio experiences based on problems designed to acquaint the student with the possibilities of various painting media and approaches to painting. Students are encouraged to explore and develop a personal direction for their work.

ART 4399 Painting III: Advanced Prerequisite(s): ART 3397 or ART 3398 or ART 3399
This course concludes the more complex series of studio experiences based on problems designed to acquaint the student with the possibilities of various painting media and approaches to painting. Students are encouraged to explore and develop a personal direction for their work.

ART 5311 Graduate Painting I Prerequisite(s): None

Graduate painting students will, in this introductory course, use a variety of painting processes including watercolor, oil, acrylic, and mixed media works to establish their central body of creative art. Interdisciplinary activities combining 2- dimensional and 3-dimensional processes will be acceptable. Students will be expected to continue their development toward a classical ability both in drawing and painting techniques and be prepared to explore thesis content in their painting activities.

ART 5312 Graduate Painting II Prerequisite(s): None
Graduate painting students will, in this second level course, continue in their use of a variety of painting processes including watercolor, oil, acrylic, and mixed media works to establish their central body of creative art. Interdisciplinary activities combining 2-dimensional and 3-dimensional processes will be acceptable. Students will be expected to continue their development toward a classical ability both in drawing and painting techniques and be prepared to explore thesis content in their painting activities.

ART 5313 Graduate Painting III Prerequisite(s): ART 5311 and ART 5312
Graduate painting students will, in this third level course, become more adept with a variety of painting processes including watercolor, oil, acrylic, and mixed media works to establish their central body of creative art. Interdisciplinary activities combining 2-dimensional and 3-dimensional processes will be acceptable. Students will be expected to continue their development toward a classical ability both in drawing and painting techniques and be prepared to explore thesis content in their painting activities.

ART 5314 Graduate Painting IV Prerequisite(s): ART 5311 and ART 5312
Graduate painting students will use a variety of painting processes including watercolor, oil, acrylic, and mixed media works to establish their central body of creative art. Interdisciplinary activities combining 2-dimensional and 3- dimensional processes will be acceptable. Students will be expected to continue their development toward a classical ability both in drawing and painting techniques and be prepared to explore their thesis content in painting activities. These courses in graduate painting focus on the development of an interdisciplinary professional discourse and creating works of art needed in order to master the fine art of painting. All activities of graduate painting are juxtaposed towards the creation of original works of art, which express the individual. These creative impulses are organized with the student through criticism by the professor. These critical thoughts lead towards the implementation of content and processes in the artists' work. When developed the critical and spiritual path of discoveries required of any professional artist will be fully achieved.

ART 5321 Graduate Drawing I Prerequisite(s): None
This course will introduce students to use the processes of wet and dry media, including watercolor, ink, charcoal, pastel, conté combined with new and experimental media including encaustic, rubbing, drawing ability, etc. Students will be expected to continue their development toward a classical ability drawing and be prepared to explore thesis content in their painting activities.

ART 5322 Graduate Drawing II Prerequisite(s): None
This course will continue to introduce students to use the processes of wet and dry media, including watercolor, ink, charcoal, pastel, conté combined with new and experimental media including encaustic, rubbing, etc. Students will be expected to continue their development toward a classical ability drawing and be prepared to explore thesis content in their painting activities.

ART 5323 Graduate Drawing III Prerequisite(s): ART 5321 and ART 5322
Students in this course will begin to become more adept in the use of processes of wet and dry media, including watercolor, ink, charcoal, pastel, conté combined with new and experimental media including encaustic, rubbing, etc. Students will be expected to continue their development toward a classical ability drawing and be prepared to explore thesis content in their painting activities.

ART 5324 Graduate Drawing IV Prerequisite(s): ART 5321 and ART 5322
This course will allow students to use the processes of wet and dry media, including watercolor, ink, charcoal, pastel, and conté combined with new and experimental media including encaustic, rubbing, etc. Students will be expected to continue their development toward a classical ability drawing and be prepared to explore thesis content in their painting activities.

ART 5331 Graduate Ceramics I Prerequisite(s): None
This course in Ceramics will require a high level of traditional skills in building 3-dimensional clay sculptural forms in addition to traditional ceramic techniques such as throwing, and hand-building. The course will combine experimental processes, glaze variations and clay body recipes for low and high range firing temperatures. Student's work will begin to achieve a thematic focus by the end of the semester.

ART 5332 Graduate Ceramics II Prerequisite(s): None
This course in Ceramics will require a high level of traditional skills in building 3-dimensional clay sculptural forms in addition to traditional ceramic techniques such as throwing, and hand-building. The course will combine experimental processes, glaze variations and clay body recipes for low and high range firing temperatures. Student's work will continue to achieve a thematic focus by the end of the semester.

ART 5333 Graduate Ceramics III Prerequisite(s): ART 5331 and ART 5332
This course in Ceramics will require a high level of traditional skills in building 3-dimensional clay sculptural forms in addition to traditional ceramic techniques such as throwing, and hand-building. The course will combine experimental processes, glaze variations and clay body recipes for low and high range firing temperatures. Student's work will begin to develop a more mature thematic focus by the end of the semester.

ART 5334 Graduate Ceramics IV Prerequisite(s): ART 5331 and ART 5332
This course combines, through experimental processes, glaze variations and clay body recipes for low and high range firing temperatures. This course will require a high level of traditional skills in building 3-dimensional clay sculptural forms in addition to traditional ceramic techniques such as throwing and hand-building. A student's work is expected to achieve a thematic focus by the end of the semester.

ART 5341 Graduate Sculpture I Prerequisite(s): None
In this graduate sculpture course, students will begin to learn how to translate drawings into 3-dimensional media such as steel, bronze, assemblage, found objects, wood, plaster, film, and installation including video and audio. Students will be expected to continue their development of drawing skills along with sculpture processes both subtractive and additive techniques. All techniques used in this course and the resulting projects culminate towards the student's thesis content.

ART 5342 Graduate Sculpture II Prerequisite(s): None
In this graduate sculpture course, students will begin to learn how to translate drawings into 3-dimensional media such as steel, bronze, assemblage, found objects, wood, plaster, film, and installation including video and audio. Students will be expected to continue their development of drawing skills along with sculpture processes both subtractive and additive techniques. All techniques used in this course and the resulting projects culminate towards the student's thesis content.

ART 5343 Graduate Sculpture III Prerequisite(s): ART 5341 and ART 5342
In this graduate sculpture course, students will begin to learn how to translate drawings into 3-dimensional media such as steel, bronze, assemblage, found objects, wood, plaster, film, and installation including video and audio. Students will be expected to continue their development of drawing skills along with sculpture processes both subtractive and

additive techniques. All techniques used in this course and the resulting projects culminate towards the student's thesis content.

ART 5344 Graduate Sculpture IV Prerequisite(s): ART 5341 and ART 5342
In this graduate sculpture course, students will begin to learn how to translate drawings into 3-dimensional media such as steel, bronze, assemblage, found objects, wood, plaster, film, and installation including video and audio. Students will be expected to continue their development of drawing skills along with sculpture processes both subtractive and additive techniques. All techniques used in this course and the resulting projects culminate towards the student's thesis content.

ART 5351 Graduate Printmaking I Prerequisite(s): None
This course will allow a student to begin to explore in new ways one or more of the following drawing and printmaking techniques: etching, silkscreen, woodblock printing, intaglio, mono printing in the traditional and digital processes. Students will discover a personal voice in preparation for the development of their thesis content. Students are expected to have a working knowledge of printmaking techniques before enrolling.

ART 5352 Graduate Printmaking II Prerequisite(s): None
This course will allow a student to explore in new ways one or more of the following drawing and printmaking techniques: etching, silkscreen, woodblock printmaking, intaglio, mono printing in the traditional and digital processes. Students will discover a personal voice in preparation for the development of their thesis content.

ART 5353 Graduate Printmaking III Prerequisite(s): ART 5351 and ART 5352
This course will allow a student to continue to explore in new ways one or more of the following drawing and printmaking techniques: etching, silkscreen, woodblock printing, intaglio, mono printing in the traditional and digital processes. Students will discover a personal voice in preparation for the development of their thesis content.

ART 5354 Graduate Printmaking IV Prerequisite(s): ART 5351 and ART 5352
This course will allow a student to begin to explore in new ways one or more of the following drawing and printmaking techniques: etching, silkscreen, woodblock printing, intaglio, mono printing in the traditional and digital processes. Students will discover a personal voice in preparation for the development of their thesis content. Students are expected to have a working knowledge of printmaking techniques before enrolling.

ART 5381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

ART 6315 Graduate Painting V Prerequisite(s): ART 5311 and ART 5312 and ART 5313 and ART 5314
Graduate painting students will use a variety of painting processes including watercolor, oil, acrylic, and mixed media works to establish their central body of creative art. Interdisciplinary activities combining 2-dimensional and 3- dimensional processes will be acceptable. Students will be expected to continue their development toward a classical ability both in drawing and painting techniques and be prepared to explore their thesis content in painting activities. These courses in graduate painting focus on the development of an interdisciplinary professional discourse and creating works of art needed in order to master the fine art of painting. All activities of graduate painting are juxtaposed towards the creation of original works of art, which express the individual. These creative impulses are organized with the student through criticism by the professor. These critical thoughts lead towards the implementation of content and processes in the artists' work. When developed the critical and spiritual path of discoveries required of any professional artist will be fully achieved.

ART 6316 Graduate Painting VI Prerequisite(s): ART 5311 and ART 5312 and ART 5313 and ART 5314
Graduate painting students will use a variety of painting processes including watercolor, oil, acrylic, and mixed media works to establish their central body of creative art. Interdisciplinary activities combining 2-dimensional and 3- dimensional processes will be acceptable. Students will be expected to continue their development toward a classical ability both in drawing and painting techniques and be prepared to explore their thesis content in painting activities. These courses in graduate painting focus on the development of an interdisciplinary professional discourse and creating works of art needed in order to master the fine art of painting. All activities of graduate painting are juxtaposed towards the creation of original works of art, which express the individual. These creative impulses are organized with the student through criticism by the professor. These critical thoughts lead towards the implementation of content and processes in the artists' work. When developed the critical and spiritual path of discoveries required of any professional artist will be fully achieved.

ART 6317 Graduate Painting VII Prerequisite(s): ART 5311 and ART 5312 and ART 5313 and ART 5314 and ART 6315 and ART 6316
Graduate painting students will use a variety of painting processes including watercolor, oil, acrylic, and mixed media works to establish their central body of creative art. Interdisciplinary activities combining 2-dimensional and 3- dimensional processes will be acceptable. Students will be expected to continue their development toward a classical ability both in drawing and painting techniques and be prepared to explore their thesis content in painting activities. These courses in graduate painting focus on the development of an interdisciplinary professional discourse and creating works of art needed in order to master the fine art of painting. All activities of graduate painting are juxtaposed towards the creation of original works of art, which express the individual. These creative impulses are organized with the student through criticism by the professor. These critical thoughts lead towards the implementation of content and processes in the artists' work. When developed the critical and spiritual path of discoveries required of any professional artist will be fully achieved.

ART 6318 Graduate Painting VIII Prerequisite(s): ART 5311 and ART 5312 and ART 5313 and ART 5314 and ART 6315 and ART 6316
Graduate painting students will use a variety of painting processes including watercolor, oil, acrylic, and mixed media works to establish their central body of creative art. Interdisciplinary activities combining 2-dimensional and 3- dimensional processes will be acceptable. Students will be expected to continue their development toward a classical ability both in drawing and painting techniques and be prepared to explore their thesis content in painting activities. These courses in graduate painting focus on the development of an interdisciplinary professional discourse and creating works of art needed in order to master the fine art of painting. All activities of graduate painting are juxtaposed towards the creation of original works of art, which express the individual. These creative impulses are organized with the student through criticism by the professor. These critical thoughts lead towards the implementation of content and processes in the artists' work. When developed the critical and spiritual path of discoveries required of any professional artist will be fully achieved.

ART 6325 Graduate Drawing V Prerequisite(s): ART 5321 and ART 5322 and ART 5323 and ART 5324
This course will allow students to use the processes of wet and dry media, including watercolor, ink, charcoal, pastel, and conté combined with new and experimental media including encaustic, rubbing, etc. Students will be expected to continue their development toward a classical ability drawing and be prepared to explore thesis content in their painting activities.

ART 6326 Graduate Drawing VI Prerequisite(s): ART 5321 and ART 5322 and ART 5323 and ART 5324
This course will allow students to use the processes of wet and dry media, including watercolor, ink, charcoal, pastel, and conté combined with new and experimental media including encaustic, rubbing, etc. Students will be expected to continue their development toward a classical ability drawing and be prepared to explore thesis content in their painting activities.

ART 6327 Graduate Drawing VII Prerequisite(s): ART 5321 and ART 5322 and ART 5323 and ART 5324 and ART 6325 and ART 6326
This course will allow students to use the processes of wet and dry media, including watercolor, ink, charcoal, pastel, and conté combined with new and experimental media including encaustic, rubbing, etc. Students will be expected to

continue their development toward a classical ability drawing and be prepared to explore thesis content in their painting activities.
ART 6328 Graduate Drawing VIII Prerequisite(s): ART 5321 and ART 5322 and ART 5323 and ART 5324 and ART 6325 and ART 6326
This course will allow students to use the processes of wet and dry media, including watercolor, ink, charcoal, pastel, and conté combined with new and experimental media including encaustic, rubbing, etc. Students will be expected to continue their development toward a classical ability drawing and be prepared to explore thesis content in their painting activities.

ART 6335 Graduate Ceramics V Prerequisite(s): ART 5331 and ART 5332 and ART 5333 and ART 5334
This course combines, through experimental processes, glaze variations and clay body recipes for low and high range firing temperatures. This course will require a high level of traditional skills in building 3-dimensional clay sculptural forms in addition to traditional ceramic techniques such as throwing and hand-building. A student's work is expected to achieve a thematic focus by the end of the semester.

ART 6336 Graduate Ceramics VI Prerequisite(s): ART 5331 and ART 5332 and ART 5333 and ART 5334
This course combines, through experimental processes, glaze variations and clay body recipes for low and high range firing temperatures. This course will require a high level of traditional skills in building 3-dimensional clay sculptural forms in addition to traditional ceramic techniques such as throwing and hand-building. A student's work is expected to achieve a thematic focus by the end of the semester.
ART 6337 Graduate Ceramics VII Prerequisite(s): ART 5331 and ART 5332 and ART 5333 and ART 5334 and ART 6335 and ART 6336
This course combines, through experimental processes, glaze variations and clay body recipes for low and high range firing temperatures. This course will require a high level of traditional skills in building 3-dimensional clay sculptural forms in addition to traditional ceramic techniques such as throwing and hand-building. A student's work is expected to achieve a thematic focus by the end of the semester.
ART 6338 Graduate Ceramics VIII Prerequisite(s): ART 5331 and ART 5332 and ART 5333 and ART 5334 and ART 6335 and ART 6336
This course combines, through experimental processes, glaze variations and clay body recipes for low and high range firing temperatures. This course will require a high level of traditional skills in building 3-dimensional clay sculptural forms in addition to traditional ceramic techniques such as throwing and hand-building. A student's work is expected to achieve a thematic focus by the end of the semester.

ART 6345 Graduate Sculpture V Prerequisite(s): ART 5341 and ART 5342 and ART 5343 and ART 5344
In this graduate sculpture course, students will begin to become more adept in learning how to translate drawings into 3- dimensional media such as steel, bronze, assemblage, found objects, wood, plaster, film, and installation including video and audio. Students will be expected to continue their development of a high level of drawing skill and materials and methods of sculpture both subtractive and additive techniques. All techniques used in this course and the resulting projects culminate towards each student's thesis content.

ART 6346 Graduate Sculpture VI Prerequisite(s): ART 5341 and ART 5342 and ART 5343 and ART 5344
In this graduate sculpture course, students will begin to become more adept in learning how to translate drawings into 3- dimensional media such as steel, bronze, assemblage, found objects, wood, plaster, film, and installation including video and audio. Students will be expected to continue their development of a high level of drawing skill and materials and methods of sculpture both subtractive and additive techniques. All techniques used in this course and the resulting projects culminate towards each student's thesis content.

ART 6347 Graduate Sculpture VII Prerequisite(s): ART 5341 and ART 5342 and ART 5343 and ART 5344 and ART 6345 and ART 6346
In this graduate sculpture course, students will begin to become more adept in learning how to translate drawings into

3- dimensional media such as steel, bronze, assemblage, found objects, wood, plaster, film, and installation including video and audio. Students will be expected to continue their development of a high level of drawing skill and materials and methods of sculpture both subtractive and additive techniques. All techniques used in this course and the resulting projects culminate towards each student's thesis content.

ART 6348 Graduate Sculpture VIII Prerequisite(s): ART 5341 and ART 5342 and ART 5343 and ART 5344 and ART 6345 and ART 6346
In this graduate sculpture course, students will begin to become more adept in learning how to translate drawings into 3- dimensional media such as steel, bronze, assemblage, found objects, wood, plaster, film, and installation including video and audio. Students will be expected to continue their development of a high level of drawing skill and materials and methods of sculpture both subtractive and additive techniques. All techniques used in this course and the resulting projects culminate towards each student's thesis content.

ART 6352 Graduate Drawing V Prerequisite(s): ART 5321 and ART 5322 and ART 5323 and ART 5324
This course will allow students to use the processes of wet and dry media, including watercolor, ink, charcoal, pastel, conté combined with new and experimental media including encaustic, rubbing etc. Students will be expected to continue their development toward a for classical ability drawing and be prepared to explore thesis content in their painting activities.

ART 6355 Graduate Printmaking V Prerequisite(s): ART 5351 and ART 5353 and ART 5353 and ART 5354
This course will allow a student to begin to explore in new ways one or more of the following drawing and printmaking techniques: etching, silkscreen, woodblock printing, intaglio, mono printing in the traditional and digital processes. Students will discover a personal voice in preparation for the development of their thesis content. Students are expected to have a working knowledge of printmaking techniques before enrolling.

ART 6356 Graduate Printmaking VI Prerequisite(s): ART 5351 and ART 5352 and ART 5353 and ART 5354
This course will allow a student to begin to explore in new ways one or more of the following drawing and printmaking techniques: etching, silkscreen, woodblock printing, intaglio, mono printing in the traditional and digital processes. Students will discover a personal voice in preparation for the development of their thesis content. Students are expected to have a working knowledge of printmaking techniques before enrolling.

ART 6357 Graduate Printmaking VII Prerequisite(s): ART 5351 and ART 5352 and ART 5353 and ART 5354 and ART 6352 and ART 6357
This course will allow a student to begin to explore in new ways one or more of the following drawing and printmaking techniques: etching, silkscreen, woodblock printing, intaglio, mono printing in the traditional and digital processes. Students will discover a personal voice in preparation for the development of their thesis content. Students are expected to have a working knowledge of printmaking techniques before enrolling.

ART 6358 Graduate Printmaking VIII Prerequisite(s): ART 5351 and ART 5352 and ART 5353 and ART 5354 and ART 6352 and ART 6357
This course will allow a student to begin to explore in new ways one or more of the following drawing and printmaking techniques: etching, silkscreen, woodblock printing, intaglio, mono printing in the traditional and digital processes. Students will discover a personal voice in preparation for the development of their thesis content. Students are expected to have a working knowledge of printmaking techniques before enrolling.

ART 6361 Graduate Gallery and Museum Practices I Prerequisite(s): None
This Gallery and Museum Practices course will begin to introduce the MFA student to a conceptual and practical understanding of art exhibitions and their importance in the careers of visual artists, as well as their contributions to contemporary society. Visits to Houston area museums and galleries will be an important component of this course. Lectures will be offered on the history of fine art venues from the late 19th century to the present.

ART 6362 Graduate Gallery and Museum Practices II Prerequisite(s): None
This Gallery and Museum Practices course will provide the MFA student with a conceptual and practical understanding of art exhibitions and their importance in the careers of visual artists, as well as their contributions to contemporary society. Visits to Houston area museums and galleries will be an important component of this course. Lectures will be offered on the history of fine art venues from the late 19th century to the present.

ART 6363 Graduate Gallery and Museum Practices III Prerequisite(s): None
This Gallery and Museum Practices course will provide the MFA student with a more sophisticated conceptual and practical understanding of art exhibitions and their importance in the careers of visual artists, as well as their contributions to contemporary society. Visits to Houston area museums and galleries will be an important component of this course. Lectures will be offered on the history of fine art venues from the late 19th century to the present.

ART 6364 Graduate Gallery and Museum Practices IV Prerequisite(s): None
This Gallery and Museum Practices course will provide the MFA student with a more sophisticated conceptual and practical understanding of art exhibitions and their importance in the careers of visual artists, as well as their contributions to contemporary society. Visits to Houston area museums and galleries will be an important component of this course. Lectures will be offered on the history of fine art venues from the late 19th century to the present.

ART 6365 Graduate Experimental Digital Methods and Materials V Prerequisite(s): MFA 5361 and MFA 5362 and MFA 5363 and MFA 5364
These courses will enhance the fine arts studio experience by integrating experimental digital tools. Starting with simple and practical image editing and correction, the student quickly branches out into using the computer as another important tool in creating art. Course topics may include: working with digital photography, digital drawing and painting, 3D software, sound art, video art and the technology behind installation art. The students will research the history of movements within digital art (Generative Art, glitch, Datamoshing, etc.) They will explore the virtual tools and materials that state-of-the-art digital media has to offer. These cutting-edge programs (including Painter, Illustrator, Photoshop, After Effects, Ableton Live, etc.) provide an amazing variety of flexible and expressive possibilities. These digital studio courses are designed to integrate with the hands-on studio experience, which opens new, dynamic, creative directions for the student as they develop their thesis.

ART 6366 Graduate Experimental Digital Methods and Materials VI Prerequisite(s): MFA 5361 and MFA 5362 and MFA 5363 and MFA 5364
These courses will enhance the fine arts studio experience by integrating experimental digital tools. Starting with simple and practical image editing and correction, the student quickly branches out into using the computer as another important tool in creating art. Course topics may include: working with digital photography, digital drawing and painting, 3D software, sound art, video art and the technology behind installation art. The students will research the history of movements within digital art (Generative Art, glitch, Datamoshing, etc.) They will explore the virtual tools and materials that state-of-the-art digital media has to offer. These cutting-edge programs (including Painter, Illustrator, Photoshop, After Effects, Ableton Live, etc.) provide an amazing variety of flexible and expressive possibilities. These digital studio courses are designed to integrate with the hands-on studio experience, which opens new, dynamic, creative directions for the student as they develop their thesis.

ART 6367 Graduate Experimental Digital Methods and Materials VII Prerequisite(s): MFA 5361 and MFA 5362 and MFA 5363 and MFA 5364 and ART 6365 and ART 6366
These courses will enhance the fine arts studio experience by integrating experimental digital tools. Starting with simple and practical image editing and correction, the student quickly branches out into using the computer as another important tool in creating art. Course topics may include: working with digital photography, digital drawing and painting, 3D software, sound art, video art and the technology behind installation art. The students will research the history of movements within digital art (Generative Art, glitch, Datamoshing, etc.) They will explore the virtual tools and materials that state-of-the-art digital media has to offer. These cutting-edge programs (including Painter, Illustrator, Photoshop, After Effects, Ableton Live, etc.) provide an amazing variety of flexible and expressive possibilities. These digital studio courses are designed to integrate with the hands-on studio experience, which opens new, dynamic, creative directions for the student as they develop their thesis.

ART 6368 Graduate Experimental Digital Methods and Materials VIII Prerequisite(s): MFA 5361 and MFA 5362 and MFA 5363 and MFA 5364 and ART 6365 and ART 6366
These courses will enhance the fine arts studio experience by integrating experimental digital tools. Starting with simple and practical image editing and correction, the student quickly branches out into using the computer as another important tool in creating art. Course topics may include: working with digital photography, digital drawing and painting, 3D software, sound art, video art and the technology behind installation art. The students will research the history of movements within digital art (Generative Art, glitch, Datamoshing, etc.) They will explore the virtual tools and materials that state-of-the-art digital media has to offer. These cutting-edge programs (including Painter, Illustrator, Photoshop, After Effects, Ableton Live, etc.) provide an amazing variety of flexible and expressive possibilities. These digital studio courses are designed to integrate with the hands-on studio experience, which opens new, dynamic, creative directions for the student as they develop their thesis.

ART 6381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

ART 6399 Graduate Thesis/ Portfolio Development Prerequisite(s): None
All MFA graduate studio majors will, in this course, coordinate their thesis writing and body of art created during their MFA period of study preparing both for their Thesis MFA professional exhibition. Each student will work with their graduate committee chair, as primary instructor for this final seminar course during their last semester. The professor and candidate will work together to ensure the best possible portfolio development. Work that has already been started relating to the student's individual thesis writing and creative oeuvre will be coordinated and edited during the duration of this course. Satisfactory approval of both the Art faculty and the UAC Gallery director are needed prior to any MFA thesis exhibition, public MFA presentation lecture and oral thesis defense.


Basic (BASC) Course Descriptions

BASC 1414 Natural Science Prerequisite(s): None
An integrated science course at the freshman level for non-science majors. Topics from biology, chemistry, and physics will be covered. Case studies on the development of significant ideas in science, as illustrations of the scientific method, include 45 clock hours of laboratory work. Credit for this course may not be granted for majors requiring another specific science course as listed on the major’s degree plan.


Biochemistry-Molecular Biology (BCMB) Course Descriptions
BCMB 3014 Microbiology Laboratory Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101
Corequisite(s): BCMB 3414
This is the laboratory portion of BCMB 3414.

BCMB 3375 Human Genetics Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 This course will introduce students to the basic concepts of human genetics and its molecular and clinical implications. Topics include the chromosomal, molecular, and biochemical basis of disease, prenatal diagnosis, and genetic counseling. (Offered also as BIOL 3375.)

BCMB 3414 Microbiology Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101
Corequisite(s): BCMB 3014
This course is a general survey of the microorganisms and includes the morphology, physiology, and control of the

organisms most important to humans. The microbiology of soil, food, water, and disease will be considered. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions. (Offered also as BIOL 3414.)

BCMB 4024 Molecular Biology Laboratory Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 and
BIOL 3444 Prerequisite: None
Corequisite(s): BCMB 4424
This is the laboratory portion of BCMB 4424.

BCMB 4044 Virology Laboratory Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 and
BIOL 3444 Prerequisite: None
This is the laboratory portion of BCMB 4444.

BCMB 4048 Molecular Genetics Laboratory Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 and
BIOL 3444 Prerequisite: None
Corequisite(s): BCMB 4448
This is the laboratory portion of BCMB 4448.

BCMB 4064 Immunology Laboratory Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 and
BIOL 3444 Prerequisite: None
Corequisite(s): BCMB 4464
This is the laboratory portion of BCMB 4464.

BCMB 4111 Bioanalytical Methods Prerequisite(s): Twenty hours of BIOL or BCMB at the 2000 level or above, and CHEM 2415 and CHEM 2416 and CHEM 3131 and CHEM 3132 and CHEM 3313 and CHEM 3333, and completion of or concurrent enrollment in CHEM 4373
This course is a senior level course which exposes students to the principles and experimental techniques underlying common bioanalytical methods such as cell fractionation, radiolabeling, protein purification, protein and DNA sequencing, immunochemistry, and spectrophotometry, all of which are widely used in research pertaining to the biological and biochemical sciences.

BCMB 4181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

BCMB 4272 Integrating Biological Concepts Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 and
BIOL 3414 and BIOL 3444
This course will integrate the knowledge, theories, and skills expected of a Biologist. Topics will encompass and reinforce the material found in the courses of the Biology Core.

BCMB 4281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

BCMB 4297 Research in Biochemistry/Molecular Biology Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 and
BIOL 3414 and BIOL 3444
Laboratory research is offered for a student majoring in Biochemistry-Molecular biology. At the conclusion of the

research, a written paper will be presented to the student's seminar advisor and an oral presentation of the results will be presented.

BCMB 4324 Advanced Cell Biology Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 and
BIOL 3444
This course provides an in-depth study of selected dynamic processes that occur in living cells. Topics include DNA regulation and expression of genes; DNA repair; protein synthesis and function; protein sorting; vesicular traffic; cell signaling; and control of cell division. (Offered also as BIOL 4324.)

BCMB 4335 RNA Biology Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 This course investigates the diverse structures and roles of RNA molecules in living cells. Both historical and current research on RNA and its varied functions will be covered. Topics include RNA with enzymatic function, cellular production and processing of RNA, regulatory RNA molecules, RNA splicing and splice defects, long non-coding RNA (IncRNA) and RNA localization within cells. (Offered also as BIOL 4335.)

BCMB 4344 Virology Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101
and BIOL 3444
This course is an introduction to the principles of animal virology. The classification and replicative cycles of viruses are compared to their pathogenic mechanisms. Viral oncogenes and modern anti-viral chemotherapy and immunization are discussed. (Offered also as BIOL 4344.)

BCMB 4363 Medical Microbiology Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 and
BIOL 3414
A study of microbial organisms that cause disease in humans. The characteristics of each pathogen are discussed along with its pathogenesis and pathology. (Offered also as BIOL 4363.)

BCMB 4375 Cancer Biology Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 and
BIOL 3444 Prerequisite: None
This course examines the development of cancer at the cellular and molecular levels. Topics covered include tumor suppressors, oncogenes, cell cycle regulation, apoptosis, telomerase, angiogenesis, and metastasis. Cancer prevention, screen, diagnosis, and treatment will also be introduced. (Offered also as BIOL 4375.)

BCMB 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

BCMB 4424 Molecular Biology Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 and
BIOL 3444 Prerequisite: None
Corequisite(s): BCMB 4024
This course presents recent developments in biotechnology and genetic engineering. Topics included are recombinant DNA; DNA cloning; DNA sequencing; polymerase chain reaction; monoclonal antibodies; genetic engineering of plants and animals; and the human genome project. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions. (Offered also as BIOL 4424.)

BCMB 4448 Molecular Genetics Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 and
BIOL 3444 Prerequisite: None
Corequisite(s): BCMB 4048
This course investigates the molecular mechanisms of genetics in greater detail than BIOL 3444 Genetics. Topics

include the dynamic molecular structure of DNA, chromatin, RNA and the proteins that interact with them. Special attention will be given to understanding current techniques used in the analysis of genomes. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions. (Offered also as BIOL 4448)

BCMB 4464 Immunology Prerequisites: BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 and BIOL 3444
Corequisite(s): BCMB 4064
This course is an introductory study of the biological and clinical approaches to immunology. Discussions center on the mechanisms responsible for various clinical syndromes as well as basic immunological phenomena such as antibody diversity, T cell receptor diversity, antigen presentation, signaling across cellular receptors, and cell activation. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions. (Offered also as BIOL 4464.)

BCMB 4481 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisites: BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

BCMB 4181, 4281, 4381, 4481 Special Topics Prerequisites: BIOL 2473, 2474, and 2475
Topics are selected on basis of students' needs and academic qualifications of staff. This will include such topics as microbial techniques, membrane biology, enzymology, etc. Laboratory may or may not be included. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.


Biology (BIOL) Course Descriptions

BIOL 1004 Introductory Biology Laboratory Prerequisite(s): None
Corequisite(s): BIOL 1404
This is the laboratory portion of BIOL 1404.

BIOL 1014 Introductory Microbiology Laboratory Prerequisite(s): None
Corequisite(s): BIOL 1414
This is the laboratory portion of BIOL 1414.

BIOL 1404 Introductory Biology Prerequisite(s): None Corequisite(s): BIOL 1004
This course is a general survey of biology including the study of plants, animals, ecology, and some marine biology. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions. This course cannot be applied toward a biology major.

BIOL 1414 Introductory Microbiology Prerequisite(s): None
Corequisite(s): BIOL 1014
A general introduction of microbiology with emphasis placed on public health. Various disease-causing agents are discussed. Procedures used in disinfection and sterilization are demonstrated with consideration given to infection control. Includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions. This course cannot be counted for credit toward a biology major.

BIOL 2104 Human Anatomy and Physiology I Laboratory Prerequisite(s): None
Corequisite(s): BIOL 2304 Fee(s): Science Laboratory Fee

This course is a laboratory course designed to accompany BIOL 2304.

BIOL 2114 Human Anatomy and Physiology II Laboratory Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2304 and BIOL 2104
Corequisite(s): BIOL 2314 Fee(s): Science Laboratory Fee
This course is a laboratory course designed to accompany BIOL 2314.

BIOL 2154 General Biology I Laboratory Prerequisite(s): SAT Composite 1130 or ACT Composite 22 or Twelve (12) Hours of College Coursework Corequisite(s): BIOL 2354
Fee(s): Science Laboratory Fee
This course is a laboratory course designed to accompany BIOL 2354. Biochemistry-Molecular Biology, Biology, Chemistry, Mathematics, or Physics Majors Only

BIOL 2155 General Biology II Laboratory Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154
Corequisite(s): BIOL 2355 Fee(s): Science Laboratory Fee
This course is a laboratory course designed to accompany BIOL 2355.

BIOL 2181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

BIOL 2214 Medical Terminology Prerequisite(s): None
This course provides a comprehensive study of medical terminology including word roots, combining forms, prefixes and suffixes. Students build and analyze thousands of medical terms, and in the process, study the structure and functions of human body systems and diseases. This course cannot be counted for credit toward the biology major.

BIOL 2281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

BIOL 2304 Human Anatomy and Physiology I Prerequisite(s): None
Corequisite(s): BIOL 2104
The course deals with the anatomical description and functions of the systems of the human body. Emphasis is placed upon the interrelationship between structure and function with maintenance and homeostasis being the unifying principle. This course cannot be counted for credit towards the Biology major or minor.

BIOL 2314 Human Anatomy and Physiology II Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2304 and BIOL 2104
Corequisite(s): BIOL 2114
This course deals with the anatomical description and functions of the systems of the human body. Emphasis is placed upon the interrelationship between structure and function with maintenance and homeostasis being the unifying principle. The course continues with human body systems not covered in BIOL 2304. This course cannot be counted for credit towards the Biology major or minor.

BIOL 2354 General Biology I Prerequisite(s): SAT Composite 1130 or ACT Composite 22 or Twelve (12) Hours of College Coursework Corequisite(s): BIOL 2154
This course is a lecture course required of all biology majors. Topics include cell structure and function, biological diversity, plant biology, and ecology. Biochemistry-Molecular Biology, Biology, Chemistry, Mathematics, or Physics

Majors Only

BIOL 2355 General Biology II Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154
Corequisite(s): BIOL 2155 Fee(s): None
This course is a lecture course required of all biology majors. Topics include animal tissues and organ systems, animal structure and function, life processes, biological diversity and the theory of evolution.

BIOL 2381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

BIOL 2481 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

BIOL 3004 Environmental Science Laboratory Prerequisite(s): None
Corequisite(s): BIOL 3404
This is the laboratory portion of BIOL 3404.

BIOL 3014 Microbiology Laboratory Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101
Corequisite(s): BIOL 3414
This is the laboratory portion of BIOL 3414.

BIOL 3033 Pathophysiology Laboratory Prerequisite(s): (BIOL 2304 and BIOL 2104 and BIOL 2314 and BIOL 2114) or (BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and
BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3101)
Corequisite(s): BIOL 3433
This is the laboratory portion of BIOL 3433.

BIOL 3034 Ecology and Field Biology Laboratory Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and credit for or concurrent registration in BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101
Corequisite(s): BIOL 3434
This is the laboratory portion of BIOL 3434.

BIOL 3044 Genetics Laboratory Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101
Corequisite(s): BIOL 3444
This is the laboratory portion of BIOL 3444.

BIOL 3054 General Physiology Laboratory Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101
Corequisite(s): BIOL 3454
This is the laboratory portion of BIOL 3454.
BIOL 3056 Advanced Human Anatomy Laboratory Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and credit for or concurrent registration in BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101
Corequisite(s): BIOL 3456
This is the laboratory portion of BIOL 3456.

BIOL 3064 Comparative Vertebrate Anatomy Laboratory Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101
Corequisite(s): BIOL 3464
This is the laboratory portion of BIOL 3464.

BIOL 3101 Cellular and Molecular Biology Laboratory Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155
Corequisite(s): BIOL 3301 Fee(s): Science Laboratory Fee
This authentic research lab introduces students to molecular and cellular biology topics and techniques in parallel with the lecture course. Students will conduct an independent research project that includes DNA purification, cell culture techniques, immunochemistry, and bioinformatics.

BIOL 3181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

BIOL 3281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.
BIOL 3301 Cellular and Molecular Biology Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and CHEM 2315 and CHEM 2115
This course is required of all biology majors. Topics include biological chemistry, cellular structure and function, energy transformations, DNA, RNA, and protein synthesis.

BIOL 3325 Global Health Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and credit for or concurrent registration in BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101
This course provides an overview to the field of Global Health. Students in this course will learn about pathogen- related diseases that are common in developed countries, as well as those more prominent in developing countries. Students will also learn about challenges facing healthcare around the world such as healthcare systems, healthcare education, emerging diseases, formulation and execution of major global initiates, healthcare inequality, sanitation, mental health, and age-related health issues.
BIOL 3335 Nutrition and Metabolism Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and credit for or concurrent registration in BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101
Nutrition and Metabolism is designed to acquaint the student with the role of nutrients in health, the physiology of the gastrointestinal tract, and the importance of nutrition in preventive and curative medicine.

BIOL 3375 Human Genetics Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 and
BIOL 3444 Prerequisite: None
This course will introduce students to the basic concepts of human genetics and its molecular and clinical implications. Topics include the chromosomal, molecular, and biochemical basis of disease, prenatal diagnosis, and genetic counseling. (Offered also as BCMB 3375.)

BIOL 3381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.
BIOL 3404 Environmental Science Prerequisite(s): None Corequisite(s): BIOL 3004
This course is a study of the interrelationships of the natural world and the interactions or organisms with their environment. Analysis of populations, both natural and human, in their communities and the impact of the physical factors will be explored. Current environmental issues will also be discussed. Sampling techniques and field studies will be emphasized. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions. This course cannot be counted for credit toward the biology major.

BIOL 3414 Microbiolog Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101
Corequisite(s): BIOL 3014
This course is a general survey of the microorganisms and includes the morphology, physiology, and control of the organisms most important to humans. The microbiology of soil, food, water, and disease will be considered. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions. (Offered also as BCMB 3414.)

BIOL 3433 Pathophysiology Prerequisite(s): (BIOL 2304 and BIOL 2104 and BIOL 2314 and BIOL 2114) or (BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and
BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101) Prerequisite: None
Corequisite(s): BIOL 3033
A general study of structure and function of human cells including the basic cellular requirements for life. The importance of fluid distribution, fluid volume and fluid balance along with abnormal deviations will be covered. The student will obtain an understanding of the pathology of the cardiovascular system, nervous system, endocrine system, digestive system, excretory system, and musculo-skeletal system. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions.

BIOL 3434 Ecology and Field Biology Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and credit for or concurrent registration in BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101
Corequisite(s): BIOL 3034
This course studies ecological concepts concerning ecosystems from a population, interspecific and community perspective. Sampling techniques and field studies will be emphasized. Analysis of populations in their communities will be explored. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions.

BIOL 3444 Genetics Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101
Corequisite(s): BIOL 3044
This course deals with the molecular and chromosomal basis of inheritance. Topics include Mendelian and non- Mendelian inheritance, population genetics, and molecular genetics. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions.

BIOL 3454 General Physiology Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101
Corequisite(s): BIOL 3054
This course deals with the function of selected organ systems in vertebrates with the major emphasis on humans. Mechanisms of kidney function, circulation, respiration, nerve transmission, muscular contraction, endocrine function, and digestion are discussed in detail. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions.

BIOL 3456 Advanced Human Anatomy Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and (credit for or concurrent registration in BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101)
Corequisite(s): BIOL 3056
This is an advanced study of the anatomical structure of the human body. Body structure will be studied by organ systems and will involve a balance between gross anatomical study and histology. Form-function relationships will be emphasized. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions.

BIOL 3464 Comparative Vertebrate Anatomy Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101
Corequisite(s): BIOL 3064
A comparative study of the anatomy of representative vertebrates which stresses the patterns and interrelationship among vertebrates. A foundation is also provided for understanding the functions of vertebrate organs and systems. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions.

BIOL 3481 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

BIOL 4023 Histology Laboratory Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and (credit for or concurrent registration in BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101)
Corequisite(s): BIOL 4423
This is the laboratory portion of BIOL 4423.

BIOL 4024 Molecular Biology Laboratory Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 and
BIOL 3444
Corequisite(s): BIOL 4424
This is the laboratory portion of BIOL 4424.

BIOL 4025 Drug Action Laboratory Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and (credit for or concurrent registration in BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101)
Corequisite(s): BIOL 4425
This is the laboratory portion of BIOL 4425.

BIOL 4033 Embryology Laboratory Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101
Corequisite(s): BIOL 4433
This is the laboratory portion of BIOL 4433.

BIOL 4043 Neuroscience Laboratory Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101
Corequisite(s): BIOL 4443
This is the laboratory portion of BIOL 4443.

BIOL 4044 Virology Laboratory Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 and
BIOL 3444 Prerequisite: None
Corequisite(s): BIOL 4444
This is the laboratory portion of BIOL 4444.

BIOL 4048 Molecular Genetics Laboratory Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 and
BIOL 3444 Prerequisite: None
Corequisite(s): BIOL 4448
This is the laboratory portion of BIOL 4448.

BIOL 4064 Immunology Laboratory Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 and
BIOL 3444
Corequisite(s): BIOL 4464

This is the laboratory portion of BIOL 4464.

BIOL 4181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

BIOL 4272 Integrating the Concepts in Biology Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101
and BIOL 3414 and BIOL 3444
This course will integrate the knowledge, theories, and skills expected of a biologist. Topics will encompass and reinforce the material found in the courses of the Biology Core.

BIOL 4281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

BIOL 4297 Research in Biology Prerequisite(s): BIOL 3414 and BIOL 3444
Laboratory research is offered for a student majoring in Biology. At the conclusion of the research, a written paper will be presented to the student's seminar advisor and an oral presentation of the results will be presented.

BIOL 4324 Advanced Cell Biology Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 and
BIOL 3444
This course provides an in-depth study of selected dynamic processes that occur in living cells. Topics include DNA regulation and expression of genes; DNA repair; protein synthesis and function; protein sorting; vesicular traffic; cell signaling; and control of cell division. (Offered also as BCMB 4324.)

BIOL 4325 Endocrinology Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101
This course provides students with a working knowledge of endocrinology. Topics include the historical development of endocrinology; structure and function of the major hormone groups; models for cell signaling; how hormones influence metabolism; and diseases caused by abnormalities of the endocrine system.

BIOL 4335 RNA Biology Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101
This course investigates the diverse structures and roles of RNA molecules in living cells. Both historical and current research on RNA and its varied functions will be covered. Topics include RNA with enzymatic function, cellular production and processing of RNA, regulatory RNA molecules, RNA splicing and splice defects, long non-coding RNA (IncRNA) and RNA localization within cells. (Offered also as BCMB 4335.)

BIOL 4344 Virology Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 and
BIOL 3444
This course is an introduction to the principles of animal virology. The classification and replicative cycles of viruses are compared to their pathogenic mechanisms. Viral oncogenes and modern anti-viral chemotherapy and immunization are discussed. (Offered also as BCMB 4344.)

BIOL 4363 Medical Microbiology Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 and
BIOL 3414
A study of microbial organisms that cause disease in humans. The characteristics of each pathogen are discussed along with its pathogenesis and pathology. (Offered also as BCMB 4363.)

BIOL 4375 Cancer Biology Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 and
BIOL 3444
This course examines the development of cancer at the cellular and molecular levels. Topics covered include tumor suppressors, oncogenes, cell cycle regulation, apoptosis, telomerase, angiogenesis, and metastasis. Cancer prevention, screen, diagnosis, and treatment will also be introduced.

BIOL 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

BIOL 4423 Histology Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and credit for or concurrent registration in BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101
Corequisite(s): BIOL 4023
A study of the fine structure of normal human tissue is the principle area of consideration in this course. Tissue techniques will be included in order to afford an appreciation of the types of preparations used in the laboratory. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions.

BIOL 4424 Molecular Biology Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 and
BIOL 3444 Prerequisite: None
Corequisite(s): BIOL 4024
This course presents recent developments in biotechnology and genetic engineering. Topics included are recombinant DNA; DNA cloning; DNA sequencing; polymerase chain reaction; monoclonal antibodies; genetic engineering of plants and animals; and the human genome project. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions. (Offered also as BCMB 4424.)

BIOL 4425 Drug Action Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and credit for or concurrent registration in BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101
Corequisite(s): BIOL 4025
This course presents the basic concepts and principles of pharmacology as related to the anatomy and physiology of certain body systems. Specific topics include principles of drug receptors; pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics; the actions of cholinoceptor-activating, cholinesterase-blocking, and cholinesterase-inhibiting drugs; adrenoceptor- activating and adrenoceptor-blocking drugs; and antihypertensive, antidepressant, and chemotherapeutic drugs. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions.

BIOL 4433 Embryology Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101
Corequisite(s): BIOL 4033
This is a study of the normally developing human from conception through birth. Common congenital defects are briefly discussed. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions.

BIOL 4443 Neuroscience Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101
Corequisite(s): BIOL 4043
This course surveys the organization and functioning of the human nervous system. Action potentials and synaptic transmissions are emphasized. Sensory systems and movement are also considered along with new models that illustrate the function of memory systems. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions.

BIOL 4448 Molecular Genetics Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 and
BIOL 3444
Corequisite(s): BIOL 4048

This course investigates the molecular mechanisms of genetics in greater detail than BIOL 3444 Genetics. Topics include the dynamic molecular structure of DNA, chromatin, RNA and the proteins that interact with them. Special attention will be given to understanding current techniques used in the analysis of genomes. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions.

BIOL 4464 Immunology Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101 and
BIOL 3444
Corequisite(s): BIOL 4064
This course is an introductory study of the biological and clinical approaches to immunology. Discussions center on the mechanisms responsible for various clinical syndromes as well as basic immunological phenomena such as antibody diversity, T cell receptor diversity, antigen presentation, signaling across cellular receptors, and cell activation. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory. (Offered also as BCMB 4464.)

BIOL 4481 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 and BIOL 3301 and BIOL 3101
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

BIOL 5023 Histology Lab Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 (or equivalent) Corequisite(s): BIOL 5423
This is the laboratory portion of BIOL 5423.

BIOL 5024 Molecular Biology Lab Prerequisite(s): BIOL 3444 (or equivalent) Corequisite(s): BIOL 5424
This is the laboratory portion of BIOL 5424.

BIOL 5025 Drug Action Lab Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 (or equivalent) Corequisite(s): BIOL 5425
This is the laboratory portion of BIOL 5425.

BIOL 5033 Embryology Lab Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 (or equivalent) Corequisite(s): BIOL 5433
This is the laboratory portion of BIOL 5433.

BIOL 5043 Neuroscience Lab Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 (or equivalent) Corequisite(s): BIOL 5443
This is the laboratory portion of BIOL 5443. (Offered also as BIOL 4043.)

BIOL 5048 Molecular Genetics Lab Prerequisite(s): BIOL 3444 (or equivalent) Corequisite(s): BIOL 5448
This is the laboratory portion of BIOL 5448.

BIOL 5064 Immunology Lab Prerequisite(s): BIOL 3444 (or equivalent) Corequisite(s): BIOL 5464
This is the laboratory portion of BIOL 5464.

BIOL 5297 Research in Biology Prerequisite(s): BIOL 3414 and BIOL 3444 (or equivalent)

Laboratory research is offered for a student majoring in Biology. At the conclusion of the research, a written paper will be presented to the student's seminar advisor and an oral presentation of the results will be presented.

BIOL 5301 Biostatistics Prerequisite(s): None
This course discussed techniques for the application of statistical theory utilizing real-life and applicable data. Topics include descriptive statistics, probability theory, parametric and non-parametric methods of hypothesis testing.

BIOL 5303 Epidemiology Prerequisite(s): None
This course is intended to introduce students to the fundamental concepts of epidemiology for professionals in health care, with relevant emphasis on clinical applications and evidence-based medicine. Both descriptive and experimental epidemiological topics including morbidity and mortality studies will be covered.

BIOL 5304 Advanced Physiology Prerequisite(s): None
This course deals with the function of selected organ systems in vertebrates with the major emphasis on humans. Mechanisms of kidney function, circulation, respiration, nerve transmission, muscular contraction, endocrine function, and digestion are discussed in detail.

BIOL 5324 Advanced Cell Biology Prerequisite(s): BIOL 3444 (or equivalent)
This course provides an in-depth study of selected dynamic processes that occur in living cells. Topics include DNA regulation and expression of genes; DNA repair; protein synthesis and function; protein sorting; vesicular traffic; cell signaling; and control of cell division.

BIOL 5325 Endocrinology Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 (or equivalent)
This course provides students with a working knowledge of endocrinology. Topics include the historical development of endocrinology; structure and function of the major hormone groups; models for cell signaling; how hormones influence metabolism; and diseases caused by abnormalities of the endocrine system.

BIOL 5375 Cancer Biology Prerequisite(s): BIOL 3444 (or equivalent)
This course examines the development of cancer at the cellular and molecular levels. Topics covered include tumor suppressors, oncogenes, cell cycle regulation, apoptosis, telomerase, angiogenesis, and metastasis. Cancer prevention, screen, diagnosis, and treatment will also be introduced.

BIOL 5381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

BIOL 5402 Immunology and Microbiology Prerequisite(s): None
This course introduces students to the intersection of immunology and microbiology as it relates to the health-care setting. A general exploration of basic concepts of immunology and microbiology including study of genomics, potential clinical treatment, and gene therapy. This course includes one semester hour credit for online laboratory sessions.
BIOL 5403 Advanced Anatomy Prerequisite(s): None
This is a graduate-level study of the anatomical structure of the human body. Body structure will be studied by organ systems and will involve a balance between gross anatomical study and histology. Form-function relationships will be emphasized. This course includes one semester hour credit for online laboratory sessions.

BIOL 5423 Histology Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 (or equivalent) Corequisite(s): BIOL 5023
A study of the fine structure of normal human tissue is the principle area of consideration in this course. Tissue techniques will be included in order to afford an appreciation of the types of preparations used in the laboratory. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions.

BIOL 5424 Molecular Biology Prerequisite(s): None
This course presents recent developments in biotechnology and genetic engineering. Topics included are recombinant DNA; DNA cloning; DNA sequencing; polymerase chain reaction; monoclonal antibodies; genetic engineering of plants and animals; and the human genome project. Emphasis will be placed on the role of molecular biology in human health professions using primary literature discussions and lecture topics. This course includes one semester hour credit for online laboratory sessions.

BIOL 5425 Drug Action Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 (or equivalent) Corequisite(s): BIOL 5025
This course presents the basic concepts and principles of pharmacology as related to the anatomy and physiology of certain body systems. Specific topics include principles of drug receptors; pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics; the actions of cholinoceptor-activating, cholinesterase-blocking, and cholinesterase-inhibiting drugs; adrenoceptor- activating and adrenoceptor-blocking drugs; and antihypertensive, antidepressant, and chemotherapeutic drugs. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions.

BIOL 5433 Embryology Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 (or equivalent) Corequisite(s): BIOL 5033
This is a study of the normally developing human from conception through birth. Common congenital defects are briefly discussed. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions.

BIOL 5443 Neuroscience Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2354 and BIOL 2154 and BIOL 2355 and BIOL 2155 (or equivalent) Corequisite(s): BIOL 5043
This course surveys the organization and functioning of the human nervous system. Action potentials and synaptic transmissions are emphasized. Sensory systems and movement are also considered along with new models that illustrate the function of memory systems. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions.

BIOL 5448 Molecular Genetics Prerequisite(s): BIOL 3444 (or equivalent) Corequisite(s): BIOL 5048
This course investigates the molecular mechanisms of genetics in greater detail than BIOL 3444 Genetics. Topics include the dynamic molecular structure of DNA, chromatin, RNA, and the proteins that interact with them. Special attention will be given to understanding current techniques used in the analysis of genomes. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions.

BIOL 5464 Immunology Prerequisite(s): BIOL 3444 (or equivalent) Corequisite(s): BIOL 5064
This course is an introductory study of the biological and clinical approaches to immunology. Discussions center on the mechanisms responsible for various clinical syndromes as well as basic immunological phenomena such as antibody diversity, T cell receptor diversity, antigen presentation, signaling across cellular receptors, and cell activation. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory.


Business Administration (BUSA) Course Descriptions

BUSA 1305 The World of Business Prerequisite(s): None
A foundations course that emphasizes decision making in an ever-changing world economy. The focus is on building a foundation for key success factors and life skills, including professionalism, communications, global and cultural awareness, team-based decision making, critical thinking, technological competence, and business language. Some emphasis is placed on career guidance, including an appreciation for the functional areas of business. BUSA 1305 is required for all BBA majors and BA-Managerial Studies majors. The course may be taken by non-Business majors who have earned less than 90 credit hours. The course is to be taken by Business majors in their first semester, or within the first 12 hours of matriculating into the Archie W. Dunham College of Business.

BUSA 2301 Business Math Prerequisite(s): MATH 1313 or higher
This course covers selected topics of one- and multi-variable calculus with applications in business and economics. It will provide business students with the appropriate conceptual and computational mathematical background for future business study and economic analysis.

BUSA 2315 Business Statistics Prerequisite(s): MATH 1313 or higher
This course covers descriptive and inferential statistics and their application to business data. Topics include data visualization, measures of central tendency and dispersion, discrete and continuous probability distributions, sampling distributions, hypothesis testing, regression analysis, and forecasting.

BUSA 2320 Legal Environment of Business Prerequisite(s): None
A study of the legal environment of business, the role of law in society, the judicial process, and government regulation. Emphases are given to the law of contracts, torts, intellectual property, as well as employment law dealing with discrimination and its relation to human resources.

BUSA 2330 Biblical Financial Management Prerequisite(s): None
This course is to encourage an understanding of personal financial planning and the acquisition of sound money management skills based on biblical principles.

BUSA 3315 Spreadsheet Modeling with Business Applications Prerequisite(s): BUSA 2301 and (BUSA 2315 or concurrent enrollment)
This course is designed to introduce students to the environment of spreadsheets and its utilization for storage, presentation, visualization, and analysis of business data. Topics include, but are not limited to, pivot tables, spreadsheet modeling of business problems, optimization, risk management, and project management. All new concepts will be introduced using real business problems related to accounting, finance, economics, management, and marketing. The course will utilize Microsoft Excel—the most commonly used spreadsheet application.

BUSA 3320 Business Ethics Prerequisite(s): None
The goal of the Business Ethics class is to prepare students for success in global business. This will be achieved by helping students develop and apply a framework for identifying the ethical implications (personal, corporate, and social) of the various business practices they will encounter in an international market. A balance will be given to universal issues raised when adopting an ethical system and the particular issues involved in applying the ethical system to business issues. Main topics include: philosophical and cultural foundations of Business Ethics, applying ethical principles in the marketplace, and how to set up and carry out an effective Business Ethics program in an organization. The particular human resources issues of diversity, whistle blowing, recruiting and hiring, and compensation will be discussed as part of the application of ethical principles.

BUSA 4301 International Business Prerequisite(s): None
This course focuses on challenges that US managers face when operating in foreign countries. The class covers basic

principles of global business and cross-cultural interaction. It will particularly emphasize cultural and historical differences among various countries and how those differences produce different managerial styles and contrasting business practices. In addition, students will do thorough research, preparation, and presentations on specific companies and countries.

BUSA 4320 Business Law Prerequisite(s): BUSA 2320
Study of the uniform commercial code applied to commercial documents. Introduction to creditors' rights and bankruptcy, agency and employment, business organizations, and property law.

BUSA 4340 Internship Prerequisite(s): See the Archie W. Dunham College of Business Internship Coordinator for current prerequisite information
The course is an integrating field experience by which students learn actual business practices by undertaking responsible roles in an organization. The students develop interpersonal skills while acquiring practical knowledge in their disciplines. The students are exposed to various work roles and career choices. Open to junior and senior H- campus (residential) students only.

BUSA 4360 Data Analytics Prerequisite(s): MIS 4350
This is a capstone course for the Data Analytics minor or certificate. The course involves practical application in several areas. Topics will include, but not be limited to, data visualization and presentation; marketing, sports, and healthcare analytics; and social media applications. Both individual and team projects will be involved. Students will acquire skills related to data information extraction, how to interpret extracted information, and how to apply that information for decision-making. The course includes practical experience using MS Excel and IBM SPSS.

BUSA 6315 Fundamentals of Data Analytics Prerequisite(s): None
This course introduces students to fundamental concepts, techniques, and applications of data analytics. It presents applied approach to data analytics and data mining with clear explanations, hands-on exercises, and real-life case studies. Students will learn various data visualization and presentation methods, as well as most commonly used data mining techniques to develop descriptive, predictive, and prescriptive models from various areas of business and real- life and learn how to extract useful information from Big Data. Graduate Business programs only.

BUSA 6320 Practical Data Analytics Prerequisite(s): BUSA 6315
This course introduces students to practical aspects of fundamental methods and techniques of data analytics. It presents applied approach to data analytics and data mining with clear explanations, hands-on exercises, and real-life examples. Special attention will be given to methods of predictive and prescriptive analytics and their application in various areas of business. The course will be computer-based and data analytics software such as Analytic Solver and SPSS will be utilized.

BUSA 6321 Data Analytics: Cases and Insights Prerequisite(s): BUSA 6315
This course provides comprehensive up-to-date coverage of modern Business Analytics technologies and demonstrates how they can be used to improve business processes and decision-making, specifically for the Web and enterprise decision support. The course is case-based and presentation oriented. Students will learn the applications of Data Analytics to various business processes. In addition to traditional decision support, students will examine modern tools of data analytics by discussing examples, products, services, and exercises and using Web-based case studies throughout the course. Finally, the course examines the processes and technologies involved in protecting information and privacy at the organization. Graduate Business Programs only.

BUSA 6395 International Management Experience Prerequisite(s): ACCT 5362 and ECON 5363 and FINA 5260 and MGMT 5260 and MGMT 5261 and completion of at least 12 hours at HCU in graduate business studies and residential student status
This course combines classroom work with international travel and provides the student with direct contact with

managers operating in another country. A weeklong international trip (scheduled at the end of the term) is a part of the course. Topical coverage in class sessions emphasizes cultural and historical differences in countries that produce different managerial styles and contrasting business practices. Graduate Business programs only.


Chemistry (CHEM) Course Descriptions
CHEM 1004 Introductory Chemistry Laboratory Prerequisite(s): None
Corequisite(s): CHEM 1404
This is the laboratory portion of CHEM 1404.

CHEM 1011 Chemistry of our World Laboratory Prerequisite(s): None
Corequisite(s): CHEM 1411
This is the laboratory portion of CHEM 1411.

CHEM 1181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

CHEM 1381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

CHEM 1404 Introductory Chemistry Prerequisite(s): None Corequisite(s): CHEM 1004
This course discusses some of the fundamental concepts in inorganic, organic, and biological chemistry, and explores their social and medicinal relevance. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions. This course cannot be applied toward a Chemistry major.

CHEM 1411 Chemistry of Our World Prerequisite(s): None
Corequisite(s): CHEM 1011
This course introduces the physical environment of our world with emphasis on scientific laws. Students study the forces of nature and apply scientific principles. Topics include rocks, minerals, the chemical composition of the earth, glaciers, the hydrologic cycle, salt water salinity, as well as selected topics from seismology, cartography, oceanography, meteorology, and astronomy. The course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions. This course does not count toward the Chemistry major or minor.

CHEM 2023 Quantitative Analysis Laboratory Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2416
Corequisite(s): CHEM 2423
This is the laboratory portion of CHEM 2423.

CHEM 2115 General Chemistry I Laboratory Prerequisite(s): (MATH 1313 or higher) or (580 SAT Math) or 26 ACT Math) or (CHEM 1404) or (appropriate math placement score for MATH 1323 or MATH 1434 or MATH 1451)
Corequisite(s): CHEM 2315 Fee(s): Science Laboratory Fee
This is the laboratory portion of CHEM 2315. CHEM 2116 General Chemistry II Laboratory

Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2315 and CHEM 2115
Corequisite(s): CHEM 2316 Fee(s): Science Laboratory Fee
This course is the laboratory portion of CHEM 2316.

CHEM 2181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

CHEM 2281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

CHEM 2315 General Chemistry I Prerequisite(s): (MATH 1313 or higher) or (580 SAT Math) or (26 ACT Math) or (CHEM 1404) or (appropriate math placement score for MATH 1323, MATH 1434, or MATH 1451)
Corequisite(s): CHEM 2115
This course is for science majors. It is an introduction to chemical reactions, the mole concept, properties and states of matter, atomic structure, periodic properties, chemical bonding, and molecular structures.

CHEM 2316 General Chemistry II Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2315 and CHEM 2115
Corequisite(s): CHEM 2116
This course is a continuation of CHEM 2315 with an emphasis on chemical equilibrium, thermodynamics, electrochemistry, and kinetics.

CHEM 2381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

CHEM 2481 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

CHEM 3023 Quantitative Analysis Laboratory Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2316 and CHEM 2116
Corequisite(s): CHEM 3423
This course is the laboratory portion of CHEM 3423.

CHEM 3043 Modern Analytical Techniques Laboratory Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2423 and CHEM 3132 and PHYS 2413
Corequisite(s): CHEM 3443
This is the laboratory portion of CHEM 3443.

CHEM 3131 Organic Chemistry Laboratory I Prerequisite(s): CHEM 3313 or concurrent enrollment.
This course provides instruction in rudimentary organic laboratory techniques, simple organic syntheses, and basic identification of organic compounds by spectroscopy.

CHEM 3132 Organic Chemistry Laboratory II Prerequisite(s): CHEM 3131 and (CHEM 3333 or concurrent enrollment).
This course extends the instruction in organic laboratory techniques, organic synthesis, and the identification of organic

compounds by spectroscopy begun in CHEM 3131.

CHEM 3151 Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2316 and CHEM 2116
Students conduct experiments with the main group elements, the transition metals, organometallic materials, and bioinorganic compounds.

CHEM 3181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

CHEM 3281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

CHEM 3313 Organic Chemistry I Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2316 and CHEM 2116
This is the first lecture course in organic chemistry for science majors. It begins a survey of the structure, reactivity, reactions, reaction mechanisms, and synthesis of compounds containing carbon.

CHEM 3333 Organic Chemistry II Prerequisite(s): CHEM 3313
This is the second lecture course in organic chemistry for science majors. It continues the survey of the structure, reactivity, reactions, reaction mechanisms, and synthesis of compounds containing carbon that was begun in CHEM 3313.

CHEM 3351 Inorganic Chemistry Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2316 and CHEM 2116
This course provides a survey of the chemistry of the main group elements, transition metals, and organometallic compounds in the context of periodic law.

CHEM 3381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

CHEM 3423 Quantitative Analysis Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2316 and CHEM 2116
Corequisite(s): CHEM 3023
This course is a continuation and extension of CHEM 2315 and 2316 into the study of the basic principles of analytical chemistry, which include stoichiometry, and homogeneous and heterogeneous equilibria. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory work on volumetric and gravimetric analysis, statistics, and aspects of instrumental analysis involving spectrophotometry and potentiometry.

CHEM 3443 Modern Analytical Techniques Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2423 and CHEM 3132 and PHYS 2413
Corequisite(s): CHEM 3043
This is an introduction to the basic concepts of applied analytical chemistry. It includes an introduction to instrumentation as applied to routine chemical analysis, including spectroscopy, chromatography and electrochemical methods. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions.

CHEM 3481 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a

minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

CHEM 4014 Introductory Physical Chemistry Laboratory Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2316 and CHEM 2116 and MATH 1451
Corequisite(s): CHEM 4414
This is the laboratory portion of CHEM 4414.

CHEM 4081 Special Topics/Independent Study Lab Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

CHEM 4171 Biochemistry Laboratory Prerequisite(s): Completion of or concurrent enrollment in CHEM 4373
This is an upper level laboratory course which exposes students to the principles and experimental techniques underlying common biochemistry methods such as buffer preparation, ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy, protein and nucleic acid purification, enzyme kinetics, protein and nucleic acid electrophoresis, and polymerase chain reactions which are widely used in research pertaining to the biochemical sciences.

CHEM 4181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

CHEM 4191 Senior Research Project Prerequisite(s): Completion of thirty credit hours of chemistry courses.
Students conduct a laboratory research project, write a research report, and give an oral presentation to the class.

CHEM 4281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

CHEM 4324 Physical Chemistry II Prerequisite(s): CHEM 4414
This course is a survey of the fundamental aspects of thermodynamics including the First and Second Laws as well as Gibbs and Helmholtz Energy and their applications. Acids and bases, basic quantum mechanics, spectroscopy, photochemistry reactions, and macromolecules are also discussed. A working knowledge of calculus is necessary.

CHEM 4351 Advanced Inorganic Chemistry Prerequisite(s): CHEM 3131 and CHEM 3132 and CHEM 3313 and CHEM 3333 and CHEM 3351
This course is an introduction to the structure, bonding, and reactivity of organotransition metal compounds. The focus is on physical organometallic chemistry, with an emphasis on the mechanisms of organometallic transformations and methods for their elucidation. The fundamental reaction types of organotransition metal complexes will be covered including: oxidative addition/reductive elimination, migratory insertion, attack on coordinated ligands, and the reactivity of metallocycles, carbenes, and carbynes. Some applications of organotransition metal complexes in catalysis and in organic chemistry will be featured.

CHEM 4361 Advanced Organic Chemistry Prerequisite(s): CHEM 3131 and CHEM 3132 and CHEM 3313 and CHEM 3333 Study of advanced topics in organic chemistry.

CHEM 4373 Biochemistry Prerequisite(s): CHEM 3333
This course is a study of the more important principles of biochemistry, with emphasis placed on the physical and chemical properties of carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins, the three major components of the living organism.

CHEM 4374 Biochemistry II Prerequisite(s): CHEM 4373
This course is a study of the principles of gene expression, replication, and metabolic pathways. Emphasis is placed on replication, transcription, translation and carbohydrate metabolism. Additional topics will include the citric acid cycle, lipid metabolism, electron transport, and oxidative phosphorylation.

CHEM 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

CHEM 4414 Introductory Physical Chemistry Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2316 and CHEM 2116 and MATH 1451
Corequisite(s): CHEM 4014
A survey of the fundamental principles which govern chemical phenomena. Emphasis is placed on gases, basic thermodynamics, solutions, chemical equilibria, phase equilibria, chemical kinetics, and electrochemical phenomena. A working knowledge of basic calculus is necessary. This course includes one credit hour for laboratory sessions.

CHEM 4481 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

CHEM 5014 Introductory Physical Chemistry Lab Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2316 and CHEM 2116 and MATH 1451
Corequisite(s): CHEM 5414
This is the laboratory portion of CHEM 5414.

CHEM 5171 Biochemistry Laboratory Prerequisite(s): Completion of or concurrent enrollment in CHEM 5373 or CHEM 4373 (or equivalent)
This is a laboratory course which exposes students to the principles and experimental techniques underlying common biochemistry methods such as buffer preparation, ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy, protein and nucleic acid purification, enzyme kinetics, protein and nucleic acid electrophoresis, and polymerase chain reactions which are widely used in research pertaining to the biochemical sciences.

CHEM 5191 Chemistry Research Project Prerequisite(s): Completion of thirty credit hours of chemistry courses (undergraduate or graduate level) Corequisite(s): None
Students conduct a laboratory research project, write a research report, and give an oral presentation to the class.

CHEM 5361 Advanced Organic Chemistry Prerequisite(s): CHEM 3131 and CHEM 3132 and CHEM 3313 and CHEM 3333 (or equivalent) Study of advanced topics in organic chemistry.

CHEM 5373 Biochemistry Prerequisite(s): None
This course is a study of the more important principles of biochemistry, with emphasis placed on the physical and chemical properties of carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins, the three major components of the living organism.

CHEM 5374 Biochemistry II Prerequisite(s): CHEM 4373 or CHEM 5373 (or equivalent)
This course is a study of the principles of gene expression, replication, and metabolic pathways.
Emphasis is placed on replication, transcription, translation and carbohydrate metabolism. Additional topics will include the citric acid cycle, lipid metabolism, electron transport, and oxidative phosphorylation.

CHEM 5414 Introduction to Physical Chemistry Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2316 and CHEM 2116 and MATH 1451
Corequisite(s): CHEM 5014
A survey of the fundamental principles which govern chemical phenomena. Emphasis is placed on gases, basic thermodynamics, solutions, chemical equilibria, phase equilibria, chemical kinetics, and electrochemical phenomena. A working knowledge of basic calculus is necessary. This course includes one credit hour for laboratory sessions.


Professional Coaching (CHNG) Course Descriptions
CHNG 5301 Coaching Methods and Procedures Prerequisite(s): None
Life Coaching is a rapidly growing field that is a natural complement to the Counseling profession. It involves mentoring or guiding an individual as they explore the requisite skills, knowledge, confidence, and goals that they will need to become proficient and successful in the area(s) in which they are being coached. This course serves as an introduction of professional coaching from a Christian perspective with special attention given to coaching theories, practice, skills, and various coaching specialties.

CHNG 6301 Relationship Coaching Prerequisite(s): CHNG 5301
Relationship/Marriage Coaching involves mentoring or guiding a couple as they explore the requisite skills, knowledge, confidence, and goals that they will need to become proficient and successful in the area(s) in which they are being coached. This course will address some of the more advanced skills with which the Relationship/Marriage Coach should become adept (e.g., communication skills, conflict resolution skills). Attention will be paid to boundaries of competence and when referral is appropriate.

CHNG 6302 Executive Leadership Coaching Prerequisite(s): CHNG 5301
This course provides a foundational framework to the structure, strategy, and dynamics of competent and effective leadership. Special attention is given to leadership strategies for navigating decision making, goal setting, project and team management, cultural awareness, inter-generational issues, and balancing work and home life. Attention is given to boundaries of competence and when referrals are appropriate.

CHNG 6303 Organizational Coaching Prerequisite(s): CHNG 5301
This course is designed to review current organizational theory and dynamics as they relate to professional coaching and consultation, especially as it pertains to organizational communication, culture formation, and change management. Attention is given to boundaries of competence and when referrals are appropriate.

CHNG 6304 Spiritual Formation Coaching Prerequisite(s): CHNG 5301
This course has a dual purpose: (1) to teach strategies for coaching others in developing and maintaining rich, satisfying, and healthy spiritual lives; and (2) to engage students in their own personal spiritual formation and the development of spiritual disciplines, while encouraging them to evaluate their current spiritual functioning and how it can be deepened. Attention is given to boundaries of competence and when referrals are appropriate.

CHNG 6305 Life Coaching Foundations I Prerequisite(s): None
This is an introductory course into the field of professional life coaching that examines the fundamental principles of coaching, the role of faith and spirituality, models of theory and coaching practice, core skill development, goal setting, motivation, and change strategies. Attention will also be given to establishing a successful coaching business.

CHNG 6306 Life Coaching Foundations II Prerequisite(s): CHNG 6305
This course builds on Life Coaching Foundations I and explores how to develop a life coaching niche. It addresses advanced skills and technique development, coaching clients for life focus, gender issues and differences,

understanding positive psychology principles, and incorporating personalized strategic action plans.

CHNG 6381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.


Christianity (CHRI) Course Descriptions

CHRI 1301 Introduction to the Bible Prerequisite(s): None
A survey of the Bible designed to introduce the student to the Old and New Testaments, their main themes, and backgrounds.

CHRI 1333 The Good Life and Happiness Prerequisite(s): None
A course that explores the foundations and practices of a good life and happiness. The course engages ancient visions of human flourishing addressed by biblical and philosophical sources and integrates this with modern conceptions of flourishing by means of contemporary psychology. Going beyond the study of ideas, participants will engage practices that are the basis of a good and happy life.

CHRI 2373 Christian Theology and Tradition Prerequisite(s): None
A course designed to introduce the student to Christian beliefs on the Old Testament and the New Testament. Beliefs of scholars who have had a significant impact on Christian thought will also be considered. This course is a required course in the Liberal Arts Core Curriculum.

CHRI 3190 Spiritual Formation Prerequisite(s): None
A practical course cultivating a holistic relationship with God, learning to love God with one’s heart, mind, soul, and strength, focusing especially on traditional spiritual disciplines such as solitude, silence, spiritual reading, contemplative prayer, etc. The course may be taken multiple times for credit.

CHRI 3300 Introduction to Bible and Theology Prerequisite(s): None
A course designed to engage students in introductory students in Old Testament, New Testament, and Christian Doctrine. The intent of this course is to allow the student to understand the basic story of Scripture and foundational Christian beliefs.
CHRI 3301 Old Testament Theology Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or ENGL 13131710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
A course designed to investigate the theology of the Old Testament and to survey selected secondary literature on Old Testament themes.

CHRI 3302 New Testament Theology Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
A course designed to investigate the theology of the New Testament and to survey selected secondary literature on New Testament themes.

CHRI 3303 Spiritual Formation Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
A study of the perspectives and practices by which Christians become formed in the image of Christ through

participation in faith communities. The course will review historic approaches to spiritual formation and encourage personal and congregational disciplines that strengthen faithful living.

CHRI 3311 Hermeneutics Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
A course designed to introduce students to the basic issues, methods, and history of Biblical interpretation. The course will also explore the application of hermeneutical principles to a selected contemporary topic.

CHRI 3314 History of Christianity Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
A course designed to introduce Christianity in its historical development.

CHRI 3325 The Christian Vocation Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
This course includes a study of the occupational field of church vocations with emphasis upon the church vocation worker's personal and ministerial identity, ministerial ethics, Baptist denominational history and polity, and the development of basic skills common to ministry. It incorporates the use of professional ministers from a variety of specialization areas who serve as resource personnel and role models for the aspiring church vocation student.
CHRI 3333 Jesus and His Teachings Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
An intensive study of the life and teachings of Jesus.

CHRI 3336 Christian Leadership Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
This course reviews theories and literature concerning leadership from a Christian perspective. Students will study the theological and ecclesiological objectives of Christian leadership, the spiritual preparation required of leaders, and core practices for leading faithfully and effectively.
CHRI 3344 Paul and His Letters Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
A study of the apostle Paul and his contribution to the progress of early Christianity based upon the book of Acts and the epistles attributed to Paul.
CHRI 3345 The General Letters Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
A study of the non-Pauline letters of the New Testament (James, 1-2 Peter, 1-3 John, Jude), examining their rhetorical style, contextual meaning, and contribution to Christian theology.

CHRI 3346 Psalms Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
This course is designed to study the book of Psalms. The study will address the origin, content, setting, literary forms, overall structure and theology of the book. Attention may also be given to the important role the book has played in Christian history, liturgy, and spirituality.
CHRI 3353 Homiletics Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
A basic course to introduce the student to the principles of preaching and other ministerial speaking. Attention is given to various types of sermons and their preparation and delivery.
CHRI 3363 Evangelism Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
A general study of the theology and methods of evangelism, including practical preparation and application for a life- style evangelism.

CHRI 3370 Palestinian Archaeology Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
A field-based experience in the archaeology of Palestine through readings, lectures, travel to excavated sites, and participation in the excavation of a selected site.

CHRI 3377 Supervised Ministry Practicum-Hospital Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
A field-based course in which the Christian vocations student functions in a ministry role under the supervision of both an experienced hospital professional and a university professor. Permission of instructor is required.

CHRI 3381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

CHRI 4181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

CHRI 4281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

CHRI 4293 Senior Seminar Prerequisite(s): (Completion of 80 semester hours--15 of which must be in the major) and an overall GPA of 2.0 or higher
Directed studies in selected areas of the student's special interests, including opportunities for independent research.

CHRI 4335 Systematic Theology Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
A course designed to study the historical, biblical, and systematic approaches to Christian theology.

CHRI 4343 Old Testament Prophets Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
A study of the prophetic movement in Israel and the writings of the canonical prophets.

CHRI 4344 The Gospel of John Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)

A study of the historical setting, literary features, and theological themes of the Gospel of John.

CHRI 4345 Christian Ethics Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
This course provides a comprehensive study of Christian ethics including biblical and theological foundations, historical developments, and contemporary issues of moral concern. The central role of faith communities in moral development and the importance of church engagement with culture will be emphasized.

CHRI 4346 The Epistle to the Hebrews Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
A study of the historical setting, literary features, and theological themes of the letter to the Hebrews.

CHRI 4347 Amos and Hosea Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
A study of the historical setting, literary features, and theological themes of Amos and Hosea, with a focus on the message to the original hearers and the message to modern readers.

CHRI 4348 Isaiah Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
A study of the historical setting, literary features, and theological themes of Isaiah, with a focus on the message to the original hearers and the message to modern readers.

CHRI 4349 Luke and Acts Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
A study of the historical setting, literary features, and theological themes of Luke's two volume work: the Gospel of Luke and the Acts of the Apostles.

CHRI 4350 The Corinthian Letters Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
This course is designed to introduce students to the New Testament texts of 1 & 2 Corinthians and to guide them towards an appreciative understanding of the material and cultural context of ancient Roman Corinth; the patterns of social life and conflict among early Christians in Corinth; the ethical, social, and theological ideals of Paul; and the place of the Corinthian correspondence in the ongoing life and literature of early Christianity.

CHRI 4351 Apostolic Fathers Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
This course is designed to introduce students to the corpus of early Christian texts commonly called the Apostolic Fathers; to guide them towards an appreciative understanding of the material, cultural, social, and theological context of the Roman world within which these texts were written; and to situate the Apostolic Fathers in the wider life and literature of early Christianity.

CHRI 4352 Jeremiah Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
A study of the historical setting, literary and rhetorical features, and theological themes of the prophetic writings of Jeremiah.

CHRI 4353 World Religions Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
An introduction to the thought and practices of the great religions of the world. Attention is given to the origin, development, and major teachings of Hinduism, Buddhism, Confucianism, Taoism, Shintoism, Judaism, Islam, and Christianity.

CHRI 4354 Exodus Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
A study of the historical setting, literary and rhetorical features, and theological themes of the book of Exodus.

CHRI 4355 Trinitarianism Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
This course addresses the importance of the Trinity for Christian theology. Aspects explored will be the revelation of God as Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; the development of this doctrine; and the relevance and influence this theology has on the life and worship of the church.

CHRI 4356 Luther, Calvin, and the Reformation Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
This course explores the theological, historical, and social impact of the Protestant Reformation in the life of the Church. A particular focus will be the writings and influence of key figures such as Martin Luther and John Calvin.

CHRI 4363 Philosophy of Religion Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
A critical examination of the nature and validity of religious experience and the place of religion in human life. Consideration is given to religious problems such as the existence and nature of God, the source of religious knowledge, the nature of man, the origin and nature of evil. (Offered also as PHIL 4363.)

CHRI 4365 Integrated Psychology Capstone Prerequisite(s): Completion of 80 semester hours – 20 of which must be in the major
This capstone course will draw together the central ideas not related to the theological and psychological disciplines in order to help students integrate the fields. Students will engage approaches to human flourishing, brokenness, and restoration that address biblical, theological, and psychological anthropology in a coherent manner.

CHRI 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

CHRI 4382 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

CHRI 4383 Baptist History Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
A study of Baptist history and polity with particular emphasis given to Baptist origins, developments, distinctive theological positions, leaders, and current trends. Special attention will be given to Baptist life in America and particularly the Southern Baptist Convention.

CHRI 4385 Special Topics Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
A course designed to explore topics of current interest. May also be used for individual study, in which a minimum of 40 clock hours of directed study is required for each semester hour of credit.

CHRI 4391 Romans Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
CHRI 4391 is an upper-level Christianity course. This course fulfills requirements for one elective course required for a minor in Biblical Studies, Theological Studies, or Christian Studies.

CHRI 4392 Revelation Prerequisite(s): (CHRI 1313 and CHRI 1323) or (CHRI 1301 and CHRI 2373) or HNRS 1710 or (CHRI 3300 for students transferring in with 45 or more credits)
CHRI 4392 is an upper-level Christianity course. This course fulfills requirements for one elective course for a major in Christianity or one elective course required for a minor in Biblical Studies, Theological Studies, or Christian Studies.

CHRI 5101 Spiritual Formation I Prerequisite(s): None
A practical course cultivating a holistic relationship with God, learning to love God with one's heart, mind, soul, and strength, focusing especially on traditional spiritual disciplines such as solitude, silence, spiritual reading, contemplative prayer, etc.

CHRI 5102 Spiritual Formation II Prerequisite(s): None
A practical course cultivating a holistic relationship with God, learning to love God with one's heart, mind, soul, and strength, focusing especially on traditional spiritual disciplines such as solitude, silence, spiritual reading, contemplative prayer, etc.

CHRI 5103 Spiritual Formation III Prerequisite(s): None
A practical course cultivating a holistic relationship with God, learning to love God with one's heart, mind, soul, and strength, focusing especially on traditional spiritual disciplines such as solitude, silence, spiritual reading, contemplative prayer, etc.

CHRI 5104 Spiritual Formation IV Prerequisite(s): None
A practical course cultivating a holistic relationship with God, learning to love God with one's heart, mind, soul, and strength, focusing especially on traditional spiritual disciplines such as solitude, silence, spiritual reading, contemplative prayer, etc.
CHRI 5110 Internship I Prerequisite(s): Permission of Instructor
An internship in pastoral ministry with field experience in a church. HCU faculty will provide oversight and mentorship. The course may be taken multiple times for credit.

CHRI 5181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None.
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.
CHRI 5190 Spiritual Formation Prerequisite(s): None
A practical course cultivating a holistic relationship with God, learning to love God with one’s heart, mind, soul, and

strength, focusing especially on traditional spiritual disciplines such as solitude, silence, spiritual reading, contemplative prayer, etc. The course may be taken multiple times for credit.

CHRI 5210 Internship II Prerequisite(s): Permission of Instructor
An internship in pastoral ministry with field experience in a church. HCU faculty will provide oversight and mentorship. The course may be taken multiple times for credit.
CHRI 5300 Introduction to Biblical Texts and Doctrines Prerequisite(s): None
A course designed to engage students in introductory studies in Old Testament, New Testament, and Christian Doctrine.
CHRI 5301 Research Methods Prerequisite(s): None
A practical course to develop effective research and writing skills for graduate-level academic work. The course will cover topics such as developing an effective writing and revising process; using primary and secondary source materials; writing abstracts, book reviews, conference presentations, and research papers; and clarity and precision of language.
CHRI 5305 Theological Inquiry Prerequisite(s): None
A class to prepare students for theological reading and writing at the graduate level. This class will focus on Biblical exegesis.

CHRI 5310 Christian Scriptures I Prerequisite(s): None
Major issues of Old Testament background and interpretation. The areas of study are the Pentateuch and Wisdom Literature. The study will involve specific literature as well as historical, theological, sociological, canonical, and critical issues of the biblical text.
CHRI 5311 Hermeneutics Prerequisite(s): None
A course designed to introduce a student to the basic issues, methods, and history of biblical interpretation.

CHRI 5315 Christian Scriptures II Prerequisite(s): None
The focus of this course of study is on New Testament background and interpretation. The areas of study are the Gospels and Acts. The study will involve specific literature as well as historical, theological, sociological, canonical, and critical issues of the biblical text.
CHRI 5325 Introduction to Missions Prerequisite(s): None
This course of study is designed to introduce the student to the biblical, theological, historical and practical basis for Christian missions. Special attention will be given to current practices and contemporary issues related to global missions.

CHRI 5326 The Bible and Wholeness; Context, Interpretation, and Formation Prerequisite(s): None
Christians understand the Bible to offer the frame of reference (creation, fall, redemption, and consummation) for pursuing human wholeness and restoration. This course will engage the crucial structure of the Biblical narrative, important hermeneutical / interpretive perspective concerning our encounter with the Scriptures, and reading strategies found helpful in the care and formation of persons, such as lectio divina, Ignatian spirituality, healing prayer, and biblical counseling.

CHRI 5327 God, Humans, and Salvation Prerequisite(s): None
Basic Christian teachings regarding the nature of God, human beings, and salvation will be discussed within the context

of psychological science and clinical practice.

CHRI 5330 History of Christianity Prerequisite(s): None
In this course, the student will study the history of Christianity in the ancient, medieval, and modern periods. Although the primary focus will be on the development of Western (Latin) Christianity, some consideration will be given to Byzantine (Eastern) Christendom as well as the spread of Christianity throughout the third world. In addition to the basic content of the history of Christianity, attention will be given to the application of a critical historiography in the interpretation of events and movements.

CHRI 5340 Systematic Theology Prerequisite(s): None
The course will focus on twelve areas of doctrinal study. The student will be assigned doctrines to examine from a biblical perspective and from a comparative study of various theologies on the doctrines assigned.

CHRI 5350 The Theology of the New Testament Prerequisite(s): None
The study concentrates on the theological message of the New Testament as communicated by the various New Testament witnesses.

CHRI 5360 Old Testament Theology Prerequisite(s): None
The study concentrates on the theological message of the Old Testament as communicated by the various Old Testament documents and literature in the discipline of Old Testament studies.

CHRI 5370 Second Temple Judaism Prerequisite(s): None
This course focuses on the history of Judaism from roughly 300 B.C. through 200 A.D., including discussion of changes in the political scene and the development of theological themes in Jewish literature of this period.

CHRI 5380 The Early Patristic Period Prerequisite(s): CHRI 5315
This course focuses on the development of Christianity from the end of the apostolic era through the early patristic era. It explores the parting of the ways between Jews and Christians; the social, political, and religious situation of post-apostolic Christianity; and the development of church institutional structures, orthodox theology, and a canon of scripture.

CHRI 5381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

CHRI 6309: Homiletics Prerequisite(s): None
A basic course to introduce the student to principles of preaching and other ministerial speaking. Attention is given to various types of sermons and their preparation and delivery.

CHRI 6311 Philosophy and the Christian Faith Prerequisite(s): None
The study will introduce students to the general topic of the relationship of theology and philosophy as well as major philosophical inquiries in the area of religion. In particular, students will pursue concentrated investigation among major issues in the field of philosophy of religion such as the nature and existence of God, the nature of religious experience, the nature and understanding of religious language, the source of religious knowledge, the nature of evil, the relationship between Christianity and other reflective disciplines, and Christianity's response to philosophical challenge and discourse.

CHRI 6312 Church Ministry Prerequisite(s): None
Students will study church ministry, pastoral care, and spiritual formation in this course. Church ministry will include areas such as evangelism, church growth, and administration. Pastoral care will include practical aspects of the pastoral role in caring for people. Spiritual formation will relate the spiritual life to the tasks of ministry. Students also will conduct interviews with local and state church and denominational leaders for practical aspects of ministry, available resources, and programming helps.

CHRI 6313 Pastoral Care and Spiritual Formation Prerequisite(s): None
This course examines the integration of the life of prayer and the caring tasks of ministry. Classic writings in the area of pastoral care will be used with particular reference to the functions of ministry and the role of the devotional life in the performance of various ministerial duties. The course may also focus on the relationship between the cura animarum of classic pastoral care and the therapeutic approaches of contemporary pastoral counseling.

CHRI 6314 Missions and Evangelism Prerequisite(s): None
This course of study will include the history of missions and the history of great awakenings. Also included would be studies in the church growth movement. Practical applications of evangelistic missions or church growth activities will be part of the requirements for this course.

CHRI 6315 Christian Scriptures III Prerequisite(s): None
This course continues the study of Old Testament background and interpretation. The areas of study are the major and minor prophets. The study will involve specific literature as well as historical, theological, sociological, canonical, and critical issues of the biblical text.

CHRI 6320 Christian Scriptures IV Prerequisite(s): None
This course continues the study of New Testament background and interpretation. The areas of study are Paul’s letters, general letters, and Revelation. The study will involve specific literature as well as historical, theological, sociological, canonical, and critical issues of the biblical text.

CHRI 6325 Christian Scripture V Prerequisite(s): None
This course continues the study of Old Testament background and interpretation. The areas of study are the historical books of the Old Testament. The study will involve specific literature as well as historical, theological, sociological, canonical, and critical issues of the biblical text.

CHRI 6328 Christian Scripture VI Prerequisite(s): None
This course continues the study of New Testament background and interpretation. The areas of study are the general letters in the New Testament and Revelation. The study will involve specific literature as well as historical, theological, sociological, canonical, and critical issues of the biblical text.

CHRI 6330 Christian Readings Prerequisite(s): None
Involves selected primary and secondary readings within specific areas as designated by the professor and according to the student's educational needs in their fields of study. Limited to one enrollment.

CHRI 6333 Historical and Moral Theology Prerequisite(s): None
The subject of this course is the historical development of Christian theology and ethics from the second century to the present. Directed study will focus on the theological and moral ideas in the writings of significant figures of ancient, medieval, and modern Christianity. The student will be required to study each writer as a person of his or her own age by means of a critical analysis of the influences, context, and content of his or her own writings. Additionally,

consideration will be given to the matter of how the theology and ethics of the Christian past offer insight into contemporary issues and problems.

CHRI 6335 Readings in OT Prerequisite(s): None
Students will study primary and secondary readings in Old Testament literature with specific areas as designated by the professor and student needs.

CHRI 6340 Christian Readings Prerequisite(s): None
Involves selected primary and secondary readings within specific areas as designated by the professor and according to the student's educational needs in their fields of study. Limited to one enrollment.

CHRI 6345 Readings in NT Prerequisite(s): None
Students will study primary and secondary readings in New Testament literature within specific areas as designated by the professor and student needs.

CHRI 6350 Christian Readings Prerequisite(s): None
Involves selected primary and secondary readings within specific areas as designated by the professor and according to the student's educational needs in their fields of study. Limited to one enrollment.

CHRI 6381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

CHRI 6392 Thesis Prerequisite(s): None
The thesis component is in lieu of the last six hours in the Master of Arts in Theological Studies (MATS) program. The thesis proposed by the student must be selected under the guidance and approval of the department, and the rendering of the thesis must be in a minimum of 75 pages.

CHRI 6393 Thesis Prerequisite(s): None
The thesis component is in lieu of the last six hours in the Master of Arts in Theological Studies (MATS) program. The thesis proposed by the student must be selected under the guidance and approval of the department, and the rendering of the thesis must be in a minimum of 75 pages.

CHRI 6395 Theological Integration Capstone Prerequisite(s): At least 27 hours of 5xxx or higher-level courses of any rubric
This course focuses on drawing together the expertise derived from specific theological disciplines (biblical studies, theological studies, and practical theology) to help participants integrate that knowledge into a coherent model for applied theology. The course will explore best practices for integrating different sources of theological knowledge (as with Quadrilateral) and test those practices through analysis of case studies.

CHRI 7201 Research Seminar Prerequisite(s): None
This course consists of two primary elements. Students will participate in a research symposium in which research presentations are delivered by faculty, advanced students, and invited guests. The course focuses on the skills and methods of doctoral level research, including preparation of the student’s individual project.

CHRI 7212 DMin Research Project Prerequisite(s): None
Students produce a project which demonstrates applied consideration of theology and ministry. Students may choose

1) to prepare a traditional DMin research dissertation, or 2) a substantial project based on discussion with and pre- approval by the department and the supervisor.

CHRI 7301 Kingdom Theology Prerequisite(s): None
This course explores the biblical and theological foundation undergirding the holistic mission and ministry of the church as part of God’s Kingdom purposes for the world. In particular, the course will focus on the climactic story that unites the Christian Scriptures.

CHRI 7302 Kingdom Ministry Prerequisite(s): None
This course explores the nature of Christian leaders’ roles in the Kingdom and the characteristics of a ministry that accords with Kingdom purposes.

CHRI 7303 Theology and Culture Prerequisite(s): None
This course focuses on analysis of the cultural forces impacting the church today (disenchantment, pluralism, anxiety, etc.) and explores theological resources to address these forces for ministry within a setting shaped by them.

CHRI 7304 Strategic Leadership and Communication Prerequisite(s): None
This course addresses contemporary issues regarding organizational leadership. The center of the course revolves around case study analysis, and topics include but are not limited to transformational leadership, leadership development, conflict management, andragogy, and spiritual formation.

CHRI 7320 Pastoral Ministry Prerequisite(s): None
Students will study church ministry, pastoral care, and spiritual formation in this course. It will include practical ministry such as leadership, church growth, and administration, as well as strategies in caring for a congregation and its members.

CHRI 7321 Organizational Leadership Prerequisite(s): None
This course examines theories and models of leadership. Environmental factors, organizational objectives, ministry culture, and individual and group ethical standards will be examined and students will develop a theory of “Christian” leadership.

CHRI 7322 World Religions Prerequisite(s): None
An introduction to the thought and practices of the great religions of the world. Attention is given to the origin, development, and central teachings of major world religions. Particular emphasis is given to the way in which one can engage participants in non-Christian religions and communicate Christian thought in various cultures.

CHRI 7325 Studies in Missional Leadership Prerequisite(s): None
Missional leadership topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour of credit must be included.

CHRI 7330 Studies in the Gospels and Acts Prerequisite(s): None
This course on New Testament background and interpretation focuses on the topic of the Gospels and Acts. The study involves specific literature as well as historical, theological, sociological, canonical, and critical issues of the biblical text.

CHRI 7331 Jesus the Preacher Prerequisite(s): None

This course is an intensive study of the life and teachings of Jesus; primarily giving attention to Jesus’ homiletical and pedagogical style. As a model for humanity, Jesus also serves as a model for preaching and teaching.

CHRI 7332 Studies in Pauline Letters Prerequisite(s): None
This course on New Testament background and interpretation focuses on the topic of Paul’s letters. The study involves specific literature as well as historical, theological, sociological, canonical, and critical issues of the biblical text.

CHRI 7333 New Testament Perspectives on Pastoral Ministry Prerequisite(s): None
This course examines the relationship between the teachings of the New Testament as they relate to pastoral ministry and their modern-day practice, especially in the context of the local Church. The course primarily looks at pastoral theology and praxis as it developed in the earliest stages of the Christian community.

CHRI 7334 Israel Study Trip Prerequisite(s): None
Students will have the opportunity to learn about the history and life of ancient and modern Israel through a trip to the Holy Land. This course will introduce students to the study of archeological, the complex history of the land, and the contemporary political challenges of Israel and the surrounding countries.

CHRI 7335 Studies in New Testament Prerequisite(s): None
New Testament topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 45 hours of work for each hour of credit must be included.

CHRI 7341 Modern & Postmodern Philosophy & Culture Prerequisite(s): None
This course is an exploration of ideas and cultural developments from the 16th Century to the present, focusing especially on the relationship between reason and faith, the cultural consequences of modernity, and the theological challenges and opportunities of the present day. Students will read philosophical, cultural, and literary texts by a range of authors.

CHRI 7342 Theology & the Imagination Prerequisite(s): None
This course is an exploration of the use of literature and art in theology and pastoral ministry, focusing on the theory and practice of imagination as a mode of knowing and communicating truth. Theoretical perspectives will include those of C.S. Lewis, George MacDonald, and J.R.R. Tolkien. Other materials will include a range of classic and contemporary texts that explore theological themes in both fictional and non-fictional modes.

CHRI 7343 Theological Aesthetics Prerequisite(s): None
This course is an examination of texts from the history of theology and philosophy, focusing on the questions of beauty, appropriateness, and value of both art and nature. Particular attention is given to the role that belief in God has in the creative process and the meaning and motivation for artistic creation.

CHRI 7345 Studies in Faith and Culture Prerequisite(s): None
Faith and culture topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 45 hours of work for each hour of credit must be included.


Cinema Production (CINE) Course Descriptions
CINE 1321 The Art of Cinema Production Prerequisite(s): None

An overview of the media production process, including an introduction to camera operation, lighting and sound equipment, general set protocols, post-production software, and workflow, as well as particular aesthetic considerations within the cinema production.

CINE 2100 Storytelling in Cinema Prerequisite(s): NARR 1300
Corequisite(s): NARR 2200
Provides students opportunities to apply the principles developed in Art of Storytelling to specific cinematic projects.

CINE 3125 Media Studies Prerequisite(s): Will vary depending on the specific topic Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
This course is programmed each semester to expose students to a broad range of cinematic styles and approaches. Classes focus on a variety of subjects (e.g., a European Film Survey, the complete works of Frank Capra, or a season of Emmy-award-winning television). This course may be repeated for credit.

CINE 3180 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): Will vary depending on the specific topic Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. This course may be repeated for credit.

CINE 3225 Media Studies Prerequisite(s): Will vary depending on the specific topic Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
This course is programmed each semester to expose students to a broad range of cinematic styles and approaches. Classes focus on a variety of subjects (e.g., a European Film Survey, the complete works of Frank Capra, or a season of Emmy-award-winning television). This course may be repeated for credit.

CINE 3280 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): Will vary depending on the specific topic Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 3 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. This course may be repeated for credit.

CINE 3320 History of Cinema Prerequisite(s): None
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
A comprehensive survey of the history of cinema. Beginning with the early, silent film pioneers and exploring a wide- range of international and American filmmakers, this course walks students through the complex and multi-faceted evolution of the film medium and its universal visual grammar.

CINE 3321 Cinematic Core Principles Prerequisite(s): None
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities; Narrative Arts Equipment
An introduction to the distinct aesthetic elements of the cinematic medium, with an emphasis on historical foundations and practical opportunities for application in cinematic production.

CINE 3322 Introduction to Media Production Prerequisite(s): None
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities; Narrative Arts Equipment
A comprehensive overview of the media production process, including an introduction to camera operation, lighting and sound equipment, general set protocols, post-production software, and workflow.

CINE 3325 Media Studies Prerequisite(s): Will vary depending on the specific topic

Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
This course is programmed each semester to expose students to a broad range of cinematic styles and approaches. Classes focus on a variety of subjects (e.g., a European Film Survey, the complete works of Frank Capra, or a season of Emmy-award-winning television). This course may be repeated for credit.

CINE 3351 Cinema Pre-Production Prerequisite(s): CINE 3321, NARR 2200, NARR 2312
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities; Narrative Arts Production
Students collaborate on the development and pre-production of a media project, learning key principles in screenwriting, directing, and producing.

CINE 3352 Cinema Production Prerequisite(s): CINE 3321, CINE 3322, NARR 2312
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities; Narrative Arts Production
Students collaborate on the production of a media project, learning key principles in cinematography, production design, and set operations.

CINE 3353 Cinema Post-Production Prerequisite(s): CINE 3321, CINE 3322, NARR 2200
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities; Narrative Arts Production
Students collaborate on the post-production of a media project, learning key principles in editing, sound design, and visual effects.

CINE 3361 Screenwriting Workshop Prerequisite(s): CINE 3321, NARR 2200 Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
An introduction to the art, technique, and structure of screenplay writing. Through exercises, students will develop their writing abilities and craft their first screenplay.

CINE 3365 Acting Workshop Prerequisite(s): None
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
Students are taught the elements of acting and directing actors. Key theories and approaches are explored, including method acting and improvisation.

CINE 3380 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): Will vary depending on the specific topic Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. This course may be repeated for credit.

CINE 4160 Advanced Practicum Prerequisite(s): Permission of the Instructor
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities; Narrative Arts Equipment
Programmed with specific topics each semester, this practicum provides students the opportunity to hone their craft through specific projects or apprenticeships overseen by a faculty member. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. This course may be repeated for credit.

CINE 4192 Sophomore Portfolio Prerequisite(s): NARR 2200, NARR 2310, NARR 2312 and at least 9 hours of CINE, DIGI, or WRIT courses Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
Students prepare a portfolio representing their best work in order to receive faculty feedback and direction for the next stage of their academic studies.

CINE 4194 Junior Portfolio Prerequisite(s): NARR 3310

Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
Working with a faculty member, students prepare a resume and portfolio in order to secure a professional internship. CINE 4194 is the prerequisite to CINE 4195/4295/4395 - Internship.

CINE 4195 Internship Prerequisite(s): CINE 4194
Credit is awarded for approved professional internships, secured as part of CINE 4194 Junior Portfolio. A minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. This course may be repeated for credit.

CINE 4199 Senior Portfolio Prerequisite(s): CINE 4194 Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
Working with a faculty member, students complete a professional resume and portfolio featuring their best coursework and personal projects (in preparation for interviews, etc.)

CINE 4260 Advanced Practicum Prerequisite(s): Permission of the Instructor
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities; Narrative Arts Equipment
Programmed with specific topics each semester, this practicum provides students the opportunity to hone their craft through specific projects or apprenticeships overseen by a faculty member. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. This course may be repeated for credit.

CINE 4295 Internship Prerequisite(s): CINE 4194
Credit is awarded for approved professional internships, secured as part of CINE 4194 Junior Portfolio. A minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. This course may be repeated for credit.

CINE 4351 Advanced Pre-Production Prerequisite(s): CINE 3351
This advanced course builds upon the groundwork established in CINE 3351 - Cinema Pre-Production, providing students opportunities to take lead roles on a media project, practicing key principles in screenwriting, directing, and producing. This course may be repeated for credit.

CINE 4352 Advanced Production Prerequisite(s): CINE 3352
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities; Narrative Arts Production
This advanced course builds upon the groundwork established in CINE 3352 - Cinema Production, providing students opportunities to take lead roles on a media project, practicing key principles in directing, producing, cinematography, production design, and set operations. This course may be repeated for credit.

CINE 4353 Advanced Post-Production Prerequisite(s): CINE 3353
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities; Narrative Arts Production
This advanced course builds upon the groundwork established in CINE 3353 - Cinema Post-Production, providing students opportunities to take lead roles on a media project, practicing key principles in editing, sound design, and visual effects. This course may be repeated for credit.

CINE 4360 Advanced Practicum Prerequisite(s): Permission of the Instructor
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities; Narrative Arts Equipment
Programmed with specific topics each semester, this practicum provides students the opportunity to hone their craft through specific projects or apprenticeships overseen by a faculty member. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. This course may be repeated for credit.

CINE 4361 Advanced Screenwriting Workshop Prerequisite(s): CINE 3361

Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
This advanced course builds upon the groundwork established in CINE 3361 - Screenwriting Workshop, providing students opportunities to craft longer and more complex screenplays with additional faculty and peer feedback. This course may be repeated for credit.

CINE 4365 Advanced Acting Workshop Prerequisite(s): CINE 3365
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
This advanced course builds upon the groundwork established in CINE 3365 - Acting Workshop, providing students opportunities to practice acting with additional faculty and peer feedback. This course may be repeated for credit.

CINE 4395 Internship Prerequisite(s): CINE 4194
Credit is awarded for approved professional internships, secured as part of CINE 4194 Junior Portfolio. A minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. This course may be repeated for credit.

CINE 6185 Internship Prerequisite(s): CINE 6323
Credit is awarded for approved professional internships. A minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. This course may be repeated for credit.

CINE 6285 Internship Prerequisite(s): CINE 6323
Credit is awarded for approved professional internships. A minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. This course may be repeated for credit.

CINE 6310 Faith, Culture, and the Arts Prerequisite(s): None
This course explores the role of the Christian artist in culture. Students will study how great Christian thinkers have thought about culture and art throughout history and be challenged to understand their vocation as artists and media creators from a biblical perspective. Students will also develop an understanding of how to live out their faith through their work as they seek to affect the culture around them. This course may be repeated for credit.

CINE 6320 Topics & Genres: Filmmakers on Cinema Prerequisite(s): None
These courses examine cinematic techniques for filmmakers through the lens of other cinematic artists. This course is programmed each semester to expose students to a broad range of cinematic styles and approaches. This course may be repeated for credit.

CINE 6321 Cinematic Core Principles Prerequisite(s): None
An overview and survey of the cinematic medium and its various forms, with an emphasis on historical foundations and developing opportunities. Includes an in-depth look at the fundamental components of the medium – writing, directing, acting, acting, cinematography, and editing – and synthesizes these various roles so that students can experience how these components work together to create the end product. Building off small exercises, students will produce short films in this course.

CINE 6322 Art of Story Telling Prerequisite(s): None
An overview and survey of storytelling across multiple mediums, from ancient oral tradition to modern media. This class will explore the role story telling plays in culture and help prepare students in the development, presentation, and pitching of stories.

CINE 6323 Media Industry & Business Prerequisite(s): None
An overview of the business and legal elements that will affect students’ work, whether as independent filmmakers or

in industry careers. This class also examines the changing dynamics in the digital economy and trains students in the art of pitching and presentation.

CINE 6331 Screenwriting Workshop Prerequisite(s): None
A writing workshop in which students will create and revise original screenplays. Over the course of the semester students will learn to critically assess their own work as well as the work of their peers. CINE 6331 is an introduction to the screenwriting workshop.

CINE 6332 Screenwriting Workshop II Prerequisite(s): CINE 6331
A writing workshop in which students will create and revise original screenplays. Over the course of the semester students will learn to critically assess their own work as well as the work of their peers. CINE 6332 builds upon the experience and skills acquired in CINE 6331.

CINE 6333 Screenwriting Workshop III Prerequisite(s): CINE 6332
A writing workshop in which students will create and revise original screenplays. Over the course of the semester students will learn to critically assess their own work as well as the work of their peers. CINE 6333 builds upon the experience and skills acquired in CINE 6331 and 6332.

CINE 6334 Screenwriting Workshop IV Prerequisite(s): CINE 6333
A writing workshop in which students will create and revise original screenplays. Over the course of the semester students will learn to critically assess their own work as well as the work of their peers. CINE 6334 builds upon the experience and skills acquired in CINE 6331, 6332 and 6333.

CINE 6380 Special Topics Prerequisite(s): None
Special topics and projects are determined based on student interest and need, faculty availability, and subject matter that would be supportive to the curriculum. This course may be repeated for credit.

CINE 6385 Internship Prerequisite(s): CINE 6323
Credit is awarded for approved professional internships. A minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. This course may be repeated for credit.

CINE 6391 Thesis Project I Prerequisite(s): CINE 6334
Under the direction of a faculty mentor, students will write or produce a faculty-approved cinematic thesis.

CINE 6392 Thesis Project II Prerequisite(s): CINE 6391
Under the direction of a faculty mentor, students will write or produce a faculty-approved cinematic thesis.


Computer Information Systems Management (CISM) Course Descriptions
CISM 3330 Management Information Systems Prerequisite(s): ACCT 2301
Provides a basic understanding of the value and uses of information systems for business operation, management decision- making, and strategic advantage. Concentrates on providing the tools needed for mastery of the information systems concepts and terms important to non-technical business managers.

CISM 6367 Global Business and Technology Strategies Prerequisite(s): MGMT 5260

Focuses on information technology management issues that must be addressed for a company to succeed in the intensely competitive global marketplace. Specific topics include models and paradigms of global information systems, national information technology infrastructure, technical and managerial information technology issues in different parts of the world, and technology transfer. Graduate Business programs only.


Classical Greek (CLAS) Course Descriptions
CLAS 1343 Ancient Rhetoric for Modern People Prerequisite(s): None
A course on the ancient art off speaking well and its modern applications. The course surveys the history of rhetoric from Socrates and the sophists (fifth century BC) through the Second Sophistic (second century AD) and introduces students to the basic elements of rhetorical theory through the ancient rhetorical handbooks. Applications of rhetoric in the New Testament and Greco-Roman literature will be used as models to teach the art to students for use in modern writing, oral delivery, critical analysis, and debate.

CLAS 1351 Classical Greek I Prerequisite(s): None
Elementary introduction to the fundamentals of Classical, principally Attic, Greek. Topics include alphabet, pronunciation, basic vocabulary, grammar and syntax, and practice in reading elementary Classical Greek. Graded reading material is adapted from classical texts and cultivates an appreciation of Classical literature and culture.

CLAS 1352 Classical Greek II Prerequisite(s): CLAS 1351
Continuation of elementary Classical Greek sequence. Topics include continued study of vocabulary, grammar and syntax, reading more difficult Greek, and gaining greater appreciation of Classical literature and culture.

CLAS 2351 Classical Greek III Prerequisite(s): CLAS 1352
An intermediate course in Classical Greek with three main goals: to develop proficiency in reading Classical Greek; to strengthen command of Classical Greek grammar and vocabulary; and, to explore key features of Greek life and culture. Students read extended selections in original Greek prose. Classroom discussion addresses cultural and historical issues while also reviewing grammar.

CLAS 3301 Classical Mythology Prerequisite(s): None
This course introduces the major Greek and Roman Myths in translation, analyzes the ways myths function in ancient and modern society, and considers the importance of Classical Myth on the modern world.

CLAS 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

CLAS 5310 Classics and Christianity Prerequisite(s): None
This course surveys religious, philosophical, and other cultural themes of the ancient Greco-Roman world and their relation to the early Christian movement and its theology.

CLAS 5320 Classical Philosophy Prerequisite(s): None
This course offers a survey of ancient philosophy from the pre-Socratics of the sixth century BC through the demise of the major schools of the Hellenistic period and the rise of eclectic philosophy during the Roman period.

CLAS 5330 Greco-Roman Religion Prerequisite(s): None

This course offers a survey of Greek and Roman religion, including study of mythology, cultic worship, and philosophy.

CLAS 5340 Classical Archaeology Prerequisite(s): None
This course offers an introduction to the principles of classical archaeology and a survey of important Greek and Roman material remains.


Speech Communication (COMM) Course Descriptions
COMM 1101 Forensic Workshop Prerequisite(s): Permission of the instructor
Workshop for students who actively compete in mock trial tournaments. A maximum of four credit hours may be counted toward a degree.

COMM 1323 Rhetoric and Public Speaking Prerequisite(s): None
This course improves communication skills in a variety of contexts and develops an understanding and appreciation of the importance of public rhetoric in a democratic society. Since ancient Greek and Roman times, rhetoric has been taught both as the foundation of a liberal arts education and as an essential skill of democratic citizenship.

COMM 2101 Forensic Workshop Prerequisite(s): Permission of the instructor
Workshop for students who actively compete in mock trial tournaments. A maximum of four credit hours may be counted toward a degree.

COMM 3101 Forensic Workshop Prerequisite(s): Permission of the instructor
Workshop for students who actively compete in mock trial tournaments. A maximum of four credit hours may be counted toward a degree.

COMM 3323 Communication Theory Prerequisite(s): None
The class provides a comprehensive view of the theoretical traditions that influence our understanding of communication.

COMM 3324 Legal Communication Prerequisite(s): None
This course examines the central role that communication occupies in the study, practice, and understanding of the legal process. Students will be introduced to key elements of the communication process relevant in all criminal justice and legal settings and will learn basic and advanced principles of trial advocacy through participation in a mock trial.

COMM 3334 Argumentation and Advocacy Prerequisite(s): None
This course explores the nature, types, effects, and ethical dimensions of argument. Current public policy issues will be considered in classroom discussions, with the goal of teaching students how to express themselves clearly in speaking and writing.

COMM 4101 Forensic Workshop Prerequisite(s): Permission of the instructor
Workshop for students who actively compete in mock trial tournaments. A maximum of four credit hours may be counted toward a degree.

COMM 4304 Interpersonal Communication Prerequisite(s): None
A study of the theory and practice of person-to-person interaction. Examines such topics as self-disclosure, trust,

emotions, perception and language, intimacy and distance, and conflict resolution.

COMM 4314 American Public Address Prerequisite(s): None
A study of the speakers and speeches that have shaped our history from colonial America to the present. The tools of rhetorical criticism will be developed and applied.

COMM 4315 Political Communication Prerequisite(s): None
This course investigates the role of communication in contemporary American politics. Topics to be discussed include speeches, rhetorical artifacts, and political campaigns.

COMM 4323 Intercultural Communication Prerequisite(s): None
A study of the impact of globalization, technology, travel, and immigration on communication. The effects of culture and experience on perception are also studied.

COMM 4373 Internship in Speech Communication Prerequisite(s): Permission of instructor
Directed work experience in a variety of public and private organizations. The primary objective of this course is to provide students with opportunities to apply speech communication theory and practice in a career-oriented setting. Also provides students with the opportunity to attain applied research experience.

COMM 6310 Intercultural Communication and Leadership Prerequisite(s): None
This course will study principles of intercultural communication from the fields of social psychology, cultural anthropology, and communication theory integrated with selected areas of personal encounter in cross-cultural settings. It will also look at the nature of Christian leadership, primarily in the context of international missions. Attention is given to various character qualities and leadership competencies necessary for effectiveness in cross- cultural ministry.


Computer Science (COSC) Course Descriptions
COSC 1351 Introduction to Computer Programming Prerequisite(s): (Credit for or registration in MATH 1434 or higher) or credit for BUSA 2301
An overview of the field of computing, applications, algorithms, data structures, rudimentary programming, machine architecture, digital logic, history, impact, and current trends. Introductory programming using an objects-first approach. Problem analysis and solution. Introductory modeling and abstraction. Documentation, good programming practices. Data and control structures as needed.

COSC 1352 Intermediate Computer Programming Prerequisite(s): ((MATH 1434 or higher) or BUSA 2301) and COSC 1351
An introduction to computer programming using an objects first approach; problem solving; an overview of the field of computing. Analysis, design and implementation of programs. Application structures, algorithm development, event-driven programming, graphical user interfaces, exception handling, recursion.

COSC 2351 Data Structures Prerequisite(s): COSC 1352 and ((MATH 1451 or a satisfactory score on an HCU required placement exam) or BUSA 2301)
The definition, representation, and manipulation of basic data structures such as arrays, stacks, queues, trees, and graphs. Practical applications of these structures will be emphasized.

COSC 2353 Operating Systems Prerequisite(s): COSC 1352

An introduction to operating systems concepts. Topics include process management, storage management, device management, performance, security, and case studies of modern operating systems.

COSC 2354 Advanced Data Structures and Algorithms Prerequisite(s): COSC 2351
This course emphasizes the study of high-performance specialized data structures (self-balancing trees, dynamic graphs, binary heaps) and their implementations using the Java language. Students in this course are also introduced to the basic object-oriented concepts of abstractions and generics to develop abstract advanced searching and sorting algorithms as well as abstract data structures.

COSC 2355 Database Management Systems Prerequisite(s): COSC 1352
Database concepts, models and applications; database management systems; implementation of a practical database.

COSC 2454 Advanced Data Structures, Algorithms, and Programming Prerequisite(s): COSC 2351
This course emphasizes the study of high-performance specialized data structures (self-balancing trees, dynamic graphs, binary heaps) and their implementations using the Java language. Students in this course are also introduced to the basic object-oriented concepts of abstractions and generics to develop abstract advanced searching and sorting algorithms as well as abstract data structures. This course also includes a laboratory component that reinforces fundamental programming concepts.

COSC 3341 Computer Architecture Prerequisite(s): COSC 2351
Architecture and organization of computer systems. Topics include the processor, control unit and microprogramming, computer arithmetic, memory hierarchy and memory management, input/output, instruction sets.

COSC 3342 Computer Networks Prerequisite(s): COSC 2353
An overview of computer networks. Topics include network topologies, layers, local area networks, and performance measurement and analysis.

COSC 3352 Theory of Computing Prerequisite(s): COSC 2351 and MATH 3311
An overview of formal languages, the abstract models of computing capable of recognizing those languages, and the grammars used to generate them.

COSC 3354 Web Application Programming Prerequisite(s): COSC 2355 or MIS 3330
In this project-based course, students will create multi-user Web applications involving application development for front-end and back-end programming in a client-server communications technology. Topics covered may include advanced implementations of both markup as well as scripting languages, data management, and effective uses of database management systems for back-end service side Web development concepts.

COSC 4331 Introduction to Cyber Security Prerequisite(s): COSC 2353 and permission of instructor
An overview of cyber security; provides students with practical cyber security experience based on theoretical foundations. Topics include: computer network defense, computer network attack, wireless security.

COSC 4352 Software Design and Engineering Prerequisite(s): COSC 2353
Design, construction, and maintenance of large software systems. Project planning, requirements analysis, software design methodologies, software implementation and testing, maintenance.

COSC 4381 Data Analytics Prerequisite(s): COSC 2354 or COSC 2454

Introduction to data analytics and key tools and concepts from the functional, technical, and implementation perspectives of using data analytics to solve real world challenges.


Counseling (COUN) Course Descriptions
COUN 5309 Counselor Professional Identity and Function Prerequisite(s): None
This course is designed to provide students with didactic and experiential training as a general orientation to the helping relationship and the broader counseling profession, including the basic counseling skills and spiritual orientation used in the relationship between a counselor and the person(s) seeking help. A multi-level focus looks at the roles and characteristics of the counselor and counselee, including one’s worldview and belief system. In addition, attention is given to understanding the ethical and personal nature of the helping relationship, as well as available resources, which may be mobilized as growth producing and change agents.

COUN 5310 Ethical and Legal Issues in Counseling Prerequisite(s): None
This course introduces students to concepts and principles regarding ethical, legal, and liability related issues and responsibilities encountered by students, residents, and licensed professional counselors, including professional codes of ethics, ethical and legal aspects of practice, and the impact of values, beliefs, and cultural norms on ethical dilemmas and decision making.

COUN 5311 Advanced Ethics and Practice Management Prerequisite(s): COUN 5310
This course builds on COUN 5310 in the development of counselor ethics and the understanding of state law specific to the counseling profession. Topics include, but are not limited to: medical records management, an overview of business/family law, professional practice issues and guidelines, and the study of current regulatory board rules. This course is required by the Texas State Board of Examiners of Professional Counselors (TSBEPC).

COUN 5312 Marriage, Couple, and Family Counseling Theories Prerequisite(s): None
This course is an introduction to the field of couples and family therapy. It will feature theory and practice in the treatment of dyadic relationships, marriages, and families (including families with children). Students will develop an understanding of the prominent theories, including emphasis on systems theories that form the basis of relevant therapy approaches. (Offered also as PSYC 5312.)

COUN 5313 Methods and Techniques in Counseling Prerequisite(s): None
This course will introduce the student to those counseling skills which communicate the qualities of empathy, genuineness, and unconditional positive regard, and which facilitate building the foundation of the therapeutic working alliance. The course will include extensive skills-practice, role-playing, and videotaped exercises. Intake skills and additional counseling techniques will be introduced didactically and practiced in class. Course is offered only in residential format. (Offered also as PSYC 5313.)

COUN 5314 Methods and Techniques in Christian Counseling Prerequisite(s): None
This course is designed to introduce graduate students to basic techniques, methods, and theories behind the practice of Christian counseling and to integrate established psychotherapeutic techniques into the practice Christian counseling. The course will include extensive skills-practice, role-playing, and videotaped exercises. Intake skills and additional counseling techniques will be introduced didactically and practiced in class. Course is offered only in residential format.

COUN 5315 Christian Integration Seminar I Prerequisite(s): None
This course is designed to provide students with didactic and experiential training as a general orientation to the helping relationship and the broader counseling profession. This course is also designed to help students effectively

integrate their Christian faith with principles of psychology and counseling. Theological backgrounds of counseling, major theories of Christian integration with counseling, and the role of the Christian counselor in society will be examined. Students will formulate their own Christian integration perspectives.

COUN 5316 Human Growth & Development Prerequisite(s): None
Course Equivalency: EPSY 6301
This course provides intensive study and examination of literature and theories of individual and family development across the lifespan from infancy through adulthood. Social and personality development, intellectual development, language acquisition, learning theories, and developmental expectations are emphasized, including biological, neurological, and physiological factors that affect human development, function, and behavior.

COUN 5317 Multicultural Counseling Prerequisite(s): None
This course addresses social and cultural diversity, as well as the need for multicultural awareness and competency among counselors and other mental health providers. Included in the study are theories of multicultural counseling, dimensions of spirituality and worldviews, racial/cultural identity development, social justice and advocacy, counseling ethnic minorities, and other various sociocultural minorities. Students will gain practical knowledge and skills necessary to work effectively with ethnically and culturally diverse clients, their attitudes, beliefs, and acculturative experiences both nationally and internationally.

COUN 5318 Counseling Skills & Techniques Prerequisite(s): COUN 5309 and COUN 5310 and COUN 5320 (if required for degree plan) Course Equivalency: EPSY 5313
This course introduces students to those counseling skills and techniques, which communicate the qualities of empathy, genuineness, and unconditional positive regard, and which facilitate building the foundation of an effective therapeutic working alliance. The course includes videotaped exercises along with an intensive supervised counseling experience on campus designed to enhance self-awareness and promote personality exploration. Intake skills, extensive skills-practice, role-playing, and additional counseling techniques will be introduced didactically and practiced during the residency portion of the class. (This course includes both long distance and residential components.)

COUN 5319 Spirituality, Theology, and Counseling Prerequisite(s): None
This course is designed to help students effectively integrate their Christian faith with principles of psychology and counseling. Theological backgrounds and historical foundations of faith-based of counseling, major theories and models of Christian integration with counseling, and the role of the Christian counselor in society will be examined. Students will formulate their own Christian integration perspectives. (Offered also as MAPC 5301.)

COUN 5320 Theories of Counseling Prerequisite(s): None
This course provides a comprehensive and intensive study of major personality models and theoretical orientations used in counseling and psychotherapy, stressing implications for research and practice. Various psychodynamic, humanistic, behavioral, cognitive, and family systems theories are summarized and evaluated. Students will have an opportunity to compare the compatibility of these theories with the Christian tradition and to begin an integration of these theories in clinical practice.

COUN 5321 Group Counseling and Psychotherapy Prerequisite(s): COUN 5309 and COUN 5310 and COUN 5320 (if required for degree plan)
This course is designed to provide students with a conceptual and practical overview of group dynamics including the role of group leadership, tools for forming and facilitating a group, and orientation of members. Emphasis will be given to leadership techniques used at various stages of the group process, as well as applicable ethical issues. Students will be provided with an intensive supervised group experience on campus during the residency portion of the class to promote self-awareness, develop interpersonal and facilitator skills, and explore biblical principles relevant to the group process. (This course includes both long distance and residential components.)

COUN 5323 Theories of Counseling and Psychotherapy Prerequisite(s): COUN 5313 or COUN 5314
Comprehensive and intensive study of major theoretical orientations in counseling and psychotherapy, stressing implications for research and practice. Includes experiences in micro-counseling and other simulations to develop counseling skills. Course is offered only in residential format. (Offered also as PSYC 5323.)

COUN 5326 Psychology of Dying, Bereavement, and Counseling Prerequisite(s): None
A course dealing with the process of dying and grief of the survivors. The psychological adjustments of the individual, family, and professional are examined. How to facilitate grief as well as therapeutic issues are discussed.

COUN 5327 Christian Psychology and Counseling Theory Prerequisite(s): None
Christian psychology and counseling is rooted in biblical revelation, and relevant Christian theological and philosophical, as well as the pastoral and spiritual formation practices of the Christian traditions. This class summarizes those influences, while engaging with contemporary psychology to develop a therapeutic framework that is grounded in a Christian worldview, as well as informed by the best contemporary research and theory. The history of Christian and modern psychology will be explored.

COUN 5328 Biblical & Theological Foundations for Psychology & Counseling Prerequisite(s): None
This class explores the therapeutic value of the main teachings of the Christian faith, including the nature of God; the metanarrative of human life; the nature of human beings, including their created goodness, as well as the main aspects of human psychopathology; the role of Jesus Christ in the reparation of the human condition; the mental health value of the local church; redemptive differentiation and integration; and the Christian future as a source of hope. The application of these teachings in clinical work will be discussed.

COUN 5335 Christian Spiritual Formation for Therapists Prerequisite(s): None
An investigation of the history, traditions, and process of spiritual formation. Emphasis is on the knowledge and practice of the spiritual disciplines, such as prayer, meditation, study, solitude, fasting, and so on. Consideration will be given to their application to Christian psychotherapy, counseling, and spiritual direction.

COUN 5336 Christian Spiritual Direction Prerequisite(s): None
This course is an extensive study of the field of spiritual direction with attention given to various traditions, strategies, and methods for helping others to move towards God. Emphasis is given to the role of spiritual direction in Christian psychology and a distinctively Christian formational paradigm. Topics such as the strategic use of prayer, holy listening, watchfulness, conferencing, confession, and more are addressed.
COUN 5363 Principles of School Counseling Prerequisite(s): None
Introduction to the philosophical and historical foundations of guidance and counseling, stressing practical problems of organizing and implementing guidance programs in the secondary and elementary schools. Consideration is given to professional issues, present and future, as they impact the role and function of the counselor. Includes the design of a guidance and counseling programs for an elementary, secondary, or postsecondary institution.

COUN 5381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

COUN 6191 Counseling Practicum Prerequisite(s): PSYC 5310, COUN 5312, COUN 5313, COUN 5323, PSYC 5360, PSYC 6301, PSYC 6302, COUN
6306, COUN 6308, PSYC 6310, PSYC 6320, and successful completion of the CPCE
Supervised laboratory experiences in individual and group counseling with emphasis upon methods and techniques. Competence in counseling with varied types of human concerns is developed. All practicum students must be involved

in counseling activities. Continued communication with on-campus supervisor through class activities and consultation. Course is offered only in residential format.

COUN 6192 Advanced Counseling Practicum Prerequisite(s): COUN 6191
Supervised laboratory experiences in individual and group counseling with emphasis upon methods and techniques. Competence in counseling with varied types of human concerns is developed. All practicum students must be involved in counseling activities. Continued communication with on-campus supervisor through class activities and consultation. May be repeated for credit.

COUN 6197 Licensure Standards Review Prerequisite(s): COUN 5310, COUN 5312, COUN 5313, COUN 5323, COUN 5360, COUN 6301, COUN 6302, COUN
6306, COUN 6308, COUN 6310, COUN 6320; overall GPA 3.0 or higher.
This preparation course is a one-hour course, taught by a core faculty member. This course reviews national standards, study strategies, and assess students' base knowledge in each area covered on the National Counselor Exam. Students must pass this class with a B or better, and they may not score lower than 80% on more than two individual exams. In this case, they are required to retake the course before becoming eligible to sit for the oral comprehensive exam in the licensure-based graduate programs in counseling. Students with a GPA of 3.75 or higher are not required to take PSYC 6197.

COUN 6281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

COUN 6291 Counseling Practicum Prerequisite(s): PSYC 5310, COUN 5312, COUN 5313, COUN 5323, PSYC 5360, PSYC 6301, PSYC 6302, COUN
6306, 6308, PSYC 6310, PSYC 6320, and successful completion of Oral Comprehensive Exam.
Supervised laboratory experiences in individual and group counseling with emphasis upon methods and techniques. Competence in counseling with varied types of human concerns is developed. All practicum students must be involved in counseling activities. Continued communication with on-campus supervisor through class activities and consultation. Course is offered only in residential format. May be repeated for credit.

COUN 6301 Single Adult Issues, Premarital Counseling, and Marital Enrichment Counseling Prerequisite(s): COUN 5312
This course provides an in-depth study of single adult lifestyle issues, cohabiting concerns, as well as covering premarital counseling tests, and marital enrichment programs.

COUN 6302 Counseling Adolescents and Their Families Prerequisite(s): None
This course examines the adolescent’s developmental and relationship factors that can lead to counseling issues. Child and adolescent psychopathology diagnoses will be discussed. Techniques and practices for working with adolescents will be explored.

COUN 6303 Introduction to Human Sexuality Prerequisite(s): None
This is an introductory course about human sexuality. It will survey a variety of topics from biological to psychological to social aspects of human sexuality. This course will provide a scientific understanding of the historical, biological, psychological and social/cultural influences on human sexuality and its expression. Information about human sexuality across the lifespan will be included. This course provides information about sexual identity, orientation, and how changing sexual attitudes are influencing the culture. This course also provides information about the prevention and treatment of sexually transmitted infections.

COUN 6304 Gender Issues and Differences Prerequisite(s): None
This course examines the most common presenting problems women and men bring into counseling, including

biological, developmental, sociocultural, spiritual, and situational issues and crises. It explores biblical perspectives, as well as effective intervention and counseling strategies.

COUN 6305 Today’s Soldiers and Veterans: Contemporary Issues and Challenges Prerequisite(s): None
This course is an introduction to the issues specific to the military and veteran population. Students develop an understanding of military and veteran culture, as well as an introduction to common concerns such as transition to civilian life, suicide, underemployment, and relationships.

COUN 6306 Career Information and Career Counseling Prerequisite(s): None
This course is focused on methods and processes of collecting, organizing, evaluating, and interpreting educational, occupational, and personal-social information for the purpose of helping others to engage in meaningful, satisfying vocations. The major theories of career development are emphasized. (Offered also as PSYC 6306)

COUN 6307 Military Families, Deployment and Reintegration Prerequisite(s): COUN 6305
This course examines the two primary transitions of military life: the reintegration challenges that recently deployed military members encounter as they blend back into family, community, church, and a peacetime setting; and the transition from military to civilian life and career. Students will identify strategies meant to facilitate a positive adjustment and support veterans in this transition back into family and community life as well as new careers. Specific course content will focus on the role of the caregiver or helping professional, with an emphasis on provision of resources.

COUN 6308 Methods of Group Process Prerequisite(s): COUN 5313 and COUN 5323
This is a course in learning how to lead out-patient psychotherapy/counseling groups. The dynamics of group process are described and theories of psychotherapy are applied to groups. Students design a psychoeducational group manual. Groups are conducted and led by students for at least ten (10) hours of class time, which allows students opportunities to practice group leadership. Feedback is provided by classmates and the professor. Course is offered only in residential format. (Offered also as PSYC 6308.)

COUN 6309 Assessment & Testing Prerequisite(s): None
Course Equivalency: EPSY 6302
This course is an introduction to psychological and counseling assessment and appraisal techniques used in the evaluation of people exhibiting mental, emotional, and/or behavioral disturbances with an emphasis on the therapeutic analysis, synthesis, and utilization of assessment data as part of the treatment process. Standardized and non- standardized data information gathering methods, validity, reliability, psychometric statistics, factors influencing appraisals, use and interpretation of appraisal results, and report writing with a variety of populations are explored. Aptitude, achievement, interest, behavioral, and personality instruments are presented, as well as ethical, legal, and cultural implications.

COUN 6310 Clinical Psychopathology Prerequisite(s): COUN 5309 and COUN 5320 (if required for degree plan)
This course addresses the principles of understanding dysfunction in human behavior and systemic organization as well as an in-depth review of a broad spectrum of psychopathological conditions as defined in the current edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM). The course addresses the etiology, prevalence and incidence, signs and symptoms, and criteria for differential diagnoses, utilizing diagnostic, preventive, and remedial methods and interventions.
Emphasis will be given on comparing and contrasting different theoretical perspectives and reviewing the empirical literature for various disorders.

COUN 6311 Substance Use and Addictive Disorders Prerequisite(s): None
This course examines a variety of models for the etiology and treatment of addictions using a biopsychosocial

perspective. Substance use is emphasized, but other problematic behaviors (e.g., gambling, sex) are covered. Spirituality is highlighted as a protective factor and as part of the treatment process.

COUN 6312 PTSD: Causes, Problems, and Therapy Prerequisite(s): COUN 6330
This course focuses on the development and treatment of PTSD, including sources of trauma such as combat stress, severe accidents, sexual assaults, etc. Adjustment problems in the physical, mental, relational and spiritual areas of life will be covered. Various types of therapy for PTSD will be discussed and practiced.

COUN 6313 Sexual Functioning, Dysfunction, and Treatment Prerequisite(s): COUN 6303
A comprehensive look at the different sexual disorders. Biological, psychological, and psychosocial factors will be included. Biological and psychological treatments will be covered.

COUN 6314 Infidelity, Sexual Trauma, and Counseling Prerequisite(s): COUN 6326
This is an advanced course, which discusses counseling issues raised by childhood sexual abuse, sexual assault and trauma, and spousal infidelity, as well as their impact on intimacy and sexual relationships within a marriage. Counseling models and strategies for both perpetrators and survivors are also discussed.

COUN 6315 Christian Integration Seminar II Prerequisite(s): COUN 5315 and at least nine hours completed since successful completion of COUN 5315
This course is an advanced survey course in the field of Christian counseling. Students will learn how to apply the prominent theories that form the basis of Christian counseling and the integration of theology and psychology, as well as develop a working knowledge of the special ethical and cultural considerations unique to the Christian counselor.

COUN 6316 Psychopharmacology and Addiction Prerequisite(s): None
This course examines a variety of models for the etiology and treatment of substance use, abuse, and dependency, as well as other addictive disorders using a bio-psycho-social-spiritual perspective. While substance use is emphasized, process and behavioral addictions are also covered, including relapse triggers and prevention. Spirituality is highlighted as a protective factor and part of the overall treatment and recovery process.

COUN 6317 Counseling Families with Addiction Prerequisite(s): COUN 6311
This course exams family dynamics that can encourage or sabotage an addict’s recovery. Family-of-origin and other systems theories that impact addiction counseling will be examined. The student will learn about enabling and how to confront it. Counseling techniques will be discussed. Support groups such as Celebrate Recovery or AA’s as an adjunctive to treatment will be covered.

COUN 6318 Transdisciplinary Foundations of Addictions Prerequisite(s): None
This course reflects the SAMHSA guidelines for knowledge, attitudes, and skills required for addictions counselors. Specifically, it targets the transdisciplinary foundations including: Understand Addiction, Treatment Knowledge, Application to Practice, and Professional Readiness.

COUN 6319 Resilience and Coping Prerequisite(s): None
This course provides an in-depth review of the literature related to stress and burnout (e.g., life transitions, personal stressors, ongoing stressors), coping, and resilience with a focus on building a repertoire of healthy coping strategies to share as a helping professional. The course also promotes the self-care, coping, and well-being of helping professionals, including an emphasis on healthy relationships, spirituality, and resistance to stress and burnout.

COUN 6320 Research Design and Program Evaluation Prerequisite(s): None

This course provides an understanding of quantitative and qualitative research methods and design, statistical analysis, needs assessment, implementation, ethical and cultural considerations in human subject research, and program evaluation relevant to the field of professional counseling and other mental health providers.

COUN 6321 Career Counseling & Lifestyle Development Prerequisite(s): None
Course Equivalency: EPSY 6306
This course examines major theories and models of career development, lifestyle and vocational assessment, and career counseling. Emphasis is given on methods and processes of collecting, organizing, evaluating, and interpreting educational, occupational, and personal-social information for the purpose of helping others engage in meaningful and satisfying vocations, including spirituality and calling.

COUN 6322 Marriage and Family Counseling Prerequisite(s): COUN 5320 (if required for degree plan)
This course is an introduction to the field of couple, marriage, and family counseling. It will integrate theory and practice in the treatment of dyadic, marital, and familial relationships (including blended families and families with children). Students will develop an understanding of the prominent theories, including emphasis on family systems theories that form the basis for relevant therapeutic approaches.

COUN 6323 Crisis Response and Trauma Care Prerequisite(s): None
This course is designed to prepare students to understand the nature of crises, traumatic events, and natural and human disasters, including the efficacy of community-based strategies and psychological first aid. Students will also learn how to work with clients who have experienced trauma and/or interpersonal violence; utilize crisis intervention and suicide prevention strategies; introduce counseling roles and responsibilities as members of an interdisciplinary emergency management response team during local, regional or national crises, disaster or other trauma-causing event; and to address burnout, compassion fatigue, and counselor self-care.

COUN 6324 Substance Abuse and Addictive Disorders Prerequisite(s): None
This course examines a variety of models for the etiology and treatment of substance use, abuse, and dependency, as well as other addictive disorders using a bio-psycho-social-spiritual perspective. While substance use is emphasized, process and behavioral addictions are also covered, including relapse triggers and prevention. Spirituality is highlighted as a protective factor and part of the overall treatment and recovery process.

COUN 6325 Clinical Diagnosis and Treatment Planning Prerequisite(s): COUN 5309 and COUN 5310 and COUN 5316 and COUN 5317 and COUN 5320 and COUN 6309 and COUN 6310 and COUN 6322 and COUN 6323 and COUN 6324 (if required for degree plan)
This course includes criteria for psychiatric diagnoses, proficiency with the current edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM), and theories of psychopathology. The course also provides an introduction to psychopharmacology, including basic neurobiology, pharmacokinetics, assessment, history taking, and drugs as they relate to the treatment of various disorders. Case conceptualization, presentation, and management is incorporated into an intensive supervised counseling experience on campus designed to incorporate role playing and enhance critical treatment planning skills during the residency portion of the class. This course is required by the Texas State Board of Examiners of Professional Counselors (TSBEPC). (This course includes both long distance and residential components.)

COUN 6326 Human Sexuality Prerequisite(s): None
This course provides an introduction to human sexuality and surveys biological, psychological, sociocultural, and spiritual factors and influences. Information about human sexuality across the lifespan is examined, including sexual identity, sexual orientation, and how changing sexual attitudes are influencing the culture. The prevention and treatment of sexually transmitted infections and diseases is also addressed.

COUN 6327 Pornography and Sexual Addiction Counseling Prerequisite(s): None

This course addresses sociocultural, biological, neurobiological, and spiritual factors (e.g., the role of fantasy, lust, and sinful choices) related to the etiology, treatment, and recovery of sexual addiction, including pornography, Internet- based issues, and deviancy.

COUN 6328 Premarital Counseling and Marital Enrichment Prerequisite(s): COUN 6322
This course provides an in-depth study of premarital/pre-engagement counseling models and assessments, as well as marital enrichment programs and principles. Dating and single adult lifestyle issues are also reviewed.

COUN 6329 Assessment and Counseling with Couples and Families Prerequisite(s): COUN 5309 and COUN 6322 and COUN 5320 (if required for degree plan)
This course examines issues in research and the clinical assessment of couples and families utilizing family systems models and other contemporary approaches. Specific assessment techniques are discussed, evaluated, and practiced, impacting marriage and family structure, psychopathology, communication, decision making, conflict resolution, and spiritual factors.

COUN 6330 Trauma and Crisis Intervention Prerequisite(s): None
This course is designed to prepare students to understand the nature of crisis, trauma, and disasters, including the appropriateness of diagnosis, to work with clients who have experienced trauma and/or interpersonal violence, to utilize crisis intervention and suicide prevention strategies, to understand psychological first aid, to introduce counselors’ roles and responsibilities as members of an interdisciplinary emergency management response team during a local, regional, or national crisis, disaster or other trauma-causing event, and to address counselor self-care and burnout.

COUN 6331 Grief and Loss Counseling Prerequisite(s): None
This course is an introduction to grief and loss work, the dynamics and specific factors related to grief and loss issues across the lifespan, concepts of bereavement and mourning, disenfranchised grief, neurological and sociocultural factors, and the role of faith and spirituality in the counseling process.

COUN 6332 Life Recovery Counseling Prerequisite(s): None
This course examines different addiction recovery models, as well as spiritual applications that address concepts such as confession, surrender, forgiveness, meditation, and accountability. The role of relapse prevention is discussed with an emphasis on 12-Step approaches such as Alcoholics Anonymous.

COUN 6333 Complex Trauma and Disaster Care Prerequisite(s): None
This course examines traumatic grief and loss events (e.g., violence and abuse, genocide, injury and loss of children, combat, sexual assault, and disasters) and their aftermath (e.g., complicated grief, complex trauma responses, and dissociation). Counseling interventions and strategies include the role of crisis responders, disaster deployment, and the incident command system, as well as psychological and spiritual care.

COUN 6334 Military Resilience and Coping Prerequisite(s): None
This course provides an in-depth review of the literature related to stress and burnout within the military culture (e.g., pre- and post-deployment, combat environments, life transitions, personal stressors, and ongoing stressors), coping, and resilience. There is a focus on building a repertoire of healthy coping and bounce back strategies to share as a helping professional.

COUN 6335 Military Stress, PTSD, Combat Trauma, and Suicide Prerequisite(s): COUN 6334 and COUN 6336
This course focuses on combat and military related stress and trauma, as well as the aftermath (e.g., PTSD, traumatic brain injury, addiction, marital and family issues, and suicide). Specific attention is given to suicide assessment, intervention, and prevention strategies.

COUN 6336 Contemporary Issues and Challenges in Today's Military Prerequisite(s): None
This course is an introduction to specific issues that impact the military and veteran population. Students will develop an understanding of military and veteran culture, as well as an introduction to common concerns such as deployment, transition to civilian life, suicide risk, underemployment, and relationships.
COUN 6338: PTSD: Etiology and Counseling Prerequisite(s): COUN 6323
This course focuses on the development and treatment of PTSD, including sources of trauma such as violence and abuse, combat stress, severe accidents, sexual assault, and disasters. Adjustment reactions and problems in physical, mental, emotional, relational, and spiritual areas of life are also covered, including various types of therapy for PTSD.
COUN 6339 Sexual Functioning: Issues, Problems, and Counseling Prerequisite(s): COUN 6326
This course offers a comprehensive look at various sexual disorders, as well as biological, psychological, psychosocial, and spiritual factors. Biological, psychological, and spiritual interventions and counseling strategies are examined.

COUN 6340 Military Career and Community Transition and Reintegration Prerequisite(s): COUN 6336
This course examines the two primary transitions of military life: the reintegration challenges that recently deployed military members encounter as they blend back into family, community, church, and a peacetime setting; and the transition from the military to a civilian life and career. Counseling strategies and resources will be discussed that help facilitate positive adjustments and support veterans in this transition back into family and community life, as well as new careers.
COUN 6341 Counseling Children, Adolescents and Families Prerequisite(s): None
This course examines the development of children and adolescents’ developmental and relationship factors that can lead to counseling issues. Techniques and practices for working with children, adolescents, and families are explored. Psychopathology diagnoses are discussed.

COUN 6343 Assessment in Counseling Prerequisite(s): PSYC 6302 and PSYC 6310
This course is an introduction to psychological testing techniques used in the evaluation of people exhibiting mental, emotional, and/or behavioral disturbances with an emphasis on using assessment therapeutically as part of the treatment process. Instruments related to several subfields are included (e.g., career, personality, behavioral). Report writing skills are addressed.

COUN 6353 Assessment and Treatment of Couples and Families Prerequisite(s): PSYC 5310, COUN 5312, COUN 5313, COUN 5323, and PSYC 6301
This course provides didactic knowledge and in-depth practice and feedback in the major assessments and counseling techniques used with couples and families. Emphasis on assessment and treatment approaches specifically designed for use with a wide range of diverse adult dyads as well as children and adolescents in a family system. Sexual issues, spirituality, and lifespan development are also addressed. Course is offered only in residential format.

COUN 6354 Practicum in Marriage and Family Counseling Prerequisite(s): PSYC 5310, COUN 5312, COUN 5313, COUN 5323, PSYC 5360, PSYC 6301, PSYC 6302, COUN
6306, COUN 6308, PSYC 6310, and successful completion of Oral Comprehensive Exam
Supervised laboratory experiences in counseling with emphasis on developing basic skills in working with couples and families. Competence in counseling with varied types of human concerns is developed. All practicum students must be involved in counseling activities. Continued communication with on-campus supervisor through class activities and consultation. Course is offered only in residential format.

COUN 6355 Advanced Practicum in Marriage and Family Counseling Prerequisite(s): COUN 6354
Supervised laboratory experiences in individual and group counseling with emphasis in developing competence in

counseling with couples and families. All practicum students must be involved in counseling activities. Continued communication with on- campus supervisor through class activities and consultation. May be repeated for credit.

COUN 6365 Advanced School Counseling and Leadership Prerequisite(s): 36 graduate hours which must include COUN 5363 and COUN 5310 and COUN 5318 and COUN 5320 and COUN 5321 and COUN 6309 and COUN 6321
This course is an advanced study of the philosophical and historical foundations of school counseling, stressing practical problems of organizing and implementing guidance programs in the secondary and elementary schools. Topics addressed include the intricacies of designing and implementing a comprehensive school counseling program— including the leadership role of the school counselor, collaboration, program design, implementation and management and professional issues as they impact the role and function of the counselor. The course includes a review of the 5th edition of the Texas Model for Comprehensive School Counseling Programs.

COUN 6391 Counseling Practicum Prerequisite(s): COUN 5309 and COUN 5310 and COUN 5316 and COUN 5317 and COUN 5318 and COUN 5320 and COUN 6310 (if required for degree plan)
This course represents an initial field experience in professional practice and provides for the application of theory and ongoing development of basic counseling skills in various mental health settings under direct supervision. Students will work with clients who represent the ethnic and demographic diversity of their community and complete a supervised counseling practicum experience that totals a minimum of 100 clock hours (40 direct service hours) with actual clients.

COUN 6392 Counseling Internship I Prerequisite(s): COUN 5309 and COUN 5310 and COUN 5316 and COUN 5317 and COUN 5318 and COUN 5320 and COUN 6309 and COUN 6310 and COUN 6325 and COUN 6391 (if required for degree plan)
This course provides an opportunity for ongoing field experiences in professional clinical practice and in the application of counseling theory and the development of advanced counseling skills under direct supervision. These experiences allow students to counsel and provide services to clients who represent the ethnic and demographic diversity of their community. Students complete 300 clock hours (120 direct service hours) of supervised counseling internship in roles and settings with clients relevant to their specialty area. By taking this course and COUN 6393, students will gain a total of 600 clock hours with 240 direct service hours.

COUN 6393: Counseling Internship II Prerequisite(s): COUN 6392
This course provides an opportunity for ongoing field experiences in professional clinical practice and in the application of counseling theory and the development of advanced counseling skills under direct supervision. These experiences allow students to counsel and provide services to clients who represent the ethnic and demographic diversity of their community. Students complete 300 clock hours, (120 direct service hours) of supervised counseling internship in roles and settings with clients relevant to their specialty area. By taking this course and COUN 6392, students will gain a total of 600 clock hours with 240 direct service hours.


Cyber Engineering (CYEN) Course Descriptions
CYEN 3321 Ethical Hacking Prerequisite(s): CYSC 2311
This course provides an understanding of how to effectively protect computer networks. Students will learn the tools and penetration testing methodologies used by ethical hackers; defining what an ethical hacker is and who employs them. Topics will include gathering information and identifying flaws and vulnerabilities in documentation, software, and computer systems, and exploiting those flaws. Students will be provided with an overview of computer crime laws.

CYEN 3331 Computer Network Security Prerequisite(s): COSC 3342
Overview of computer network security, broad coverage of cyber security concepts, computer network defense, computer network attack, and wireless security.

CYEN 3332 Ethics and Cyber Warfare Prerequisite(s): CYEN 3321
This course presents the student with issues of law and ethics in cyberspace and cyber warfare. Students will learn the proper techniques with which to approach the difficult ethical dilemmas that arise from using the modern Internet. In addition to providing students with the skills to assess future ethical dilemmas for themselves. Topics covered include government regulation of online behavior, constitutional considerations concerning free speech and content controls, intellectual property, hacking, and the ethics of internet behavior.

CYEN 4331 Digital Forensics and Cyber Crime Prerequisite(s): COSC 3342
An overview of forensics including methods to uncover and exploit digital evidence; cyber crime, forensics analysis techniques.

CYEN 4332 Wireless and Mobile Security Prerequisite(s): CYEN 3331
Overview of wireless and mobile security providing students with practical and theoretical experiences. Topics include threat analysis, security infrastructure, security services, wireless network security components.

CYEN 4333 Reverse Engineering Prerequisite(s): CYEN 3331
Overview of reverse engineering techniques, modern tools for reverse engineering of machine code. Topics include gathering information, PE32 format, obfuscation techniques, memory dumping, and automating processes.

CYEN 4334: Cybersecurity Principles Prerequisite(s): CYEN 3331
Overview of cybersecurity; provides students with practical cyber security experience based on theoretical foundations and national standards and principles of cybersecurity. Topics include computer network defense, computer network attack, wireless security.

CYEN 4335 Applied Cryptography Prerequisite(s): CYEN 3331
An introduction to the basic theory and practice of cryptographic techniques used in computer security. Topics include probability and statistics, encryption, key management, hashing, and network security protocols.

CYEN 4337 Security Operations Prerequisite(s): CYEN 3331
Overview of security assessment, network operations, and security protocols.

CYEN 4352 Distributed and Cloud Computing Prerequisite(s): COSC 4351
Overview of distributed computing. Theoretical and applicable aspects of distributed systems and cloud computing. Modeling aspects including architecture, performance, reliability, availability, service models, security characteristics.

CYEN 4371 Access Control Logic and Covert Channels Prerequisite(s): CYEN 3331 and MATH 3311
An overview of access control logic and covert channels. Topics include access control concepts and logic, covert channel detection, future security predictions, steganography, steganalysis, data hiding.

CYEN 4373 Industrial Security Prerequisite(s): CYEN 3331 or ELEN 2341
Principles and concepts of industrial security infrastructure. Topics include PLC programming, SCADA systems, firewalls, segregation of corporate and industrial networks.

CYEN 4374 OT Network Security Prerequisite(s): ELEN 4374

Overview of industrial security, broad coverage of cyber security concepts, industrial network defense, industrial network attack, and wireless security.

CYEN 4381 Data Analytics Prerequisite(s): COSC 2355
Introduction to data analytics; key tools and concepts from the functional, technical, and implementation perspective of using data analytics to solve real world challenges.

CYEN 4391 Blockchain Prerequisite(s): COSC 3331
The course covers all aspects of cryptocurrencies, including distributed consensus, blockchains, smart contracts and applications; focusing on Bitcoin and Ethereum as case studies. Prior background in Python within a Unix environment is recommended, but no previous Bitcoin knowledge is necessary.


Cybersecurity (CYSC) Course Descriptions
CYSC 1331 Introduction to Cybersecurity Prerequisite(s): MATH 1434
This course is an overview of cybersecurity which provides students with practical cybersecurity experience based on theoretical foundations. Topics include computer network defense, computer network attack, and wireless security.

CYSC 2311 System Administration Prerequisite(s): CYSC 1331 and COSC 1352
An introduction to system administration examining the Windows operating system running on physical hardware, as well as Type-1 hypervisors and hosted virtual machines. Topics will include installation, configuration, sever and system administration, logging and auditing, backup and restoration, file management, and account management.

CYSC 2312 Cloud Architecture Prerequisite(s): CYSC 1331
This course will introduce concepts, terminology, technologies, benefits, and challenges of cloud computing technology covering topics such as SaaS, IaaS, PaaS delivery models, and common cloud deployment models (Public, Private, Hyper). Students will also learn cloud characteristics, such as a focus on complex cloud-based solution design, including the incorporation of hybrid cloud deployment models, compound design patterns, and solution architectures that span cloud and on-premise environments.

CYSC 2321 Mobile/Wireless Computing Prerequisite(s): CYSC 1331
This course will introduce students to a variety of wireless networks that target low-power, machine-to-machine communication as is common in the Internet of Things. While we introduce the physical layer and have a goal of getting data to the internet at large, the focus of this course is on the wireless protocols themselves.

CYSC 4321 Information Assurance Prerequisite(s): CYEN 3321 and CYEN 4331
This course provides an overarching model for information assurance for businesses, government agencies, and other enterprises needing to establish a comprehensive security plan. Students will be guided through the components of security and the construction of an effective security policy. Topics include asset identification, human factors, compliance with regulations, personnel security, risk assessment, business continuity, and ethical considerations are covered, as well as computer and network security tools and methods.

CYSC 4336 Risk Management Analysis Prerequisite(s): CYEN 4331
This is an introduction to risk management frameworks, standards, and processes. Students will study risk identification and control techniques, and insurable loss exposure. Student will learn risk management for individuals and organizations, financial aspects of insurance companies and markets, and industry structures.

CYSC 5301 Applied Cryptography and Cybersecurity Prerequisite(s): None
Practical issues in cryptography, including examples of classical cryptosystems; modern cryptosystems, cryptanalytic techniques, and how they operate; hands-on experience with current cryptographic technologies. Topics include, but not necessarily limited to, CIA triad, symmetric block and stream ciphers, asymmetric crypto techniques, homomorphic cryptography, threshold cryptography, data integrity algorithms such as cryptographic hash functions, message authentication codes (MAC), digital signatures, cryptographic protocols, cryptanalysis, key management and distribution, etc.

CYSC 5302 Operations Systems Security Prerequisite(s): None
This course examines controls over personnel, hardware, software, and systems as they relate to techniques of access control, authentication, secure communication and audit. Accepted best practices and guidelines to secure information systems and networks. Security policies, system configuration, integration, and maintenance.

CYSC 5303 Cybersecurity Risk Analysis Prerequisite(s): None
This course focuses on the organizational issues of risk analysis in the organizational policies and the legal context the networked systems. Organizational problems involving reliability, safety, security, and privacy as pertains to a human’s wellbeing.

CYSC 5304 Secure Cloud Computing Prerequisite(s): None
The course will provide a survey of cloud services and how they can be used to construct scalable, secure cloud applications. Security concerns and best practices for cloud computing and cloud services; cloud computing architectures, risk issues and legal topics; data security; internal and external clouds; information security frameworks and operations guidelines are among the topics covered in this course.

CYSC 5305 Information Systems Assurance Prerequisite(s): None
This course investigates methodologies for identifying an institution’s information technology assets, exploring the risks of these systems and the proper ways to determine the necessary level of protection required. The course explores the different information systems audit procedures, compliance with governmental regulations and techniques for developing budgets for security implementations.

CYSC 5310 Graduate Capstone Project Prerequisite(s): Permission of Instructor
All students are required to demonstrate the ability to clearly evaluate a particular information security need, identify potential solutions, evaluate the alternatives, and implement the best solution. This capstone project will draw upon portfolio case assignments completed in previous courses to produce a complete solution for the assigned problem.

CYSC 5311 Network Security Concepts and Applications Prerequisite(s): None
The course covers principles of computer networks and network security design and operation. Principles of computer networks: requirements, connectivity levels, layered architectures, and applications. Direct link networks, packet switched networks, IP, and internetworking. Core perimeter security fundamentals and network security components. Layered security and defense in depth. Packet filtering, routers as security devices, intrusion detection.

CYSC 5312 Wireless and IoT Device Security Prerequisite(s): None
This course covers the importance of IoT in society, the current components of typical IoT devices and trends for the future. IoT design considerations, constraints and interfacing between the physical world and your device will also be covered. How to make design trade-offs between hardware and software are also investigated.

CYSC 5313 Legal Regulations, Compliance, and Investigation Prerequisite(s): None

The course examines computer crimes, laws, and regulations. It includes techniques for investigating a crime and gathering evidence. It also covers techniques for creating incident reports.

CYSC 5314 Ethical Hacking and Penetration Testing Prerequisite(s): None
Application of tools, techniques, and procedures to perform penetration testing on networks and applications to identify the different security vulnerabilities.


Digital Media (DIGI) Course Descriptions
DIGI 1321 Introduction to Digital Media Prerequisite(s): None
An introduction to digital art and design applications, including 2D and 3D software and methods, with potential use in graphic design, animation, game development, and other forms of digital media.

DIGI 2100 Storytelling in Digital Media Prerequisite(s): NARR 1300
Corequisite(s): NARR 2200
Provides students opportunities to apply the principles developed in Art of Storytelling to specific digital media projects.

DIGI 3125 Art & Design Topics Prerequisite(s): DIGI 3120 Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
Develops art and design principles that will be applicable throughout the Digital Media curriculum, supporting work in video games, animation, visual effects, and graphic design. This course may be repeated for credit.

DIGI 3180 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): Will vary depending on the specific topic Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. This course may be repeated for credit.

DIGI 3225 Art & Design Topics Prerequisite(s): DIGI 3120 Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
Develops art and design principles that will be applicable throughout the Digital Media curriculum, supporting work in video games, animation, visual effects, and graphic design. This course may be repeated for credit.

DIGI 3280 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): Will vary depending on the specific topic Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. This course may be repeated for credit.

DIGI 3321 Art Foundations for Digital Artists Prerequisite(s): None
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities; Narrative Arts Equipment
Introduces foundational artistic skills in drawing and design, preparing students for narrative artistic work in character
/ environmental art and graphic design.

DIGI 3322 2D Digital Art & Design Prerequisite(s): DIGI 3321
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities; Narrative Arts Equipment
Introduces key design principles and applications in vector graphics, photo editing, and digital painting for graphic

design, video games, animation, and visual effects.

DIGI 3323 3D Digital Art & Design Prerequisite(s): DIGI 3321
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities; Narrative Arts Equipment
Introduces key design principles and applications in computer-generated 3D imagery for video games, animation, visual effects, and graphic design.

DIGI 3325 Art & Design Topics Prerequisite(s): DIGI 3321 Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
Develops art and design principles that will be applicable throughout the Digital Media curriculum, supporting work in video games, animation, visual effects, and graphic design. This course may be repeated for credit.

DIGI 3341 Principles of Interactive Media Prerequisite(s): DIGI 3322
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities; Narrative Arts Equipment
Through case studies and exercises, students are introduced to defining principles of interactive media, from basic game theory to user interface design. Students will develop interactive content building on these principles throughout the semester.

DIGI 3350 Principles of Cinema & Animation Prerequisite(s): DIGI 3321, DIGI 3322, DIGI 3323
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities; Narrative Arts Equipment
An introduction to the distinct aesthetic elements of the cinematic medium and the traditional principles of animation, with an emphasis on historical foundations and practical opportunities for application in digital animation.

DIGI 3351 Animation Production I Prerequisite(s): DIGI 3350
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities; Narrative Arts Production
Students collaborate on the development and pre-production of an animated project, learning key principles in story, style, and asset development.

DIGI 3352 Animation Production II Prerequisite(s): DIGI 3350
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities; Narrative Arts Production
Students collaborate on the production of an animated project, learning key principles in digital production and animation.

DIGI 3361 Principles of Game Theory Prerequisite(s): DIGI 3460
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities; Narrative Arts Production
Through practical application in the development of a video game, students explore key principles in game theory and storytelling in interactive mediums.

DIGI 3362 Gameplay Implementation Prerequisite(s): DIGI 3460
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities; Narrative Arts Production
Through practical application in the development of a video game, students are introduced to game interactivity through engine coding and scripting.

DIGI 3380 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): Will vary depending on the specific topic Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. This course may be repeated for credit.

DIGI 3460 Intro to Video Game Design Prerequisite(s): DIGI 3323
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities; Narrative Arts Equipment
This course introduces students to the fundamental elements of video game development, the primary tools, and overall workflow. Students will complete a simple interactive game project.

DIGI 4160 Advanced Practicum Prerequisite(s): Permission of the Instructor
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities; Narrative Arts Equipment
Programmed with specific topics each semester, this practicum provides students the opportunity to hone their craft through specific projects or apprenticeships overseen by a faculty member. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. This course may be repeated for credit.

DIGI 4192 Sophomore Portfolio Prerequisite(s): NARR 2200, NARR 2310, NARR 2312 and at least 9 hours of CINE, DIGI, or WRIT courses Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
Students prepare a portfolio representing their best work in order to receive faculty feedback and direction for the next stage of their academic studies.

DIGI 4194 Junior Portfolio Prerequisite(s): NARR 3310 Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
Working with a faculty member, students prepare a resume and portfolio in order to secure a professional internship. DIGI 4194 is the prerequisite to DIGI 4195/4295/4395 - Internship.

DIGI 4195 Internship Prerequisite(s): DIGI 4194
Credit is awarded for approved professional internships, secured as part of DIGI 4194 Junior Portfolio. A minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. This course may be repeated for credit.

DIGI 4199 Senior Portfolio Prerequisite(s): DIGI 4194 Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
Working with a faculty member, students complete a professional resume and portfolio featuring their best coursework and personal projects (in preparation for interviews, etc.)

DIGI 4260 Advanced Practicum Prerequisite(s): Permission of the Instructor
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities; Narrative Arts Equipment
Programmed with specific topics each semester, this practicum provides students the opportunity to hone their craft through specific projects or apprenticeships overseen by a faculty member. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. This course may be repeated for credit.

DIGI 4295 Internship Prerequisite(s): DIGI 4194
Credit is awarded for approved professional internships, secured as part of DIGI 4194 Junior Portfolio. A minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. This course may be repeated for credit.

DIGI 4331 Advanced Graphic Design Prerequisite(s): DIGI 3322
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities; Narrative Arts Equipment
Develops and applies key design principles for graphic design, web design, and app development in larger project- based assignments. This course may be repeated for credit.

DIGI 4351 Advanced Animation I Prerequisite(s): DIGI 3351
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities; Narrative Arts Production
This advanced course builds upon the groundwork established in DIGI 3351 - Animation Production I, providing students opportunities to take lead roles on an animated project, practicing key principles in story, style, and asset development. This course may be repeated for credit.

DIGI 4352 Advanced Animation II Prerequisite(s): DIGI 3352
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities; Narrative Arts Production
This advanced course builds upon the groundwork established in DIGI 3352 - Animation Production II, providing students opportunities to take lead roles on an animated project, practicing key principles in digital production and animation. This course may be repeated for credit.

DIGI 4360 Advanced Practicum Prerequisite(s): Permission of the Instructor
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities; Narrative Arts Equipment
Programmed with specific topics each semester, this practicum provides students the opportunity to hone their craft through specific projects or apprenticeships overseen by a faculty member. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. This course may be repeated for credit.

DIGI 4361 Advanced Game Development I Prerequisite(s): DIGI 3361
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities; Narrative Arts Production
This advanced course builds upon the groundwork established in DIGI 3361 - Principles of Game Theory, providing students opportunities to take lead roles on a video game project, practicing key principles in game theory and storytelling in interactive mediums. This course may be repeated for credit.

DIGI 4362 Advanced Game Development II Prerequisite(s): DIGI 3362
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities; Narrative Arts Production
This advanced course builds upon the groundwork established in DIGI 3362 - Game Programming, providing students opportunities to take lead roles on a video game project, practicing key principles game interactivity through engine coding and scripting. This course may be repeated for credit.

DIGI 4395 Internship Prerequisite(s): DIGI 4194
Credit is awarded for approved professional internships, secured as part of DIGI 4194 Junior Portfolio. A minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. This course may be repeated for credit.


Economics (ECON) Course Descriptions
ECON 2311 Microeconomics Prerequisite(s): None
An introduction to microeconomic theory with emphasis on the determination of price and output in the competitive and noncompetitive market structures of American capitalism. Includes applications of price theory to a range of economic issues.

ECON 2312 Macroeconomics Prerequisite(s): ECON 2311
An introduction to macroeconomic theory including supply and demand analysis, national income accounting, monetary theory and policy, modern employment theory, and applications of theory to policy.

ECON 3303 Macroeconomic Theory Intermediate Prerequisite(s): ECON 2312
An intensive study of the assumptions and concepts which are basic to the theories of income determination and

aggregate employment.

ECON 3304 Microeconomic Theory Intermediate Prerequisite(s): ECON 2311 and (BUSA 2301 or MATH 1451 or a higher mathematics course) An intensive examination of the assumptions and forces which underlie the price system.

ECON 3315 Security Markets and Financial Institutions Prerequisite(s): FINA 3320
An introduction to the US financial system. Topics include interest rate theory, financial markets such as money markets and capital markets including stock and bond markets, and financial institutions such as banks and other depository institutions, finance companies, insurance companies, investment companies, pension funds, securities firms. (Offered also as FINA 3315.)

ECON 3330 International Finance Prerequisite(s): FINA 3320 and ECON 2311
A study of the theories and practices of international trade and finance, direction and composition of world trade, institutions for facilitating trade, international payments, capital movement, exchange rates. (Offered also as FINA 3330.)

ECON 4312 Global Economy Prerequisite(s): ECON 2311 and ECON 2312
This course examines international trade beginning with an evaluation of the gains of trade, types of restrictions on free trade and their impacts, and policies regarding trade. The effects of the movement of resources across national boundaries are also examined. The discussion of international monetary theory includes balance of payments and the functions and impacts of the foreign-exchange markets. The course is structured around case studies that require the student to analyze and apply knowledge gained from the course.

ECON 4330 Seminar on Law and Economics Prerequisite(s): BUSA 2320 and ECON 2311
This course will provide an analytical framework for studying the relationship between the environment and economic and political systems. Students will cover cost/benefit analysis and economic issues concerning valuation, and then apply the theory to current legislation, case law, and state and federal statutes dealing with air and pollution, waste management, wildlife management, and resource management.

ECON 4335 History of Economic Thought Prerequisite(s): ECON 2311 and ECON 2312
A survey of major contributors to economic thought from Adam Smith to Milton Friedman in modern times with emphasis on their impact on contemporary economic thought and analysis. Research papers will be required on selected topics in economic history.

ECON 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

ECON 5363 Economics Principles Prerequisite(s): None
A survey course of microeconomic and macroeconomic theory. Microeconomic theory will include supply and demand analysis, with emphasis on the determination of price and output in the competitive and noncompetitive market structures of American capitalism. A study of the macroeconomic theory will include application of economic principles relating to the behavior of aggregate economic activity and the price level. Topics include aggregate economic variables and their measurement, economic growth, economic fluctuations, inflation, unemployment, government deficits, monetary policy, and fiscal policy.

ECON 6330 Global Political Economy Prerequisite(s): ECON 5363

This course examines the interaction of politics and the economy at the global level. In particular, it evaluates how political and economic decisions of one country or groups of countries affect institutions and life circumstances in others and assesses the causes and consequences of globalization as rooted in political economy. Key topics include major conceptual frameworks for understanding the linkages between international politics and international economics, international monetary and financial relations, international trade, foreign investment and multinational enterprises, key international economic institutions such as the International Monetary Fund, World Trade Organization, and World Bank, the rise of the BRIC economics and the shift of global balance, and global economic governance. Graduate Business Programs only.

ECON 6353 Global Economy and Institutions Prerequisite(s): ECON 5363
This course provides an overview of global economies, institutions and how macroeconomic factors impact different economies. This will impact the way business leaders manage risks that globalization entails. The course goes beyond the theory and includes a discussion of current global economic events drawing on articles from current publications. Graduate Business programs only.

ECON 6365 Entrepreneurial Perspectives on Economics and Free Enterprise Prerequisite(s): None
This course focuses on the core principles of economics, with an emphasis on the specific terminology, models, and concepts describing the micro-economic entity of the firm. It will also integrate the core tenets that drive the American market system of free enterprise. Topics will include: a) producer supply, buyer demand, and the four market structures of monopoly, oligopoly, monopolistic competition, and commodity-based perfect competition; b) marginal analysis of revenue, costs, profits, and productivity; and c) integrating pricing, revenue, and margins into decision making for the emerging entrepreneurial venture.

Educational Administration (EDAD) Course Descriptions
EDAD 5320 Systems Thinking: Theory and Application Prerequisite(s): None
This class will provide an overview, background, and foundation in systems theory and performance technology. This focus will assist in developing a vision of teaching and learning with technology as a major component. Topics covered include performance technology, general systems theory, needs assessment, and change management. A class project, including a needs assessment and final report of potential solutions, is required of all students.

EDAD 5381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.
EDAD 6181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDAD 6191 Internship in the Principalship I Prerequisite(s): 24 credit hours in Educational Administration
This course is a two-semester internship designed to provide field experiences in school leadership at the campus level with emphasis on public relations, personnel administration, pupil behavior and discipline, curriculum development, instructional leadership, and facilities management. The candidate is assigned to work with a certified campus leader for a minimum of 160 clock hours in the field in the time period of over two semesters. In the overall two-semester experience, the candidate is given experiences in applying management fundamentals to an on-going school program. Each of the topics in the contract and syllabus is developed by assignments, discussions, required reading, and reports. The curricula for this course includes (1) knowledge of the literature of the discipline and (2) ongoing student engagement in research related to professional practice.

EDAD 6192 Seminar in Educational Leadership Prerequisite(s): None
This course is designed to help students prepare for the Texas Examination of Educator Standards (TExES) for state principal certification. The course will focus on content and sample questions from the authorized preparation manual for the state principal examination distributed by the National Evaluation Systems, Inc. Information will also be utilized from the state publication Proficiencies for Leaders in Learner-Centered Schools and other appropriate sources. Students must score a minimum of 80% on the TExES practice tests in order to be authorized by the College of Education to take the state TExES examination.
EDAD 6193 Internship in the Principalship II Prerequisite(s): 24 credit hours in Educational Administration
This course is a two semester internship designed to provide field experiences in school leadership at the campus level with emphasis on public relations, personnel administration, pupil behavior and discipline, curriculum development, instructional leadership, and facilities management. The candidate is assigned to work with a certified campus leader for a minimum of 160 clock hours in the field in the time period of over two semesters. In the overall two-semester experience, the candidate is given experiences in applying management fundamentals to an on-going school program. Each of the topics in the contract and syllabus is developed by assignments, discussions, required reading, and reports. The curricula for this course includes (1) knowledge of the literature of the discipline and (2) ongoing student engagement in research related to professional practice.

EDAD 6281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDAD 6291 Internship in the Principalship Prerequisite(s): Completion of at least 24 credit hours in EDAD coursework
This course provides for administrative internship at the home campus of the student with the supervision of a campus- based administrator and a university supervisor.

EDAD 6292 Internship in the Principalship Prerequisite(s): EDAD 6291 and completion of at least 24 credit hours in EDAD coursework
This is the second course in the Internship and is recommended for the summer term. The student shadows an administrator in a summer school session. The internship is scheduled in a district other than the employing district of the student.

EDAD 6301 Administrative Theory and Practice Prerequisite(s): None
This course explores theory and practices related to organizational behavior, development, models, and change; shared decision-making; and instructional leadership. Major topics include the new roles of school leaders, issues related to school reform, community and stakeholder involvement, improvement of the teaching and learning environment, enhancing student achievement, and ethics.

EDAD 6302 Instructional Leadership and Evaluation Prerequisite(s): None
This course will study major issues, problems, and trends in Instructional Leadership. An analysis of leadership skills required of the principal in the areas of curriculum, supervision, group processes, organization for school improvement, and staff development will be emphasized. Each candidate will receive certification in Advancing Educational Leadership (AEL) and Teacher Appraisal Training (T-TESS) upon completion of the Texas approved training.

EDAD 6303 School Law Prerequisite(s): None
This course explores legal and ethical issues that arise in elementary and secondary schools. It provides school leaders with the knowledge necessary to understand and prevent legal problems, and helps school leaders think through questions of educational policy and ethics that legal disputes raise but do not resolve. Topics include liability for

student injury, due process, search and seizure, staff appraisal, employment discrimination, church/state conflicts, control over the curriculum, the expression of controversial views, legal and ethical issues related to the financing and adequacy of state school finance plans, and the schools' authority to make rules governing student and teacher conduct. The course also reviews federal, state and local policies related to equal opportunity, including: school accountability, bilingual education, sexual discrimination and harassment, privacy issues, affirmative action, and the education of exceptional children.

EDAD 6304 School Business Management and Finance Prerequisite(s): None
Study of roles, responsibilities, systems, and procedures in school business matters. Includes budgeting, accounting, data processing, purchasing, personnel, and management of facilities, equipment, and real property. Examination of federal, state, and local programs to finance education.

EDAD 6307 Classroom Management Prerequisite(s): None
A study of a broad spectrum of approaches to classroom management, including authoritarian, behavior-modification, group- process, instructional, and psycho-emotional-climate orientations. Examination of research regarding effective classroom management. Exploration of multiple strategies for handling common classroom management problems. (Offered also as EDUC 6301.)

EDAD 6308 The Role of the Principal Prerequisite(s): None
Study of the roles and responsibilities in the administration of elementary, middle, and secondary schools, with focus on the principal’s professional relations with teachers, parents, pupils, educational leaders within the district, and the board of education. Analysis of the role of the principal in curriculum development, organization, and evaluation; school organization; discipline; student behavior; community relations; the teaching/learning process; in-service training; and leadership in teacher growth and evaluation. Emphasis is on the personal qualities of leadership conducive to good human relations.

EDAD 6309 The School and Its Instructional Program Prerequisite(s): None
Factors influencing school curriculum in grades K-12 are studied. Included are the components of the curriculum: organization of the curriculum; how curriculum is changed; how new curriculum is developed; and the curriculum programs in elementary and secondary schools.

EDAD 6310 Applications of Educational Research Prerequisite(s): None
A study of investigations relating to educational research. Includes examination of reports from abstracts and original sources, valid research criteria in making written evaluations, and applications in specific field settings. (Offered also as EDUC 6320 and PSYC 6320.)

EDAD 6311 Leadership for Inclusive Education Prerequisite(s): None
This course is an in-depth analysis and discussion of the school leader's role in creating and sustaining an inclusive learning environment for all. Candidates will examine diversity through the lens of race/ethnicity, language, economics, and academics. They will also explore the role of the campus leader in the administration and support of special elementary and secondary school programs including Career Technology Education (CTE), special education, compensatory, bilingual, English Language Learners (ELL), and gifted and talented education.

EDAD 6312 Interpersonal Communication and Public Relations Prerequisite(s): None
This course addresses the requisite knowledge, performances, and dispositions necessary for a school leader to collaborate with families and community members, respond to diverse community interests and needs, and mobilize community resources. Candidates study the meaning of collaborative leadership and the actions necessary to build working alliances. Much attention is focused on the strategies needed to connect across multiple and diverse community boundaries. Candidates also become familiar with an emergent body of research regarding school, family,

and community collaboration around schooling issues. In addition, candidates explore the interpersonal communication skills in order to become effective communicators of the campus vision and mission.

EDAD 6313 School Personnel Leadership Prerequisite(s): None
An integration of personnel leadership skills required in the legal, academic, and administrative considerations of regular and special school programs. Included are state and federal regulations.
EDAD 6316 Data-Driven Decision Making Prerequisite(s): None
This course enables school leaders to enhance their understanding of how consistent and systemic use of data shifts school cultures toward learner-centered communities that recognize achievement gaps in learning among student populations. Through the analysis of data, candidates learn a process for collaboratively inquiring with school faculty to identify significant student learning problems, design research-based intervention strategies, and monitor effectiveness, which contribute to building school capacity and instructional expertise. Through data-driven dialogue, candidates practice and learn facilitation strategies to establish high performing teams and enhance personal accountability. Candidates explore achievement gaps related to minority and special populations and recognize how their personal belief systems and expectations may impact schooling practices. A focus on literacy or math content will enable candidates to frame a context in which to explore issues related to diverse learners and equitable practice.

EDAD 6317 Human Capital and Professional Development Prerequisite(s): None
This course studies the practices and principles of school leadership with reference to recruitment, selection and promotion, and retention of school personnel. Topics include planning for personnel needs, job analysis and evaluation, job descriptions, salaries, maintenance of morale, evaluation of personnel, and other employee services. This course includes fundamental issues related to the development of personnel, entry-level knowledge of staff appraisal, adult learning and development, and professional development.

EDAD 6381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.


Bilingual Education (EDBI) Course Descriptions
EDBI 3335 Spanish Writing Workshop Prerequisite(s): None
This course provides students with strategies to write fluently in Spanish. Techniques emphasize the steps of the writing process. Students use self-editing and peer collaboration to produce a portfolio of their work. (Offered also as SPAN 3335.)

EDBI 3381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDBI 3387 Teaching School Content Areas in the Bilingual Classroom Prerequisite(s): EDUC 4301 or EDUC 4311
This course will include the preparation and teaching of lessons and units in Spanish for content area; Spanish vocabulary development and instruction including the multifaceted knowledge of word knowledge; appropriate strategies for before, during and after reading; the role of fluency in comprehension and strategies to improve fluency; evaluation of curriculum materials for the Spanish speaker; familiarization with the state adopted materials written in Spanish; assessment that leads to data informed decisions; comprehension skills in content areas; grouping procedures in a multi-tiered approach; and lesson design that differentiates based on student need. Students apply course content in a field-based practicum in a bilingual classroom.

EDBI 4304 Methods of Teaching English as a Second Language Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Educator Preparation Program and (EDUC 4301 or EDUC 4311)
This course will enable students to explore theories, pedagogical considerations and current methodology in the teaching of reading, speaking, listening, thinking and writing visualizing, and visually representing for second languages and targeted cultures. The five critical components of reading instruction (phonemic awareness, phonics and word study, fluency, vocabulary, and comprehension) will frame the study of learners of second languages. An emphasis will be placed on developing interpersonal communication skills of the beginning and intermediate ESL students.

EDBI 4305 Second Language Acquisition Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Educator Preparation Program
This course will introduce students to theories of second language acquisition; comparison of first and second language acquisition; second language acquisition in children and adults and in the bilingual child. Also included in this course is an introduction to sociolinguistic considerations and assessment of language dominance and proficiency to inform instructional decisions. This course will make use of a multi-tiered system of support to provide the necessary differentiation. Student learning will focus on acquisition of English as a second language.

EDBI 4314 Survey of Linguistics Prerequisite(s): None
Nature and structure of language. Language variation and change. Language and society. Introduction to contrastive linguistics, with emphasis on English. Languages of the world.

EDBI 4350 Developing Literacy in the Bilingual Classroom Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Educator Preparation Program and (EDUC 4301 or EDUC 4311)
This course will include an analysis of the development of reading, speaking, listening, thinking and writing visualizing, and visually representing as it applies to the young bilingual child. The five critical components of reading instruction (phonemic awareness, phonics and word study, fluency, vocabulary, and comprehension) will frame the study of the bilingual learner. The course will also include a theoretical framework for literacy development in the first language of bilingual students using a multi-tiered approach to classroom instruction that involves being able to gather assessment data that will inform instructional decisions and differentiate instruction. This course will also include an exploration of the selection and development of activities that promote literacy acquisition in the first language of bilingual students. This class will be taught primarily in Spanish.

EDBI 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDBI 5304 Methods of Teaching English as a Second Language Prerequisite(s): None
This course will help to prepare learners to function as knowledgeable and effective teachers/scholars of students in a bilingual/ESL classroom. Students will conduct an in-depth study of theories, pedagogical considerations and current methodology in the teaching of listening, speaking, reading and writing skills for second languages and target cultures. Emphasis is on developing interpersonal communication skills of beginning and intermediate ESL students.

EDBI 5305 Second Language Acquisition Prerequisite(s): None
This course will prepare professional educators to function as knowledgeable and effective teachers/scholars of students in a bilingual classroom. Students will explore theories of second language acquisition, comparison of first and second language acquisition, and second language acquisition in children and adults and in the bilingual child. Students will conduct an in-depth study of assessment of language dominance and proficiency with a focus on acquisition of English as a second language.

EDBI 5315 Integrating ESL with the Content Areas Prerequisite(s): None

Approaches to teaching English as a Second Language within the context of comprehensible content-area instruction. Sheltered English. Emphasis on developing literacy skills and fostering oral and written student interaction in all subject areas. Understanding of cultural diversity and its implications to classroom climate. Adapting instruction to the diagnosed needs of the LEP student. Fifteen-hour school-based practicum project.

EDBI 5335 Spanish Writing Workshop Prerequisite(s): None
This course will provide students with techniques for developing writing skills in Spanish. This includes knowledge of Spanish language orthography, as well as the use of suitable writing styles for a given audience. Knowledge and skills developed in the class will be relevant to the teaching of writing in the EC-6 Bilingual/ESL classroom and to the Bilingual Target Language Proficiency Test (BTLPT). This course will be conducted in Spanish.

EDBI 5343 Hispanic Cultural Perspectives Prerequisite(s): None
A study of the major cultural aspects of Spanish-speaking countries, with a special emphasis on literature, art, history, geography and cultural patterns. This course will be taught in Spanish. Not open to students with language proficiency below ACTFL Intermediate High.

EDBI 5344 Hispanic Cultural Perspectives Prerequisite(s): None
A study of the major cultural aspects of Spanish-speaking countries, with a special emphasis on literature, art, history, geography and cultural patterns. This course will be taught in Spanish. Not open to students with language proficiency below ACTFL Intermediate High.

EDBI 5350 Developing Literacy in the Bilingual Classroom Prerequisite(s): None
This course will prepare professional educators to function as knowledgeable and effective teachers/scholars of students in a bilingual classroom. Students will gain an in-depth understanding the theoretical framework for the literacy development in the first language of bilingual students. Students will explore and analyze current methods of teaching reading and writing. Students will develop and evaluate activities that promote literacy acquisition in the first language of bilingual students. This class will be taught primarily in Spanish.

EDBI 5381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDBI 6181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDBI 6281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDBI 6305 Foundations of Bilingual Education Prerequisite(s): None
Rationale for bilingual education. Goals, curriculum, classroom management, and testing in the various types of bilingual programs. Research findings in bilingual education.

EDBI 6307 The Teaching of Mathematics, Science and Social Studies in the Bilingual Classroom Prerequisite(s): None
Development, utilization, and adaptation of resources and materials for teaching math, science and social studies in the bilingual classroom. Current approaches to teaching the content areas in the bilingual classroom. Vocabulary and

fluency development in content areas in Spanish. Program and staffing models. Use of the first and second languages. This course will be taught primarily in Spanish.

EDBI 6381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.


Early Childhood Education (EDEC) Course Descriptions
EDEC 2320 Learning and Development Prerequisite(s): None
This is a comprehensive study of child and adolescent development (cognitive, social, physical, and emotional development) combined with examination and analysis of learning theory and other factors and principles that affect learning. Observation and experience in schools is included. (Offered also as EDUC 2320.)

EDEC 4160 Wellness & Fitness for Children Prerequisite(s): None
This course prepares students to effectively teach health and P.E. in grades PK-6. In addition to PK-6 health content and methodology, it includes exploration of developmentally appropriate movement education methods for PK through grade 6 as well as ways to use movement activities to help children learn academic content areas other than health and P.E. (such as math, science, social studies and language arts). (Offered also as INDC 4160.)

EDEC 4181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be include

EDEC 4281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDEC 4290 Early Childhood Practicum Prerequisite(s): EDEC 4304 and EDEC 4306 and EDEC 4313 and EDEC 4330 and EDEC 4351
This is a field-based course in which students are placed in a pre-school situation for observation and application of concepts learned in coursework.

EDEC 4304 The Young Child Prerequisite(s): None
This course includes an in-depth study of growth and development during infancy and early childhood. The behavioral science foundations of early childhood education are studied in this course.

EDEC 4313 Curriculum and Instruction in Early Childhood Education Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Educator Preparation Program and (EDUC 4301 or EDUC 4311)
This course is focused on the study of research-based curriculum, instruction, and assessment for early childhood. All areas of study are focused on developmentally appropriate practices for children of preschool and kindergarten age and are supported by national standards and state standards - National Association for the Education of the Young Child (NAEYC), Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills (TEKS) and guidelines. Topics include learning about the specific characteristics and expectations for this age group, becoming knowledgeable of early childhood programs, planning learning activities and facilities, developing positive school/home relations, being aware of the diverse needs of the learner, and other aspects of creating and maintaining rich learning experiences.

EDEC 4330 Psychology of Learning Prerequisite(s): None

A course stressing the contributions of major learning theories to understanding behavior. Particular attention is paid to human learning and the applicability of learning theory to the educational process as well as to goal attainments. (Offered also as PSYC 4330 and EDUC 4330.)

EDEC 4351 Emergent Literacy Prerequisite(s): None
This course includes an analysis of the development of reading, speaking, listening, thinking and writing, visualizing, and visually representing as it applies to the young child. The five critical components of reading instruction (phonemic awareness, phonics and the word study, fluency, vocabulary, and comprehension) frame the study of the emergent learner. The course also includes a multi-tiered approach to classroom instruction: being able to differentiate instruction as needed and gather assessment data that will inform instructional decisions. (Offered also as EDRE 4351.)

EDEC 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDEC 4385 Essential Elements of Fine Art Prerequisite(s): None
This course explores EC-6 fine arts content and methodology. It includes development of knowledge, skills and dispositions identified in the art, music and theatre Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills (TEKS) as well as ways to integrate fine arts into learning in other content areas. (Offered also as INDC 4385.)

EDEC 5181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDEC 5281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDEC 5310 Preschool Curriculum and Instruction Prerequisite(s): None
This course is designed to provide an in-depth study of developmentally appropriate curriculum and instruction for three and four-year-old children. Fieldwork is required.

EDEC 5311 Kindergarten Curriculum and Instruction Prerequisite(s): EDEC 5306
This course includes the study of and experiences with instructional strategies; planning and evaluation of learning activities; selection and planning of physical facilities; and the skills necessary for management of kindergarten programs.

EDEC 5351 Emergent Literacy Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Educator Preparation Program
In this course students examine emergent literacy and explore ways to encourage the development of initial literacy. A wide variety of topics pertaining to the emergent reader and writer are included. (Offered also as EDRE 5351 and EDSP 5351.)

EDEC 5381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDEC 6181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDEC 6281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDEC 6381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

Educational Leadership (EDLD) Course Descriptions
EDLD 7281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDLD 7300 Seminar in Doctoral Studies in Executive Educational Leadership Prerequisite(s): Completion of a minimum of 30 hours in the Doctoral Program
This course is the first dissertation writing course of the doctoral sequence and is used for students to begin writing the dissertation with the supervision of an instructor and the dissertation chair. A dissertation chair will be appointed at the beginning of this course. The expectation is that the student will complete Chapters 1-3 of the dissertation and schedule the proposal defense by the end of the semester.

EDLD 7301 Cultural Competence for Educational Leaders Prerequisite(s): EDLD 7302 and EDLD 7307
Content in the course includes the political, economic, and cultural factors affecting schools, institutions of higher education, and educational leadership today. Life styles, values and aspirations of various cultural groups as related to the leadership process are also covered. In addition, conflict management processes and skills with emphasis on interaction patterns, interpersonal relationships, and communication skills are addressed.

EDLD 7302 Leadership Theory and Applications Prerequisite(s): EDLD 7306 and EDLD 7307
Leadership theories, models and processes with emphasis on the results of the applications of various theories, models, and processes to educational leadership are addressed in this course. The course requires knowledge of the literature and ongoing candidate engagement in research.

EDLD 7303 Rethinking Education with Emerging Technologies Prerequisite(s): None
The course content addresses emerging technologies as tools to enhance learning in and out of the classroom. In this course, theories, instructional design, assessment, and digital teaching platforms are emphasized. No specialized technology expertise is required.

EDLD 7304 Organizational Behavior and Theory Prerequisite(s): EDSU 7322
The study of organizational theory and behavior is built upon contributions from a number of behavioral disciplines such as: psychology, sociology, social psychology, anthropology, and political science. Contributions of the psychologists have been mainly at the individual or micro level, while the latter disciplines have contributed to our understanding of macro concepts - group processes and organization. The course addresses the integration and

application of behavioral knowledge to guide the behavior of others in the educational work place. The course requires knowledge of the literature and ongoing candidate engagement in research.

EDLD 7305 Instructional Theory and School Effectiveness Prerequisite(s): None
Systematic study is made of existing research on key factors influencing instructional effectiveness and on models for school restructuring. The relationship of instruction and school effectiveness is explored in depth. The course requires knowledge of the literature and ongoing candidate engagement in research.

EDLD 7306 introduction to Academic Writing and Research Prerequisite(s): None
This course introduces students to the principles of academic reading and writing for advanced graduate studies. Major components of APA style and literature searches are included. Students will explore current research and write for an academic purpose while learning to identify and implement key scholarly components of academic literacy.

EDLD 7307 Christian World View for Educational Leaders Prerequisite(s): None
The course will examine the roles of leadership in community, administration and schools from a Christian worldview. The course curriculum emphasizes the knowledge necessary to assess and apply biblically informed leadership skills in school settings.

EDLD 7308 Ethical Leadership and Governance Prerequisite(s): None
The course will explore ethics, values, and diversity, with an emphasis on building the knowledge and skills necessary for effective leadership within the educational setting. Current theory, best practices, and opportunities for practical application are integrated. Particular emphasis is given to leadership behavior theory and ethical practice that has emerged in the field of educational administration/leadership.

EDLD 7381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.


Educational Leadership Research (EDLR) Course Descriptions
EDLR 7116 Dissertation Research I Prerequisite(s): None
In consultation with the professor of record for the course and dissertation chair, the student will continue to develop chapter I and begin to develop chapter II of the dissertation to complete the aims identified by the dissertation chair and the student.

EDLR 7117 Dissertation Research II Prerequisite(s): None
In consultation with the professor of record for the course and dissertation chair, the student will complete the design of chapters II and III of the dissertation and defend chapters I, II, and III in the proposal defense during spring, summer I, summer II and fall semesters. In addition, the student will write proposals for presentations at professional conferences and review and correct the case study developed in semester two of the program to prepare for publication.

EDLR 7118 Dissertation Research III Prerequisite(s): None
In consultation with the professor of record for the course and dissertation chair, the student will design and conduct research to complete the aims identified in his/her research proposal to write chapter IV and begin the development of chapter V of the dissertation. In addition, the student will review the questions and processes for the written and oral exams, review and correct the case study developed in semester two of the program to prepare for publication, write proposals for presentations at professional conferences, and write manuscripts for publication.

EDLR 7119 Dissertation Research IV Prerequisite(s): None
In consultation with the professor of record for the course and dissertation chair, the student will design and conduct research to complete the aims identified in chapters I-IV to complete chapter V and defend the final dissertation. In addition, the student will review the questions and processes for the written and oral exams; review and correct the case study developed in semester two of the program to prepare for publication; write proposals for presentations at professional conferences; and write manuscripts for publication.

EDLR 7120 Dissertation Research V Prerequisite(s): Completion of 63 hours of Doctoral Program coursework without successful Final Defense of Dissertation
The student must remain continuously enrolled in the program until all courses and the dissertation are completed. In consultation with the professor of record for the course and dissertation chair, the student will design and conduct research to complete the aims identified in chapters I-IV to complete chapter V and defend the final dissertation.

EDLR 7181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

EDLR 7216 Dissertation Research I Prerequisite(s): None
In consultation with the mentor and advisory committee, the student will design and conduct research to complete the aims identified in his/her research proposal or as modified subsequently in line with recommendations from the committee.

EDLR 7217 Dissertation Research II Prerequisite(s): None
In consultation with the mentor and advisory committee, the student will design and conduct research to complete the aims identified in his/her research proposal or as modified subsequently in line with recommendations from the committee.

EDLR 7310 Accountability and Measurement for Current Issues in Education Prerequisite(s): EDLD 7300
The course is designed for the study of educational problem solving and accountability and their relationship to needs assessment techniques, evaluation methodologies, and decision-making processes.

EDLR 7311 Methods of Quantitative Educational Research Prerequisite(s): EDLR 7323 and EDLR 7312
The course is a study of quantitative research with emphasis upon an understanding of statistical concepts and procedures necessary to create and implement effective educational research. The course requires knowledge of the literature and ongoing engagement in research.

EDLR 7312 Qualitative Research Methodology Prerequisite(s): EDLR 7323 and EDLD 7302
The course is designed to teach qualitative research methodology within an educational leadership problems-based contextual framework. The course will emphasize qualitative research techniques through lecture, discussion, readings, and field-based research projects using the methods learned. The course requires knowledge of the literature and ongoing candidate engagement in research.

EDLR 7313 Applied Multivariate Statistics Prerequisite(s): None
The course examines the assumptions, limitations, and uses of basic techniques such as cluster analysis, principal components analysis, and factor analysis. The concepts will be applied to real data sets using programs such as R, SAS, and SPSS.

EDLR 7323 Applied Research in Education Prerequisite(s): EDLD 7306 and EDLD 7307
This course requires knowledge of the literature and ongoing engagement in research.

EDLR 7399 Dissertation Defense Preparation Prerequisite(s): EDLR 7310
This course is designed to allow doctoral candidates the opportunity to complete their dissertation study and prepare for Dissertation Final Defense.

Reading Education (EDRE) Course Descriptions
EDRE 4320 Teaching Reading through Children's Literature Prerequisite(s): Admission to Educator Preparation Program
Students in this course will be introduced to the best examples in literature for children. The student will gain an in- depth knowledge of the major genres of children's literature, how to critically evaluate books using specific criteria, and how to make use of that knowledge in extending pupil skills in developmental reading as well as the creation of lifetime reading habits. Students also become familiar with the lives and works of major authors and illustrators of works for children.

EDRE 4330 Teaching Content Area Reading Skills Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Educator Preparation Program
Students in this course will explore methods for teaching reading in the content areas. Topics will include assessment that leads to data informed decisions; comprehension skills in content areas; readability and material suitability; study skills; vocabulary development and instruction, the multifaceted knowledge of word knowledge; appropriate strategies for before, during and after reading; the role of fluency in comprehension and strategies to improve fluency, reading efficiency; grouping procedures in a multi-tiered approach; and lesson design that differentiates based on student need.
EDRE 4350 Reading and the Language Arts Prerequisite(s): EDUC 4301 or EDUC 4311
Corequisite(s): EDRE 4360
This course includes an analysis of the development of writing and spelling for grades 2-8 and the use of differentiated instruction. The use of assessment and data driven decision making for instruction are covered. The style of instruction will focus on effective teaching: (1) Explicit instruction with modeling, (2) Systematic instruction and scaffolding, (3) Multiple opportunities for independent practice and application, (4) Immediate affirmative & corrective feedback, and
(5) On-going progress monitoring and a multi-tiered system of support. Both on-campus and field experiences are included. It must be completed before student teaching.

EDRE 4351 Emergent Literacy Prerequisite(s): Admission to Educator Preparation Program
This course includes an analysis of the development of reading, speaking, listening, thinking and writing visualizing, and visually representing as it applies to the young child. The five critical components of reading instruction (phonemic awareness, phonics and word study, fluency, vocabulary, and comprehension) frame the study of the emergent learner. The course also includes a multi-tiered approach to classroom instruction: being able to differentiate instruction as needed and gather assessment data that will inform instructional decisions.

EDRE 4360 Developing and Teaching Literacy Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Educator Preparation Program Corequisite(s): EDRE 4350
Included in this course are methods and materials for teaching developmental reading to children in school settings from grades Pre-K to 8. The course emphasizes competence in assessing specific strengths and weaknesses in the reading skills of children, differentiation in instruction, lesson planning in order to prepare learning activities appropriate to children’s’ needs, and interaction with children in such a way that learning is maximized. It includes a multi-tiered approach to meet the various needs of students along with assessment that drives instructional decisions. It builds on the concepts from emergent literacy (EDRE 4351) that stress the five critical components of reading

instruction and the understanding of effective instruction (five features). Both on-campus activities and field experiences are included. This course must be completed before student teaching.

EDRE 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDRE 5181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDRE 5182 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDRE 5301 Advanced Developmental Reading Prerequisite: None
This course examines developmental reading programs for grades pre-school through college. Skill in recognizing various stages in the development of reading processes and an analysis of the total reading program, emphasizing procedures for improvement, is developed.

EDRE 5304 Diagnosis and Correction of Reading Difficulties Prerequisite(s): None
Causes of reading difficulties along with the use of diagnostic evaluation to select appropriate instructional materials and strategies for correction are explored.

EDRE 5310 Reading & Writing for Pre-Adolescents Prerequisite(s): None
Included in this course are methods and materials for teaching developmental reading to children in elementary school settings. The course emphasizes competence in assessing specific strengths and weaknesses in the reading skills of children, lesson planning in order to prepare learning activities appropriate to children’s needs, and interacting with children in such a way that learning is maximized. Both on-campus activities and field experiences are included. This course is a prerequisite for student teaching.

EDRE 5320 Teaching Reading through Children's Literature Prerequisite(s): None
This course will enable professional educators to construct and evaluate reading programs at all levels. Graduate students taking this course will gain an in-depth knowledge of the major genres of children’s literature and how to critically evaluate books using specific criteria. The course will provide educators with the skills and experience necessary to enrich their reading instruction, as well as the creation of lifetime reading habits. Students will explore the lives and works of major authors and illustrators of works for children and their impact on this area of reading education, as well as exploring the use of multicultural literature.

EDRE 5330 Content Area Reading Prerequisite(s): None
This course will introduce professional educators (and those seeking initial certification) to specific methods for teaching reading in content areas. Students will study assessment procedures, comprehension skills in content areas, readability and materials suitability, study skills, vocabulary development, developing reading rate flexibility, reading efficiency, grouping procedures, and lesson design. Using these experiences, students will learn to write formal lesson plans or prepare units of study for content areas that incorporate reading instruction. Students will learn to evaluate the effectiveness of reading strategies and how to make improvements.

EDRE 5351 Emergent Literacy Prerequisite(s): Admission to Teacher Education
In this course students examine emergent literacy and explore ways to encourage the development of initial literacy. A wide variety of topics pertaining to the emergent reader and writer are included. (Offered also as EDEC 5351, and EDSP 5351.)

EDRE 5352 Literacy in the Secondary Schools Prerequisite(s): None
This course provides students with opportunities to use literacy as a tool to meet a broad range of personal, social, and curricular functions as well as real-world applications. It stresses comprehension strategies, metacognition, reflection and positive attitudes toward literacy.
EDRE 5381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDRE 6181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDRE 6281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.
EDRE 6304 Clinical Practice in Reading Education Prerequisite(s): EDRE 5304
Activities are designed to give the student clinical experience in the application of theoretical models of diagnosis, remediation, and pedagogy through fieldwork assignments with appropriate required TEA standards documentation.
EDRE 6305 Reading: A Linguistic Perspective Prerequisite(s): None
This course examines reading within the framework of literacy development. Linguistic and psychological perspectives toward reading as well as their relationship to the comprehensive process are emphasized.

EDRE 6381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.


Special Education (EDSP) Course Descriptions
EDSP 2302 Survey of Exceptional Children Prerequisite(s): None
This course provides a survey of populations with exceptionalities. Cognitive, emotional, social, physical, and motivational characteristics as well as educational needs of children with exceptionalities are explored. Knowledge of professional, ethical and legal issues that apply to working with students with exceptionalities is also included. Students apply current and new knowledge regarding instructional planning, assessment and collaboration.

EDSP 4181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDSP 4281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDSP 4302 Survey of Exceptional Children Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Educator Preparation Program
This course provides a survey of populations with exceptionalities. Cognitive, emotional, social, physical, and motivational characteristics as well as educational needs of children with exceptionalities are explored. Knowledge of professional, ethical and legal issues that apply to working with students with exceptionalities is also included. Students apply current and new knowledge regarding instructional planning, assessment and collaboration.

EDSP 4311 Diagnostic and Prescriptive Teaching for Exceptional Children Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Educator Preparation Program and EDSP 4302
This course focuses on the diagnostic-prescriptive approach to individualizing instruction which provides educators with a comprehensive method of assessing learning styles, identifying where breakdowns occur in the learning process, and developing appropriate programming related to the specific needs of learners. Key topics include response to intervention (RTI) approaches, the screening process for dyslexia, standardized and informal assessments, and data analysis as well as laws related to eligibility, ethics and parents' rights. Students learn to write Individualized Educational Programs (IEPs) based on the diagnostic-prescriptive approach to individualizing instruction for students with exceptionalities. Further, interviews of experienced educators will be conducted regarding current issues and practices in assessment and intervention.

EDSP 4325 Educating Gifted Learners Prerequisite(s): EDUC 4301 or EDUC 4311
This course presents an overview of the intellectual and developmental characteristics of the gifted and talented as well as an introduction to identification techniques, instructional approaches, educational programs, and special problems. The course focuses on classroom educational practices designed to meet the unique needs of the gifted and talented students. Historical, legal, and conceptual foundations of gifted education are examined as well as current research relevant to the education of gifted learners.

EDSP 4352 Behavior and Classroom Management Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Educator Preparation Program and EDSP 4302
Promoting positive behavior and effectively responding to misbehavior are critical skills necessary for all educators. This course helps educators create safe, supportive, and respectful learning environments that promote social- emotional development, self-responsibility, and character, in order to optimize learning for all students. Age- appropriate skills and strategies for managing dynamic and flexible grouping structures and for teaching conflict resolution will be presented. Through this course, the educator will also learn the ABC's of behavior, function, and effective strategies for implementing a behavior intervention plan (BIP) for students that exhibit behavior deficits. The course also provides strategies for building positive relationships, fostering motivation, and engaging in effective communication and problem solving with parents and families.

EDSP 4353 Field Experiences in Special Education Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Educator Education Program and EDSP 4302 and EDSP 4311 and EDSP 4319 and EDSP 4352
Students will become knowledgeable about various methods of special service delivery to students with exceptionalities as they come in contact with a continuum of service delivery systems ranging from least restrictive (inclusive) to most restrictive (self- contained) environments. Observations, classroom assistance, instructional planning, classroom and individual instruction, and conference activities will be required. Students will create a Teacher Work Sample (TWS), which consists of a project demonstrating mastery of the components of effective instruction and student learning. Successful completion of the TWS is required for program completion.

EDSP 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDSP 5302 Survey of Exceptional Children Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Educator Preparation Program
Students will determine the goals of instruction according to the needs of the various exceptionalities; they will develop an appropriate curriculum using the essential elements as a base. Students will learn the techniques of managing behavior, how to individualize instruction, how to apply methods of intervention, and how to evaluate adequacy of teaching. The future educator will learn how to arrange classrooms specific to management theories. Students must be computer literate. Fieldwork is required.

EDSP 5311 Diagnostic and Prescriptive Teaching for Exceptional Children Prerequisite(s): EDSP 5302
The learning experiences in this course will contribute to the knowledge and skills of professional educators in developing and assessing programs for students who exhibit learning and behavior difficulties. Students will learn the diagnostic-prescriptive approach to individualized instruction. Students in the course will learn about comprehensive methods of assessing learning styles and to identify where the breakdowns can occur in the learning process. This course will assist educators in developing, administering and evaluating appropriate programming related to specific needs of learners. The screening process for dyslexia mandated by the State Board for Educator Certification is taught in this course.

EDSP 5319 Teaching Strategies in Special Education Prerequisite(s): EDSP 5302 and EDSP 5311
This course is designed to enable students to develop the expertise of the professional educator with the needs of the various student exceptionalities. Teachers seeking certification as Educational Diagnosticians will learn to apply specialized techniques of managing behavior, how to individualize instruction, how to apply methods of intervention, and how to evaluate adequacy of teaching. The practicing educator taking this course will be able to develop a comprehensive knowledge about classroom management theories as they relate to special education.

EDSP 5325 Educating Gifted Learners Prerequisite(s): None
This course presents an overview of the intellectual and developmental characteristics of the gifted and talented as well as an introduction to identification techniques, instructional approaches, educational programs, and special problems. The course focuses on classroom educational practices designed to meet the unique needs of the gifted and talented students. Historical, legal, and conceptual foundations of gifted education are examined as well as current research relevant to the education of gifted learners.

EDSP 5335 Identification, and Evaluation in Early Childhood Prerequisite(s): EDSP 5302 and EDSP 5311
This course involves an in-depth study of growth and development of the young child during infancy and early childhood. Additionally, this course emphasizes the acquisition of knowledge and identification of exceptionalities. It will include observations, screen, and assessment of young children, report writing, and identifying appropriate evidence-based interventions.

EDSP 5345 Student Evaluation Techniques Prerequisite(s): Teaching experience and/or a course in instructional design (i.e. EDUC 6302 or EDUC 6312)
This course is designed to enable the student to improve the design, construction, and validation of teacher-made tests, and to evaluate, select, administer, and interpret standardized tests for all levels of instruction. Also included is brief attention to the organization and management of schools and legal and ethical aspects of teaching.

EDSP 5351 Emergent Literacy Prerequisite(s): 6302 (or teacher certification)
In this course students examine emergent literacy and explore ways to encourage the development of initial literacy. A wide variety of topics pertaining to the emergent reader and writer are included.
(Offered also as EDEC 5351 and EDRE 5351.)

EDSP 5381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a

minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDSP 6181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDSP 6281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDSP 6305 Individual Psychological Evaluation Prerequisite(s): Psych 6302
The purpose of this course is to attain knowledge of cognitive functioning and develop skills in the cognitive assessment of children and adolescents. This course integrates the skills of administration, scoring, and interpretation of major cognitive assessment instruments (e.g., KABC-II, WISC-V, and WJ-IV COG) in the context of recent cognitive theories and research. The Cattell-Horn-Carroll (CHC) Theory of Cognitive Abilities will be the primary underlying framework for interpreting test data. Also, an emphasis will be placed on a dual discrepancy model when utilizing the CHC theory of cognitive abilities. Issues of assessing culturally and linguistically diverse children and adolescents are integrated throughout the course in addition to specified lectures. (Offered also as PSYC 6305 and EPSY 6305)

EDSP 6315 Practicum in Diagnosis Prerequisite(s): Permission of Advisor
Each student works under the supervision of a certified Educational Diagnostician five days a week during regular school hours for the length of the term that the course is offered at the university.

EDSP 6344 Educational Appraisal of Individuals with Exceptionalities Prerequisite(s): EDSP 5302 and EDSP 5311 and EDSP 5319
This course is an introduction to appraisal techniques and instruments used to identify the presence or absence of a specific disability. Administration, scoring, interpretation, preparation of written reports and the development of IEPs and evidence- based interventions in psychology and education designed to promote academic skills will be taught in this course. Students must be computer literate. (Offered also as EPSY 6344 and PSYC 6344)

EDSP 6345 Advanced Assessment in Special Education Prerequisite(s): EDSP 5302 and EDSP 5311 and EDSP 5319 and EDSP 5335 and EDSP 6305 and EDSP 6344
This course addresses the explosion of information related to assessment in special education and to the diverse populations served by special education. It examines advanced assessment techniques currently used by educational diagnosticians. The course will focus on developing proficiency in the administration and interpretation of instruments such as the following: The Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale, the KABC, the Wechsler Achievement Test, the Bender Gestalt, the Test of Nonverbal Intelligence, the Woodcock Johnson Cognitive Battery, the UNIT, Adaptive Behavior Scales, and the Vineland Social Maturity Scales. Students must be computer literate.

EDSP 6381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDSP 7321 Legal Issues and Policies in Special Education Prerequisite(s): None
The course examines the tension between competing philosophical theories and the construction and function of educational policy and key legal issues that govern daily and long-range decisions of special education leaders. Contemporary debates in special education policy, law, and ethical issues will be explored, and the development of educational policy and the initiation and impact that influences educational institutions are examined.

EDSP 7322 District and Community Relations for Special Education Leaders Prerequisite(s): None
The seminar course focuses on systems for developing school-community relations and an understanding of the school district's purposes, functions, achievements as related to the needs of stakeholders involved with special education initiatives. Best practices and relevant research involving the communication of student data and achievement results are addressed.

EDSP 7323 Personnel Preparation and Collaboration in Special Education Prerequisite(s): None
The course focuses on the special education leader's role in human resources management, emphasizing recruiting and retaining adequate staff. Such topics as recruitment, mentoring, professional development, ethics, performance evaluations, compensation, and due process are discussed.

EDSP 7324 Instructional Practices in Special Education Prerequisite(s): None
This course guides special education professionals through the process of identifying, selecting, implementing, and evaluating evidence-based practices, including procedures for scenarios when the research is insufficient. Functional and curriculum-based assessment is addressed.

EDSP 7325 Field Experience in Special Education Leadership Prerequisite(s): Completion of a minimum of 48 hours in the Doctoral Program
Candidates participate and are evaluated in an intensive study and field experience relating to positions in special education leadership.


Executive Educational Leadership (EDSU) Course Descriptions
EDSU 7303 Public Policy in Education Prerequisite(s): None
This course examines the context for policy making and the process of policy development and implementation. It includes the study of organizational structures for educational decision-making at the federal, state, county, and local levels, with emphasis on how and where influence can be exerted.

EDSU 7306 Field Experience in Executive Educational Leadership Prerequisite(s): Completion of a minimum of 48 hours in the Doctoral Program
Candidates participate and are evaluated in an intensive study and field experience relating to positions in educational leadership.

EDSU 7308 Finance Principles and Practice for Christian School Leadership Prerequisite(s): EDSU 7303 and EDSU 7306 and EDSU 7310 and EDSU 7320 and EDSU 7322
The course covers finance and funds development principles and models as well as major trends and issues in the study of resource acquisition and use in Christian schools and auxiliary enterprises.

EDSU 7309 Educational Law & Policy Prerequisite(s): EDSU 7303
The course examines the tension between competing philosophical theories and the construction and function of educational policy and key legal issues that govern daily and long-range decisions of educational leaders. Contemporary debates in educational policy, law, and ethical issues will be explored and the development of educational policy and the initiation and impact that influences educational institutions will be examined.

EDSU 7310 Program Evaluation Prerequisite(s): EDLR 7311 and EDLR 7312 and EDLR 7323
This course focuses on policy and program evaluations. It also focuses on establishing whether a particular program, regulation, or policy is achieving its intended outcome by investigating whether it has had a verifiable causal effect on intended (and unintended) outcomes. The coursework covers the use of effective evaluation procedures and applications that will allow educational leaders to become knowledgeable consumers. The course presents a variety of

methods and applications that are included in the repertoire of educational personnel who successfully evaluate school programs and policies.

EDSU 7320 District and Community Relations Prerequisite(s): None
The course focuses on systems for developing school-community relations and an understanding of the school district's purposes, functions, achievements as related to the needs of all stakeholders. Best practices and relevant research involving the communication of student achievement data, systems management by effectively using media such as websites, newsletters, and local news agencies will be explored.

EDSU 7321 District Finance, Plant Planning and Management Prerequisite(s): EDSU 7303 and EDSU 7306 and EDSU 7310 and EDSU 7320 and EDSU 7322
The course is designed for school superintendents, business managers, and other school personnel whose responsibilities include school plant planning and management. Topics considered include how to use and maintain present school plants, keeping the school board and community informed as to building needs, selecting architects, and financing construction, and the developing educational specifications. It will also cover the roles, responsibilities, systems and procedures in school district business matters including budgeting, accounting, data processing, purchasing, personnel, and how bond packages are created for rapid district growth needs.

EDSU 7322 Human Resource Management Prerequisite(s): None
The course focuses on the administrator's role in human resources management, emphasizing recruiting and retaining adequate staff. Such topics as recruitment, selection, mentoring, professional development, educator ethics, performance evaluations, compensation, and due process are discussed.


Professional Education (EDUC) Course Descriptions
EDUC 2320 Learning and Development Prerequisite(s): None
This is a comprehensive study of child and adolescent development (cognitive, social, physical, and emotional development) combined with examination and analysis of learning theory and other factors and principles that affect learning. Observation and experience in schools is included. (Students who wish to enter the Educator Preparation Program must earn a "C" or better in this course.)

EDUC 2330 Foundations of American Educational Thought Prerequisite(s): None
This course of study introduces the historical, philosophical, and sociological influences that have shaped the dynamic nature of private and public educational systems in the United States. Emphasis is placed on the Christian influence on education, great educational leaders, as well as examining the future of education. A great variety of selected classical readings are included with authors such as William Penn, Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Jefferson, Noah Webster, Ralph Waldo-Emerson, G. Stanley Hall, John Dewey, Booker T. Washington, Jane Addams, W.E.B. DuBois,
E.L. Thorndike, and others. An overview of the many facets and issues of teaching are introduced. (Students who wish to enter the Educator Preparation Program must earn a "C" or better in this course.)

EDUC 4000 Clinical Teaching Seminar Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Educator Preparation Program and approval of the Teacher Education Committee Corequisite(s): Enrollment in clinical teaching in student's area of certification
This course is founded on foundational research-based content and best practices in education concerning the topics of classroom management, assessment and professional development. The seminar for clinical teachers is interactive includes exploration of issues of particular interest and value to students as they complete their Educator Preparation Programs. These issues include the process of acquiring a teaching position (applications, resumes, interview skills, etc.), classroom management/discipline, ethical and legal issues related to teaching, communication with parents, portfolio construction and other issues encountered during clinical teaching. Support and encouragement in the form of sharing and problem solving will occur during each of the weekly sessions.

EDUC 4100 TExES State Certification Preparation Seminar Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Educator Preparation Program and a degree plan on file in the Office of Academic Records and completion of at least 90 credit hours of degree plan specified coursework
This course assists students in understanding the state and federal standards for their chosen certification areas. Students complete intensive reviews for their Pedagogy and Professionalism (PPR) and content area certification exams. They must successfully complete PPR and content area practice exams. This course must be completed prior to entering clinical teaching.

EDUC 4181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDUC 4281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDUC 4301 Curriculum and Instruction in the Elementary School Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Educator Preparation Program.
This course is designed to provide an integrated and in-depth understanding of principles of curriculum and instruction, as well as practical experiences in instructional design for elementary school contexts and learners. Multiple approaches to learning, the roles of teachers in the teaching-learning process, as well as current Texas state curriculum requirements and guidelines are explored. The effective use of media/technology is included. Field work is required.

EDUC 4302 Classroom Culture, Climate, and Safety Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Educator Preparation Program
This course has emphasis on helping pre-service teachers to recognize the importance of developing knowledge about the culture and backgrounds of children and families in order to establish positive interactions within the classroom community. Best practices in classroom and behavior management for classrooms in general and special education will be included. As part of this, training will include using social-emotional learning strategies and content for recognizing, understanding, and responding to trauma, stress, developing trauma-sensitive classroom spaces, and using trauma-informed approaches to foster positive relationships. Suicide prevention will also be included.

EDUC 4311 Curriculum and Instruction in the Secondary School Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Educator Preparation Program
This course is designed to provide an integrated and in-depth understanding of principles of curriculum and instruction, as well as practical experiences in instructional design for secondary school contexts and learners. Multiple approaches to learning, the roles of teachers in the teaching-learning process, as well as current Texas state curriculum requirements and guidelines are explored. The effective use of media/technology is included. Field work is required.

EDUC 4320 Teaching Methodology for Secondary Teachers Prerequisite(s): Admission to Educator Preparation Program and (EDUC 4301 or EDUC 4311)
This course combines campus-based instruction with field-based experiences. Students observe as well as plan and present lessons in their designated content area. An emphasis is placed upon content specific instructional methods, using data to make instructional decisions and application of classroom management skills. This course must be completed before clinical teaching.

EDUC 4340 Action Research Prerequisite(s): None
The Action Research model is explored and students complete an Action Research project. Preparation for certification exams is also a component of the course. Students take this course either immediately preceding clinical teaching or concurrent with clinical teaching if clinical teaching occurs in the fall semester.

EDUC 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None

Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDUC 4400 Clinical Teaching Seminar Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Educator Preparation Program and approval of the Teacher Education Committee Corequisite(s): Clinical teaching in student's area of certification
This course is founded on foundational research-based content and best practices in education concerning the topics of classroom management, assessment and professional development. The seminar for clinical teachers is interactive includes exploration of issues of particular interest and value to students as they complete their Educator Preparation Programs. These issues include the process of acquiring a teaching position (applications, resumes, interview skills, etc.), classroom management/discipline, ethical and legal issues related to teaching, communication with parents, portfolio construction and other issues encountered during clinical teaching. Support and encouragement in the form of sharing and problem solving will occur during each of the weekly sessions.

EDUC 4481 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDUC 4487 Clinical Teaching in the Bilingual Classroom Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Teacher Preparation Program and approval of the Teacher Education Committee. Corequisite(s): EDUC 4400
Clinical teaching is among the final requirements in the undergraduate educator preparation program. This course must be taken during one of the last two semesters prior to graduation. In this course students are assigned to a classroom or classrooms for the semester from Monday through Friday for the entire school day. This course is part of the preparation for both the BS degree and certification in Bilingual Generalist-Spanish (EC-6).

EDUC 4495 Clinical Teaching in Secondary School Subjects Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Teacher Preparation Program and approval of the Teacher Education Committee Corequisite(s): EDUC 4400
Clinical teaching is among the final requirements in the undergraduate educator preparation program. This course must be taken during one of the last two semesters prior to graduation. In this course students are assigned to a classroom or classrooms for the semester from Monday through Friday for the entire school day. This course is part of the preparation for both a BS degree and high school certification (grades 7-12) in the chosen teaching field.

EDUC 4800 Clinical Teaching Prerequisite(s): Approval of application for clinical teaching.
Clinical teaching is among the final requirements in the undergraduate Educator Preparation Program. This course must be taken during one of the last two semesters prior to graduation. In this course, students are assigned to a classroom or classrooms for the semester from Monday through Friday for the entire school day. This course is part of the preparation for both the BS degree and certification offered through the Texas Education Agency. Students enrolled in clinical teaching must also enroll in and attend EDUC 4400 Clinical Teaching Seminar.

EDUC 4872 Clinical Teaching in All-Level Special Education Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Teacher Preparation Program and approval of the Teacher Education Committee. Corequisite(s): EDUC 4400
Clinical teaching is among the final requirements in the undergraduate educator preparation program. This course must be taken during one of the last two semesters prior to graduation. In this course students are assigned to a classroom or classrooms for the semester from Monday through Friday for the entire school day. The course is part of the preparation for both the BS degree and certification in Special Education (EC-12).

EDUC 5000 Clinical Teaching Seminar Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Educator Preparation Program and approval of the Teacher Education Committee Corequisite(s): Enrollment in clinical teaching in student's area of certification
This course is founded on foundational research-based content and best practices in education concerning the topics of classroom management, assessment and professional development. The seminar for clinical teachers is interactive

includes exploration of issues of particular interest and value to students as they complete their Educator Preparation Programs. These issues include the process of acquiring a teaching position (applications, resumes, interview skills, etc.), classroom management/discipline, ethical and legal issues related to teaching, communication with parents, portfolio construction and other issues encountered during clinical teaching. Support and encouragement in the form of sharing and problem solving will occur during each of the weekly sessions.

EDUC 5101 Internship I Prerequisite(s): (Must have an Alternative Certification Program (ACP) plan on file in the School of Education or a Master's with Initial Certification degree plan on file in the Office of Academic Records) and be employed in an EC- 12 school as a teacher.
This is a field-based course required for students in the HCU Alternative Certification Program (ACP) or in a Master's with Initial certification degree plan. To be enrolled in the course, the student must be employed as a teacher in an EC-12 state- accredited school. HCU faculty will provide regular supervision and support for the student during the semester to assist the student in becoming a successful and effective teacher. (Offered Fall and Spring only.)

EDUC 5181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDUC 5201 Internship II Prerequisite(s): EDUC 5101 and be employed as a teacher in an EC-12 state-accredited school in the semester immediately prior (excluding summer)
This is a field-based course required for students in the HCU Alternative Certification (ACP) Certification Program or in a Master's with Initial Certification degree plan. HCU faculty will provide regular supervision and support for the student during the semester to assist the student in becoming a successful and effective teacher. Preparation for the EC-12 Pedagogy and Professional Responsibilities certification exam is provided during this course. (Offered Fall and Spring only.)

EDUC 5281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDUC 5300 Clinical Teaching Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Educator Preparation Program and approval of the Teacher Education Committee Corequisite(s): EDUC 5000 and enrollment in clinical teaching in student’s area of certification
Clinical teaching is among the final requirements in the graduate educator preparation program. This course must be taken during one of the last two semesters prior to graduation. In this course, students are assigned to a classroom or classrooms for the semester from Monday through Friday for the entire school day. This course is part of the preparation for both a MEd degree and certification (grades 4-8) in the chosen teaching field.

EDUC 5320 Teaching Methodology for Secondary Teachers Prerequisite(s): Teacher Certification
This course combines campus-based instruction with a minimum of 25 clock hours of field-based experience in observation and the planning and presenting of lessons for prospective student teachers or interns. An emphasis is placed upon lesson presentation skills; lesson preparation and planning, using a variety of teaching methods including technology; application of classroom management skills; and research into the teaching of the specific content area for which the student is being certified.

EDUC 5350 Science for Pre-Adolescents Prerequisite(s): None
This course is an exploration of teaching science for educators in preschool through grade 6. Graduate students will examine a variety of science curricula as well as teaching/learning materials and strategies for developing new content and skills at preschool through grade 6 levels. Applications of knowledge and skills are emphasized. Technology applications are required.

EDUC 5360 Essential Elements of Math Prerequisite(s): EDUC 5313 or EDUC 5314 or EDUC 6302 or EDUC 6312 or teacher certification
This course prepares prospective and practicing preschool, elementary school and middle school teachers to teach mathematics effectively. Students acquire an in-depth knowledge of the content, methods, and materials involved in the development of mathematical processes and in development of the number and operations strand of preschool, elementary, and middle school mathematics. Classroom applications and use of models and manipulatives are emphasized. Fieldwork in which students teach mathematics in an elementary or middle school is required.

EDUC 5374 Clinical Teaching in EC-6/Special Education EC-12 Classrooms Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Educator Preparation Program and approval of the Teacher Education Committee Corequisite(s): EDUC 5000 and enrollment in clinical teaching in student's area of certification
Clinical teaching is among the final requirements in the graduate educator preparation program. This course must be taken during one of the last two semesters prior to graduation. In this course students are assigned from Monday through Friday for the entire school day in an EC- 6 classroom for half of the semester and are assigned in a Special Education EC-12 classroom for the remainder of the semester. This course is part of the preparation for both the MED degree and certification in EC-6 and in Special Education Grades (EC-12).

EDUC 5375 Essential Elements of Fine Arts and PE/Health Prerequisite(s): None
This course explores EC-6 fine arts, PE and Health content and methodology. It includes development of knowledge skills, and dispositions identified in the art, music, theatre, PE and Health TEKS (Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills), as well as ways to integrate into learning in other content areas.

EDUC 5380 Essential Elements of Social Studies Prerequisite(s): EDUC 6302 or EDUC 6312
This course provides an in-depth study of social studies content and skills, as well as teaching/learning materials and strategies for developing content and skills at preschool through grade 12 levels. Teachers will apply content knowledge as they learn to implement and enhance classroom essential knowledge and skills; construct assessments that assess in a differentiated manner using multiple approaches to assessment; and create diagnostic assessment tools. Emphasis is placed on developing a professional perspective and knowledge base designed for service as a teacher leader at campus/district/national levels. Technology integration to enhance instruction is an integral element of the course.

EDUC 5381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDUC 5396 Clinical Teaching in Secondary School Art Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Educator Preparation Program and approval of the Teacher Education Committee Corequisite(s): EDUC 5000 and EDUC 5393 and enrollment in clinical teaching in student's area of certification Clinical teaching is among the final requirements in the graduate educator preparation program. This course must be taken during one of the last two semesters prior to graduation. In this course students are assigned to a classroom or classrooms for half of the semester from Monday through Friday for the entire school day. The corequisite EDUC 5393 provides a full semester of clinical teaching experience. The course is part of the preparation for both the MED degree and certification in Art (EC-12).

EDUC 6181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDUC 6281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a

minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EDUC 6301 Classroom Management Prerequisite(s): None
A study of a broad spectrum of approaches to classroom management, including authoritarian, behavior-modification, group- process, instructional, and psycho-emotional-climate orientations. Examination of research regarding effective classroom management. Exploration of multiple strategies for handling common classroom management problems. (Offered also as EDAD 6307.)

EDUC 6302 Elementary School Curriculum and Instruction Prerequisite(s): None
This course is designed to provide an integrated and in-depth understanding of principles of curriculum and instruction, as well as practical experiences in instructional design for elementary school contexts and learners. Multiple approaches to learning, the roles of teachers in the teaching-learning process, as well as current Texas state curriculum requirements and guidelines are explored. The effective use of media/technology is included. Fieldwork is required.

EDUC 6304 Children, Adolescents, and Learning Prerequisite(s): None
This course combines a study of learning (including both cognitive and behavioral perspectives), human development (childhood through adolescence), and assessment (traditional and performance; teacher-made and standardized). Related constructs such as motivation and self-esteem are explored.

EDUC 6312 Secondary School Curriculum and Instruction Prerequisite(s): None
This course is designed to provide an integrated and in-depth understanding of principles of curriculum and instruction, as well as practical experiences in instructional design for secondary school contexts and learners. Multiple approaches to learning, the roles of teachers in the teaching-learning process, as well as current Texas state curriculum requirements and guidelines are explored. The effective use of media/technology is included. Fieldwork is required.

EDUC 6315 American Educational Reform Prerequisite(s): None
In this course of study the historical, philosophical, sociological and political influences of the past, present, and future issues and trends of American education are examined. Emphasis is placed on interconnectivity and impact on teaching and learning in both private and public venues. Study framed within this context provides opportunity for the professional educator to develop a deeper understanding of the current challenges faced in educational settings. A broad selection of readings range from traditional classical works to current perspectives on challenging issues such as: demographics, diversity, vouchers, charter schools, home schooling, accountability, high-stakes testing, special needs, giftedness, bilingual instruction, technology, and more.

EDUC 6320 Research Techniques and Procedures Prerequisite(s): None
A study of a spectrum of research methods related to psychological and educational research. The course is designed to develop research knowledge and skills. Included are theory, techniques, designs, evaluation of research, and integration of findings into professional decision-making. (Offered also as EDAD 6310 and PSYC 6320.)

EDUC 6322 Curriculum and Instruction: Grades K-12 Prerequisite(s): None
This course provides a study of influencing factors and guiding principles for curriculum and instruction in grades K-
12. It includes practical experience in instructional design as well as first-hand teaching experiences. It is designed to provide integrated and in-depth understandings of principles and processes for curriculum and instruction, as well as practical experiences in planning and facilitating learning (instructional design, media/technology usage, and classroom teaching). The role of the student and teacher in the teacher-learning process as well as current Texas curriculum requirements, including Essential Knowledge and Skills, are explored.

EDUC 6330 Teaching Methodology for the Professional Prerequisite(s): None

Structured to meet the needs of those professionals who must design, organize, and present materials to various target populations, this graduate level course focuses on teaching methods, media, and evaluation of the learning process.

EDUC 6370 Critical Issues in Teaching Reading in the Elementary School Prerequisite(s): None
An analysis of issues important to effective development of reading abilities during the elementary school years. Emphasis is placed upon teaching comprehension processes and understanding factors which affect comprehension processes.

EDUC 6371 Critical Issues in Teaching Reading in the Secondary School Prerequisite(s): None
An analysis of issues important to effective development of reading abilities during the secondary school years. Emphasis is placed upon teaching comprehension processes and understanding factors which affect comprehension processes.

EDUC 6381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.


Electrical Engineering (ELEN) Course Descriptions
ELEN 2341 Introduction to Microprocessors & Digital Design Prerequisite(s): Credit for or concurrent enrollment in MATH 1451
Introduction to microprocessor organization and operation, data manipulation, assembly and/or embedded-C language programming, serial communication, analog-to-digital conversion, timers, interrupts, DC motor control. Digital design techniques, Boolean algebra, combinational logic, minimization techniques, simple arithmetic circuits, programmable logic, sequential circuit design, registers and counters, state machines, Verilog and VHDL.

ELEN 2342 Introduction to Digital Design Prerequisite(s): ENSC 1411
Digital design techniques, Boolean algebra, combinational logic, minimization techniques, simple arithmetic circuits, sequential circuit design, registers and counters, state machines, programmable logic, Verilog and VHDL.

ELEN 2381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisites: None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included

ELEN 3325 Electric and Magnetic Fields Prerequisite(s): PHYS 2423 and ENSC 2361 and MATH 2451
Vector analysis, Coulomb’s and Gauss’ Law. Electrical field streamlines. Energy and potential. Conductors, dielectrics, capacitance. Maxwell’s, Poisson’s, and Laplace’s equations. Steady magnetic fields. Joule’s Law. Ampere’s Circuit Law, magnetic flux and potential, magnetic forces, materials and inductance, time-varying electromagnetic fields, Maxwell’s equations, plane waves, transmission lines, impedance-matching devices.

ELEN 3342 Digital Signal Processing Prerequisite(s): ELEN 3360
Discrete signals, LTI systems, discrete Fourier analysis, discrete filters, sampling, Z-transforms.

ELEN 3360 Electrical Circuits II Prerequisite(s): ENSC 2361
Steady-state and transient analysis of RL, RC, and RLC circuits. Design problems using circuit analysis programs. Analysis of idea and non-ideal operational amplifiers. Magnetically coupled circuits. Complex frequency. Two-port networks. Lapace transforms. Frequency response.

ELEN 3361 Linear Systems Prerequisite(s): ELEN 3360
A study of the fundamental principles and properties of linear systems. Topics will include Fourier Series, Fourier Transform, Laplace Transform, convolution and the system function, filters, state variable representation and solution.
ELEN 3362 Solid State Electronics Prerequisite(s): MATH 2451 and PHYS 2423 and ENSC 2361
An introduction to solid state electronics with topics to include amplifiers, small-signal models, and applications of diodes, bipolar junction transistors, junction field effect transistors, and metal oxide semiconductor field effect transistors. Course will include lab-based activities and a comprehensive semester project.
ELEN 3363 Electronic Circuits Prerequisite(s): ELEN 2361
Circuit-level behavior of diodes, bipolar transistors, field-effect transistors, and operational amplifiers. Analysis and design of linear amplifiers. Frequency domain characterization of transistor circuits.

ELEN 3364 Electronic Circuits II Prerequisite(s): ELEN 3363
Analysis and design of advanced transistor circuits; differential amplifiers, cascodes, current mirrors, frequency response, high frequency transistor models, feedback and stability, active filters, operational amplifiers, power electronic circuits.

ELEN 3374 Automatic Control Systems Prerequisite(s): MATH 3333 and ELEN 3360
Analysis and design of linear systems. Mathematical modeling. Transfer functions and signal-flow graphs. State variable analysis. Time domain analysis and design of linear control systems. Frequency domain analysis and design of linear control systems.

ELEN 4341 Embedded Systems Prerequisite(s): ELEN 2342
A low-level study of embedded systems, particularly those that constitute cybersecurity infrastructure. Topics include microprocessor organization and operation, data manipulation, serial communication, analog-to-digital conversion, timers, interrupts, DC motor control, C versus assembly language, FPGA design, hardware encryption, and packet filtering and routing.

ELEN 4362 Power Systems and Renewable Energy Prerequisite(s): ELEN 3364
This course introduced methods used in analysis and design of modern electrical power systems. Topics include: phasor analysis, per-unit system, single-phrase and three-phase AC power systems, electrical power generation, solar power generation, wind power generation, transformers, transmission and distribution systems and steady-state power flow analysis.

ELEN 4371 Instrumentation and Measurement Prerequisite(s): ENSC 2361
Transducers, including 4-20 mA loops. Signal Conditioning. Industrial Control Electronics, including Programmable Logic Controllers (PLCs). Statistical analysis on experimental data.

ELEN 4372 Communication Systems Prerequisite(s): ELEN 3361
Basic theory and principles of modern analog and digital communication systems; signal and noise analysis, signal-to- noise ratio, and circuit implementations.

ELEN 4374 OT Networks Prerequisite(s): ENSC 2361
Principles and concepts of industrial control system infrastructure. Topics include PLC programming, SCADA systems, firewalls, segregation of corporate and individual networks.


English (ENGL) Course Descriptions
ENGL 1303 Basic Grammar and Composition Prerequisite(s): None
A prerequisite course for enrollment in ENGL 1313 for students not meeting the ENGL 1313 placement requirement. ENGL 1303 is an introduction to the principles of composition accomplished through the study of grammar, standard English usage, and rhetorical techniques and strategies. This course emphasizes basic grammar and composition and focuses on sentence structure and on organizing and developing the short essay. ENGL 1303 does not meet the Liberal Arts Core requirements for either the BA or the BS degree but does carry elective credit.

ENGL 1313 Composition and Literature I Prerequisite(s): (SAT Evidence-Based Reading and Writing (EBRW) 570+) or (ACT English 22+) or (Classic Learning test (CLT) 75+) or (TSIA in Reading 351+ and TSI in Writing 340+ and TSIA Essay score of 5+) or (TSIA2 945+ on the ELAR CRC [English Language Arts and reading section of the College Readiness Classification] and a minimum score of 5 on the TSIA2 Essay Test) or (Accuplacer Reading Comprehension score of 78+ and a Sentence Skills score of 87+) or ([Accuplacer Next Gen Reading score of 253+] and [253+ Writing score or 5+ WritePlacer score]) or (“B” or higher in AP or Honors English on High School transcript) or (“A-“ or higher in non-AP or non- Honors senior English on High School transcript) or (ENGL 1303 with a grade of “C” or higher)
An introduction to the principles of composition and rhetoric accomplished through the writing of expository essays and through the study of both of the principles of composition and of essays which employ specific rhetorical strategies.

ENGL 1323 Composition and Literature II Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313
This course continues the study of composition and rhetoric introduced in English 1313: Composition and Literature
I. Students will gain an understanding of why reading literature is deeply important for Christians, learn the conventions of such literary genres as poems, stories, novels, and plays, study methods of literary analysis, interpret literature from a Biblical perspective through the exploration of Biblical archetypes, typology, language constructions, and metaphor in classic works of English literature, and learn to write well-constructed and well-written arguments about literature and life in standard English including the use of research in MLA format and the writing of a fully developed research paper.

ENGL 2315 Great Works of Literature I Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and ENGL 1323
A reading course in the literary heritage of western civilization. This course includes readings from the Greeks, the Romans, and the Middle Ages.

ENGL 2321 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

ENGL 2325 Great Works of Literature II Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and ENGL 1323
A reading course in the literary heritage of western civilization. This course includes readings from the 18th century to the present.

ENGL 3313 English Literature I Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and ENGL 1323
A survey of the historical development of English literature from its beginning through the eighteenth century: historical background and major authors of each period. The course will provide requisite information for advanced study in major periods of English literature. For English majors or by permission of the instructor.

ENGL 3321 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisites: ENGL 1313 and 1330
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

ENGL 3323 English Literature II Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and ENGL 1323
A survey of the historical development of English literature of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries: historical background and major authors of each period. The course will provide requisite information for advanced study in major periods of English literature. For English majors or by permission of the instructor.

ENGL 3331 American Literature I Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and ENGL 1323
This course examines the beginnings of America's literary self-definition in the Colonial Period and covers the rise of American Romanticism and its culmination in writers such as Emerson, Poe, Hawthorne, Melville, Thoreau, and Dickinson. For English majors or by permission of the instructor.

ENGL 3332 American Literature II Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and ENGL 1323
This course examines American literary trends after the Civil War, including Realism, Naturalism, and Modernism. Writers under consideration include Twain, S. Crane, Frost, Stevens, Fitzgerald, Hemingway, and Faulkner. For English majors or by permission of the instructor.

ENGL 3334 Literature and Culture of the Southwest Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and ENGL 1323
The course addresses the way the American West has shaped American culture and popular culture. It examines the Frontier Myth, Manifest Destiny, Regeneration through Violence, America's cowboy archetype, the savage archetype, and the American dream. Students read literature written by authors from a variety of cultures, including Anglo, Mexican-American, and Native American. Students view television shows and films to examine how popular culture has created and enforced stereotypes. The course is designed for non-majors seeking upper level elective credit or to fulfill Liberal Arts Core requirements.

ENGL 3342 Women's Literature Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and ENGL 1323
This course will acquaint students with literature by and about women from the medieval period to the present. Through a study of various literary genres, students will learn that the issues that concern women transcend time, place, race, religion, and ethnicity. This course is designed for non-English majors seeking upper level elective credit or to fulfill Liberal Arts Core requirements and for persons seeking certification in Language Arts Grades 6-8 and Grades 8- 12.

ENGL 3346 Austen and the Brontes Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and ENGL 1323
This course covers selected novels of Jane Austen and Charlotte, Emily, and Anne Bronte, influential 19th century writers who wrote of affairs of the heart with insight and passion. Students will study the authors' social and intellectual milieu and discuss their works and compare them to some of the film adaptations of these popular works.

ENGL 3363 Film Studies Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and ENGL 1323
An introduction to the art of film. Students are provided with a methodology and a vocabulary for understanding film and are encouraged to consider how different directors guide and shape our perceptions of reality, how different genres generate their own unique vision of the world and of humanity, how the multi-media aspects of film affect us as viewers, how film provides us with a record of cultural values and cultural change, and how screen writers, actors, directors, and cinematographers translate literary genres into visual terms. This course may be used for elective credit.

ENGL 3370 Hispanic Literature Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and ENGL 1323
The study of major periods and masterworks of Hispanic literature, read and discussed in English. Introduces

literary/cultural figures of medieval and early modern Spain (El Cid, Don Quixote, Don Juan); and includes major 20th-century writers, as well as literary movements that were propagated from Latin America to the rest of the literary world (e.g., magical realism). This course may not be used to fulfill requirements for the Spanish major. (Offered also as SPAN 3370.)

ENGL 3371 Chronicles of Narnia Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and ENGL 1323
Students complete a close reading of the seven novels that make up the Chronicles of Narnia by C. S. Lewis. Students assess how and to what extent the Chronicles successfully foster spiritual maturity, strength of character, and moral virtue. Special focus will be placed on the Christian allegories that underlie each of the novels.

ENGL 3372 Multicultural Literature Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and ENGL 1323
Students study ethnic literatures, including works by authors from the following cultural voices: North American Indian, African American, Mexican American, Asian American, and Americans of Middle Eastern descent.

ENGL 3373 Shakespeare Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and ENGL 1323
A study of selected tragedies, history plays, and comedies, with emphasis on the major tragedies. Some consideration will be given to the cultural and philosophical characteristics of the Elizabethan Age as they are reflected in the drama of Shakespeare. For English majors or permission of the instructor.

ENGL 3377 Lord of the Rings Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and ENGL 1323
Students complete readings from Beowulf and selected Arthurian romances and a close reading of The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings. The course also includes an overview of The Silmarillion and a discussion of how Tolkien was influenced by Norse mythology, Beowulf, Arthurian Romances, his Catholic faith, and his friendship with C. S. Lewis.

ENGL 3378 The Legacy of Greece Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and ENGL 1323
This course takes students on an exciting journey through the great literary works of Ancient Greece: Homer's Iliad and Odyssey; Aeschylus' Oresteia (Agamemnon, Libation Bearers, Eumenides), Sophocles' Oedipus, Antigone, Women of Trachis, and Philoctetes; Euripides' Medea, Hippolytus and Bacchae. The course examines the nature of the epic and tragic hero and those universal questions we all must answer for ourselves: Who am I? What is my purpose? How do I know I am of value? The course will also offer an overview of ancient Greek history and consider Greece's legacy for Western civilization.

ENGL 3379 The Legacy of Rome Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and ENGL 1323
This course takes students on an exciting journey through the great literary works of Ancient Rome and Medieval Italy: Virgil's Aeneid; Ovid's Metamorphoses, Dante's Divine Comedy: Inferno, Purgatorio, Paradiso. The course examines the nature of the classical and medieval epic hero and those universal questions we all must answer for ourselves: Who am I? What is my purpose? How do I know I am of value? The course will also offer an overview of ancient Roman history, consider Rome's legacy for Western civilization, and discuss how Dante, while imitating pagan writers, was able to fashion a Christian epic.

ENGL 3381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and 1330
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

ENGL 3384 Religion in American Literature and Film Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and ENGL 1323
Students read novels, including Flannery O'Connor's Wise Blood, Davis Grubb's Night of the Hunter (screenplay by James Agee), Sinclair Lewis's Elmer Gantry, and Marilyn Robinson's Gilead. Students also view films based on these and other novels that portray religion in 20th century American society, and learn to analyze both genres for plot,

characterization, metaphors, themes and other literary elements.

ENGL 3385 The Writings of C.S. Lewis Prerequisite(s): None
C.S. Lewis, the greatest Christian apologist of the 20th century, has challenged three generations of readers to think logically and imaginatively about their faith, their moral behavior, and their view of man, God, and the universe. This class will study closely Lewis's seven major apologetical works (Mere Christianity, The Problem of Pain, Miracles, Screwtape Letters, The Great Divorce, The Abolition of Man, and A Grief Observed) and seek to determine why these works have had such a phenomenal and growing impact both on Christians of all denominations and on those of other (or no) religious backgrounds.

ENGL 3386 The Inklings Prerequisite(s): None
Although the late 19th century was a golden age for children's literature, after WWI a more cynical, "realistic" Europe relegated fairy tales to the nursery. A group known as the Inklings—which centered on C.S. Lewis, J.R.R. Tolkien, and Charles Williams—played a major role in revising the reputation of fantastical literature. This class will study Lewis's Space Trilogy (Out of the Silent Planet, Perelandra, That Hideous Strength) and Till We Have Faces, Tolkien's shorter fairy tales and essay "On Fairy Stories", and one of the spiritual warfare novels of Charles Williams (Descent into Hell). The class will also consider how the Inklings were influenced by the faerie stories of George MacDonald (Phantastes, Lillith), and the imaginative apologetics of G.K. Chesterton (Orthodoxy, The Everlasting Man).

ENGL 4311 Literary Criticism Prerequisite(s): (ENGL 1313 and ENGL 1323) or (HNRS 2310 and HNRS 2340)
A survey of literary theory from Plato to Postmodernism. The course provides an understanding of the different theoretical structures, schools, and methodologies that have influenced our understanding and appreciation of literature. It explores the presuppositions upon which each theoretical system is founded and the special terminology associated with each system.
Students planning to pursue a graduate degree are strongly encouraged to take this course.

ENGL 4330 Medieval Literature Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and ENGL 1323
This course provides intensive study of the key literature of the Middle Ages in Britain (ca. 450-1485). Works and authors may include Beowulf, Gawain and the Green Knight, Julian of Norwich, Margery Kempe, Chaucer's Canterbury Tales, Gower's Confessio Amantis, Langland's Piers Plowman, and Malory's Le Morte d'Arthur. As Rome waned, western Europe was transformed politically by the rise of feudal kingdoms and religiously by the flowering of an influential and dynamic Church. In this class, we will examine closely how different works and authors reflect and engage the many facets of medieval culture, including chivalry and heroism, courtly love, practical Christian piety, and the grim realities of war at home and abroad.

ENGL 4331 Renaissance English Literature Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and ENGL 1323
This course provides intensive study of the key literature of the Renaissance in England (1485-1600). Works and authors may include William Shakespeare, Christopher Marlowe, Thomas More's Utopia, Elizabeth I, Francis Bacon, Philip Sidney's Astrophil and Stella, and Edmund Spenser's Faerie Queene. In a time of new classical learning, violent religious controversy, and political upheaval, Renaissance England was rich with remarkable creativity and artistic achievement in prose, poetry, and drama. In this class, we will examine closely how different Renaissance writers expressed and explored the human condition at all levels, in a period that speaks beautifully of the True and the Good perhaps more than any other.

ENGL 4332 17th-Century English Literature Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and ENGL 1323
This course provides intensive study of the key literature of seventeenth-century England (ca. 1601-1700). Works and authors may include John Donne's lyric poetry, Ben Jonson's comedies, John Webster's macabre drama, George Herbert's The Temple, John Milton's Paradise Lost, John Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress, Cavalier poetry, Richard Crashaw, Margaret Cavendish, Lucy Hutchinson, Thomas Browne, Andrew Marvell, Aphra Behn, and William Congreve. The literature of this period is extraordinary for elaborate form and conceit, intense meditative and

devotional lyric, response to revolutionary scientific discoveries, and political satire, polemic, and debate through a period of civil war, regicide, and republican experiment.

ENGL 4333 18th-Century British Literature Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and ENGL 1323
This course provides intensive study of the key literature of the Long Eighteenth Century (1688-1815). Works and authors may include John Dryden, Daniel Defoe's Moll Flanders, Samuel Richardson's Pamela, Henry Fielding's Tom Jones, Jonathan Swift's Gulliver's Travels, Joseph Addison, Richard Steele, Alexander Pope, Laurence Sterne, Samuel Johnson, James Boswell, Frances Burney, and Jane Austen. Topics may include Enlightenment thought, Augustan poetry, sentimental fiction, comedy of manners, early gothic romance, satire, coffeehouses, the rise of the novel and of journalism, and developments in literary criticism, biography, the essay, and the dictionary.

ENGL 4334 The Romantic Age Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and ENGL 1323
This course provides intensive study of the key literature of the Romantic Age (1789-1832). Works and authors may include Blake's "Marriage of Heaven and Hell," Wordsworth's Prelude, Coleridge's "Christabel," Byron's Don Juan and Manfred, Shelley's Prometheus Unbound, and Keats's "Eve of St. Agnes" and "Lamia." In this class, we will examine closely the unique zeitgeist of the Romantic Age, one that marks a transition between traditional, pre-French revolutionary Europe and the modern Europe of which we are heirs. Like the great figures of the Renaissance, the Romantics saw themselves as breaking from past traditions while yet carrying on perennial conversations about human nature, the natural world, the imagination, and the divine.

ENGL 4335 The Victorian Age Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and ENGL 1323
This course provides intensive study of the key literature of the Victorian Age (1833-1901). Works and authors may include Tennyson's In Memoriam and Idyls of the King, Browning's "Fra Lippo Lippi" and "Andrea del Sarto," Newman's Apologia Pro Vita Sua, John Stuart Mill's Autobiography, Ruskin's Stones of Venice, Carlyle's Sartor Resartus, T.H. Huxley's "On the Physical Basis of Life," and Arnold's "Function of Criticism." The Victorian Age was an age during which the orthodoxies of the past were put to the test by new theories of science, progress, philosophy, art, religion, authority, etc. In this class, we will examine closely how each Victorian writer reacted to and wrestled with these challenges.

ENGL 4336 20th-Century British Literature Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and ENGL 1323
This course provides intensive study of major authors writing in English in Modern and contemporary letters. Authors may include T.S. Eliot, Virginia Woolf, James Joyce, and William Butler Yeats, among others. Special consideration will be given to the literature of the world wars, modernism, and post-modernism.

ENGL 4337 American Romanticism Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and ENGL 1323
This course is an intensive study of both American Renaissances -- the one of American Transcendentalism with authors such as Irving, Emerson, Thoreau, Fuller, Whitman, Hawthorne, and Melville, as well as the renaissance of sentimental American writers such as Longfellow, Alcott, and Stowe.

ENGL 4338 American Realism and Naturalism Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and ENGL 1323
This course is an intensive study of the great realists and naturalists, including Jack London, Edith Wharton, Henry James, Mark Twain, Stephen Crane, and Theodore Dreiser. Special attention will be paid to the historical context of American realism and its concomitant literary outgrowths, including magic realism and dystopian fiction.

ENGL 4339 American Modernism and Contemporary Literature Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and ENGL 1323
This course is an intensive study of the rise of Modernism and the expatriate movement in American letters, with possible authors including Ernest Hemingway, Ezra Pound, F. Scott Fitzgerald, Gertrude Stein, H.D., and Wallace Stevens. Contemporary experimental authors as well as the current use of modernist literary techniques will also be explored. Attention may also be paid to music and visual art of the modernist movement.

ENGL 4340 Health & Science in Literature Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and ENGL 1323
This course examines the important intersections of health and science in literature. Particular texts and topics will vary based upon the instructor’s expertise and research interests. This is a repeatable course.

ENGL 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and ENGL 1323
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

ENGL 4394 Advanced Studies in American Literature Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and 1323
This undergraduate course provides intensive study of American literature in the English language. Sections of this course may focus on a variety and range of representative authors, works, genres, movements, and periods from the colonial period up to the twentieth century.

ENGL 4395 Advanced Studies in British Literature Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and 1323
This undergraduate course provides intensive study of literature from the British Isles: England, Scotland, Ireland, and Wales. Sections of this course may focus on a variety and range of representative authors, works, genres, movements, and periods from the early Middle Ages up to the twentieth century.

ENGL 4396 Christianity and Literature Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and 1323
This undergraduate course provides directed readings of select works that embody a Christian worldview or that readily lend themselves to being analyzed in accordance with a Christian worldview. Works can be taken from a wide range of authors, genres, and/or countries, but all will be viewed through an intentionally Christian lens.

ENGL 4397 Modern and Contemporary Literature Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and 1323
This undergraduate course provides directed readings of works of literature from the modern and contemporary periods. Readings may be selected from a variety of narrative forms, genres, places of origin, and dates from the late 19th century to the present day. Consideration may be given to the novel, short fiction, and poetry, as well as modernist and contemporary approaches to the literary tradition more broadly.

ENGL 4398 World Literature Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and 1323
This undergraduate course provides directed readings of select non-English-language literature in translation or literature in English by non-American and non-British authors. Readings can be taken from any country or period from antiquity to the twenty-first century. This course may focus on the major authors and literary trends of a single nation or it may introduce a comparative approach to literary trends across nations and/or time periods.

ENGL 5199 Thesis Continuation Prerequisite(s): Six credit hours of ENGL 5399
Restriction(s): Credit hours in this course may not be applied toward any course or credit hour requirement in the Master of Liberal Arts degree.
This course continues the research, writing, and defense of a thesis project begun in ENGL 5399. This course earns one credit hour and may be taken twice.

ENGL 5319 Structures of Poetry Prerequisite(s): None
Course Equivalency: MLA 5319
Structures of Poetry teaches students to read poetry thoughtfully, accurately, and wisely. Students who are experienced with reading poetry will emerge from this course as capable readers. Students who have read much poetry will emerge from this course with a much fuller understanding of the way a poem functions.

ENGL 5321 Victorian Fiction Prerequisite(s): None
Course Equivalency: MLA 5321
This introductory course on Victorian Fiction will survey the major novelists from Dickens to Hardy.

ENGL 5322 Chronicles of Narnia Prerequisite(s): None
Students complete a close reading of the seven novels that make up The Chronicles of Narnia by C. S. Lewis. Students assess how and to what extend The Chronicles successfully foster spiritual maturity, strength of character, and moral virtue. Special focus will be placed on the Christian allegories that underlie each of the novels.

ENGL 5323 Tolkien and the World of Fantasy Prerequisite(s): None
Course Equivalency: MLA 5323
Students complete readings from The Lord of the Rings and Beowulf. The course also includes an overview of The Hobbit and The Silmarillion and a discussion of how Tolkien was influenced by Anglo-Norse mythology, his Catholic faith, and his friendship with C. S. Lewis. Emphasis will be put on how Tolkien injects a Christian worldview into a pre-Judeo-Christian society.

ENGL 5345 Faulkner Prerequisite(s): None
Course Equivalency: MLA 5345
Students read novels and short stories by William Faulkner and relate his themes and style to American Modernism.

ENGL 5349 The Epic: Homer and Virgil Prerequisite(s): None
Course Equivalency: MLA 5349
This course introduces students to the Great Epics of the Classical World: The Iliad and Odyssey of Homer and the Aeneid of Virgil.

ENGL 5359 Utopia, Dystopia and the Literature of Technology Prerequisite(s): None
Course Equivalency: MLA 5359
This course will cover literature that portrays societies that are utopian and/or dystopian in nature, and feature the use or misuse of technology. The course will begin with Sir Thomas More’s Utopia (1516), then proceed chronologically through the 19th and 20th centuries. We will end by exploring a new literary genre, hypertext fiction, which is not only produced but also consumed using technology, since it can only be read on a computer screen. Students will analyze the works using selected 20th century critical theories.

ENGL 5364 Chaucer and the Fourteenth Century Prerequisite(s): None
Course Equivalency: MLA 5364
Examines the fourteenth century as a turning point in English and European culture: the end of the High Middle Ages and the beginnings of the pre-Renaissance. The course emphasizes the rise of vernacular languages as literary languages, particularly in Italy and England, and the role of Geoffrey Chaucer as the father of English poetry.

ENGL 5365 Milton Prerequisite(s): None
Course Equivalency: MLA 5365
This course considers the thought and works of John Milton, with special attention devoted to Paradise Lost. Through examination of Milton’s poetry and his major prose writings as well as their historical context and influence, students will explore the artistic, religious, political, and philosophical contributions of this key intellectual figure.

ENGL 5366: Advanced Studies in American Literature Prerequisite(s): None

This course provides intensive study of American literature in the English language. Sections of this course may focus on a variety and range of representative authors, works, genres, movements, and periods, from the colonial period up to the twentieth century.

ENGL 5367: Advanced Studies in British Literature Prerequisite(s): None
This course provides intensive study of literature from the British Isles: England, Scotland, Ireland, and Wales. Sections of this course may focus on a variety and range of representative authors, works, genres, movements, and periods, from the early Middle Ages up to the twentieth century.

ENGL 5368: World Literature Prerequisite(s): None
This course provides directed readings of select non-English-language literature in translation or literature in English by non- American and non-British authors; readings can be taken from any country or period from antiquity to the twenty-first century. This course may focus on the major authors and literary trends of a single nation or it may introduce a comparative approach to literary trends across nations and/or time periods.

ENGL 5369: Christianity and Literature Prerequisite(s): None
This course provides directed readings of select works that embody a Christian worldview or that readily lend themselves to being analyzed in accordance with a Christian worldview; works can be taken from a wide range of authors, genres, and/or countries, but all will be viewed through an intentionally Christian lens.

ENGL 5370: Shakespeare Prerequisite(s): None
This course provides a selected study of William Shakespeare’s drama and verse, attending to the major genres of history, tragedy, comedy, romance, and non-dramatic poetry. Consideration may be given to Shakespeare’s deployment of the theatre as a locus of human transformation, the role of imagination in early modern questions of faith and politics, and the poet’s creative use of literary, historical, and philosophical sources.

ENGL 5371: Modern and Contemporary Literature Prerequisite(s): None
This course provides directed readings of works of literature from the modern and contemporary periods. Readings may be selected from a variety of narrative forms, genres, places of origin, and dates, from the late 19th century to the present day. Consideration may be given to the novel, short fiction, and poetry, as well as modernist and contemporary approaches to the literary tradition more broadly.

ENGL 5381: Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of faculty. If regular classes are not conducted, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

ENGL 5399 Thesis Prerequisite(s): Approval of research topic by supervisor.
Restriction(s): This course may be taken for up to six hours of credit towards a degree.
This course is for the research, writing, and defense of a literature thesis project that is supervised by a faculty member.

ENGL 6315 Critical Approaches to Literature: Don Quixote Prerequisite(s): None
Course Equivalency: MLA 6315
This course uses the Cervantes masterpiece Don Quixote de la Mancha as a springboard for the study of literary theory that may, in turn, be applied to other literary texts. Contemporary theories such as psychological, mythological- archetypal, formalist, structuralist, and poststructuralist methodologies will be examined and applied to Quixote.

ENGL 6328 Early American Literary Traditions Prerequisite(s): None

Course Equivalency: MLA 6328
This course provides a survey of American literary traditions from 1620 to 1920, focusing on the historical and philosophical foundations and major figures in American literature. Writers included are: Bradford, Bradstreet, Edwards, Franklin, Irving, Cooper, Emerson, Thoreau, Hawthorne, Poe, Melville, Whitman, Dickinson, Twain, Howells, Crane, Adams, and James.

ENGL 6338 The World of Great Detectives Prerequisite(s): None
Course Equivalency: MLA 6338
A survey of mystery and detective fiction since Poe with an emphasis on 20th century British and American writers. By the end of the course, students should recognize the major authors, the major fictional detectives, and the principal varieties, e.g., the inverted detective story, the hard-boiled school, the police procedural, and the locked room puzzle.

ENGL 6343 Satire: From Aesop to Auden Prerequisite(s): None
Course Equivalency: MLA 6343
This course will study the form and content of satire from antiquity to the modern period as represented in selected poetry and prose. Works studied will be grouped in thematic units to allow comparison of techniques employed by individual writers in addressing common issues.

ENGL 6369 The World of Charles Dickens Prerequisite(s): None
Course Equivalency: MLA 6369
This course will provide an overview of the life, world, and work of Charles Dickens, the Shakespeare of the English novel. His development as a writer will be traced through his major novels: Oliver Twist, David Copperfield, Dombey and Son, Little Dorrit.

ENGL 6381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.


Engineering (ENGR) Course Descriptions

ENGR 1301 Introduction to Engineering Prerequisite(s): MATH 1313 and MATH 1323
An introduction to the engineering profession, including registration, ethics, and an introduction to the different fields of engineering. Topics include: a review of basic mathematical skills required for engineering, including operations with vectors, matrices, and complex numbers; the use of graphing calculators and computer algebra systems; an introduction to engineering analysis and design techniques; and the use of word processors, spreadsheets, and computer-aided-design software in engineering. Includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions.

ENGR 1302 Introduction to Engineering II Prerequisite(s): ENGR 1301
A continuation of ENGR 1301. Topics include: explorations of basic mechanics, acoustics, optics, thermodynamics, analog and digital electronics, and computer systems. This course also covers additional mathematical skills required for engineering: numerical techniques, statistics, nonlinear systems, iterative systems, and chaotic behavior. Includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions.


Engineering and Science (ENSC) Course Descriptions

ENSC 1381 Special Topics in Engineering Prerequisite(s): None

Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

ENSC 1411 Engineering and Cyber Projects I Prerequisite(s): None
Corequisite(s): Credit for or concurrent registration in MATH 1434 or higher
An introduction to engineering profession, engineering design and problem-solving, computing, algorithms, programming and software structures, and computer systems.

ENSC 1412 Engineering and Cyber Projects II Prerequisite(s): ENSC 1411 and MATH 1434 or higher
Additional engineering and computing projects using electronic components, algorithms and programming, and applications.

ENSC 2321 Statics and Mechanics of Materials Prerequisite(s): ENSC 1412 and PHYS 2413 and MATH 1452
Resultants and equilibrium of force systems, stress and strain, truss and frame analysis, torsion, bending.

ENSC 2322 Thermodynamics Prerequisite(s): ENSC 1412 and MATH 1452
Fundamental concepts, properties of pure substance, work, heat, first and second laws of thermodynamics, entropy, cycle analysis.

ENSC 2361 Electrical Engineering and Circuits Prerequisite(s): ENSC 1412 and MATH 1451
Fundamental concepts, units and laws. Network theorems, network simplification, phasors and AC solution of circuits, power and electronic applications.

ENSC 4181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

ENSC 4311 Senior Project I Prerequisite(s): Permission of instructor
Open-ended, team-based design project that draws on student’s entire academic experience with emphasis on idea generation and conceptual design. Social and ethical aspects of engineering and computing. Communication skills.

ENSC 4312 Senior Project II Prerequisite(s): ENSC 4311
Continuations of ENSC 4311 with emphasis on implementation and testing.
ENSC 4315 Internship/Professional Experience Prerequisite(s): Permission of the Instructor
On-site, supervised, structured work experience. This course may be taken to facilitate a three month off-campus professional experience or part-time professional experience.

ENSC 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.


Entrepreneurship (ENTR) Course Descriptions

ENTR 3301 Entrepreneurship and New Venture Development Prerequisite(s): None

This course focuses on the core principles of innovation-related entrepreneurship, and the processes involved with developing new ventures. The entrepreneur’s function in a start-up company or existing enterprise is examined. Topics include: a) recognition and quantification of market opportunity, b) integration of creativity and innovation with problem-solving and opportunity-recognition related to new products, c) assessment of risk associated with market position, d) the relationship of networking and perseverance, e) the role of venture capital or angel investors, and f) the different stages of ventures related to innovation and entrepreneurship.

ENTR 3302 Entrepreneurial Creativity and Opportunity Recognition Prerequisite(s): ENTR 3301
This course focuses on the core principles that comprise the formal creative process wherein innovators and entrepreneurs diagnose problems and determine opportunities for a given market, recognize a deliverable product opportunity, and then propose an innovative and creative solution to meet potential demand. Topics include: a) the formal market-mapping process, b) developing a competitive matrix for any market, c) formalizing the specific stages of the creative process, business models, and quantifiable outcomes, d) product feasibility studies, and e) pro forma forecasting and sensitivity analysis given various assumptions.

ENTR 3303 Developing the Business Plan for New Ventures Prerequisite(s): ENTR 3301
This course focuses on the development of a comprehensive business plan, executive summary, and slide presentation for an emerging or existing enterprise. Topics include: a) the eight facets of new ventures, b) the competitive matrix,
c) the uses of funds schedule, d) pro forma cash flow and innovation or venture potential, e) investor capitalization sheets and legal formation, f) the business model for the product or service, g) the format and targeted uses for an Executive Summary, h) the “business plan slide presentation” (the pitch), and i) the format for attendees at public and private forums.

ENTR 3381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

ENTR 6301 Entrepreneurship and New Venture Development Prerequisite(s): None
This course focuses on the core principles of economics, with an emphasis on the specific terminology, models, and concepts describing the micro-economic entity of the firm. It will also integrate the core tenets that drive the American market system of free enterprise. Topics will include: a) producer supply, buyer demand, and the four market structures of monopoly, oligopoly, monopolistic competition, and commodity-based perfect competition; b) marginal analysis of revenue, costs, profits, and productivity; and c) integrating pricing, revenue, and margins into decision making for the emerging entrepreneurial venture.

ENTR 6302 Entrepreneurial Creativity and Opportunity Recognition Prerequisite(s): ENTR 6301
This course focuses on the core principles that comprise the formal creative process wherein innovators and entrepreneurs diagnose problems and determine opportunities for a given market, recognize a deliverable product opportunity, and then propose an innovative and creative solution to meet potential demand. Topics include: a) the formal market-mapping, b) developing a competitive matrix for any market, c) formalizing the specific stages of the creative process, business models, and quantifiable outcomes, d) product feasibility studies, and e) pro forma forecasting and sensitivity analysis given various assumptions.

ENTR 6303 Developing the Business Plan for the New Venture Prerequisite(s): ENTR 6301
This course focuses on the entrepreneur's development of a comprehensive business plan, executive summary (XSumm), and slide presentation for a start-up or emerging growth venture. Topics include: a) the common "8 Facets of New Ventures", b) the competitive matrix, c) the Uses of Funds schedule, d) pro forma cash flows and venture potential, e) investor capitalization sheets and venture legal formation, f) the Business Model for the product-service,
g) the format and targeted uses for an Executive Summary (XSumm), h) the business plan slide presentation (the pitch), and i) the format and attendees at public and private venture forums.

ENTR 6390 Entrepreneurial Praxis: Integrating the Emerging Venture Experience Prerequisite(s): ACCT 6365 and ECON 6365 and ENTR 6301 and ENTR 6302 and ENTR 6303 and FINA 6365 and
MGMT 6390 and MKTG 6365 Prerequisite: None
This course focuses on bringing together and integrating all facets of the program into a comprehensive entrepreneurial experience where students consult to a Houston-area entrepreneur/founding team on the complete new venture development process. This experience provides a "working lab" within which the full complement of the MSME courses come together in a formal, systematic manner. Topics include: a) comparisons-contrasts of the consulting venture and the student's own proposed new venture, b) engaging in high-level dialogue with an entrepreneur/business owner across a wide range of pros and cons related to all facets of the venture development process, and c) recognizing various opportunities for strong ethics/morals throughout the many levels of entrepreneurial leadership in the firm.


Educational Psychology (EPSY) Course Descriptions

EPSY 5310 Ethical and Professional Issues in Psychology and Counseling Prerequisite(s): None
A seminar format will provide the student with opportunities to study ethical standards and applications in mental health fields. (Offered also as PSYC 5310.)

EPSY 5313 Methods and Techniques in Counseling Prerequisite(s): None
This course will introduce the student to those active listening skills which communicate the qualities of empathy, genuineness and unconditional positive regard. The course will include role-playing and videotaped exercises. Other selected interventions will be included.

EPSY 5323 Theories of Counseling and Psychotherapy Prerequisite(s): None
Comprehensive and intensive study of major theoretical orientations in counseling and psychotherapy, stressing implications for research and practice. Includes experiences in micro-counseling and other simulations to develop counseling skills. (Offered also as PSYC 5323.)

EPSY 5330 Psychology of Learning Prerequisite(s): None
A course stressing the contributions of major learning theories to understanding behavior. Particular attention is paid to human learning and the applicability of learning theory to the educational process as well as to goal attainments. (Offered also as PSYC 5330.)

EPSY 5363 Principles of Guidance Prerequisite(s): None
Introduction to philosophical and historical foundations of guidance and counseling, stressing practical problems of organizing and implementing guidance programs in the secondary and elementary schools. Consideration is given to professional issues, present and future, as they impact the role and function of the counselor. Includes the design of a guidance and counseling program for an elementary, secondary, or postsecondary institution. (Offered also as PSYC 5363.)

EPSY 5381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EPSY 6181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EPSY 6191 Counseling Practicum Prerequisite(s): None
Supervised laboratory experiences in individual and group counseling with emphasis upon methods and techniques. Competence in counseling with varied types of human concerns is developed. All practicum students must be involved in counseling activities and must exhibit skills in evaluation as well. This course meets on campus when the student is involved in an off-campus practicum assignment. (Offered also as PSYC 6191.)

EPSY 6192 Counseling Practicum Prerequisite(s): None
Supervised laboratory experiences in individual and group counseling with emphasis upon methods and techniques. Competence in counseling with varied types of human concerns is developed. All practicum students must be involved in counseling activities and must exhibit skills in evaluation as well. This course meets on campus when the student is involved in an off-campus practicum assignment. (Offered also as PSYC 6192.)

EPSY 6281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EPSY 6305 Individual Psychological Evaluation Prerequisite(s): PSYC 5309
The purpose of this course is to attain knowledge of cognitive functioning and develop skills in the cognitive assessment of children and adolescents. This course integrates the skills of administration, scoring, and interpretation of major cognitive assessment instruments (e.g., KABC-II, WISC-V, and WJ-IV COG) in the context of recent cognitive theories and research. The Cattell-Horn-Carroll (CHC) Theory of Cognitive Abilities will be the primary underlying framework for interpreting test data. Also, an emphasis will be placed on a dual discrepancy model when utilizing the CHC theory of cognitive abilities. Issues of assessing culturally and linguistically diverse children and adolescents are integrated throughout the course in addition to specified lectures. (Offered also as PSYC 6305 and EDSP 6305.)

EPSY 6308 Methods of Group Guidance Prerequisite(s): EPSY 5323
Group aspects of student personnel and clinical work for counselors, administrators, and other professionals dealing in services where group counseling is provided. Theory and research relevant to providing group counseling to various populations are emphasized. Didactic and experiential activities are offered. (Offered also as PSYC 6308.)

EPSY 6310 Clinical Psychopathology Prerequisite(s): 24 graduate semester hours in psychology
A course that examines the etiology, symptoms, diagnosis, prognosis and therapeutic methods applicable to the major psychological disorders. Emphasis is placed on being able to differentiate one disorder from the other. (Offered also as PSYC 6310.)

EPSY 6381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

EPSY 6391 Counseling Practicum Prerequisite(s): A cumulative GPA of at least 3.00 and the successful completion of 24 credit hours. The 24 credit hours are comprised of EDUC 6304 and COUN 5310 and COUN 5318 and COUN 5320 and COUN 5363 and COUN 5321 and six credit hours from any courses listed on the MEd School Counseling Degree Plan. All courses included in the prerequisite requirement of 24 credit hours must be passed with a grade no lower than a ‘C’.
This course provides supervised field experience in school counseling with emphasis upon methods and techniques. Competence in school counseling with varied types of concerns is developed. All practicum students must be involved in school counseling activities and must exhibit skills in evaluation as well. This course meets on campus when the student is involved in an off-campus practicum assignment.


Educational Technology (ETEC) Course Descriptions
ETEC 4306 Educational Applications of Technology Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Educator Preparation Program
A broad spectrum of technology application is explored including the use of word processing, software evaluation, Internet use, multimedia, and telecommunications. Technology is used for communication, management, teaching, and learning. Software is reviewed and evaluated.

ETEC 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

ETEC 5302 Multimedia Instructional Strategies Prerequisite(s): None
This course is part of the introductory sequence of courses designed to introduce and train educators in the appropriate applications of instructional technology. Information acquisition will focus on methodologies and appropriate use of multimedia as an instructional tool. Application of skills will focus on demonstrated proficiency in manipulation of text, graphics, and sound. Problem-solving activities will focus on the integration of multimedia programs as appropriate. Participants will complete the design and development of an individual multimedia project and a group multimedia project, using advanced technical features and multiple sources of media. Participants will learn to use multimedia tools to enhance their own communication, expand their repertoire of instructional strategies, and lead students in creating their own multimedia projects.

ETEC 5305 Technology Enhanced Instructional Design Prerequisite(s): ETEC 5306
This course is designed to provide integrated and in-depth understanding of the principles and processes of technology- enhanced instructional design and curriculum development. Learning will be focused on the application of learner, instructional, and resource analyses with an emphasis on technology-enhanced resources, assessment, and computer- based curriculum management.

ETEC 5306 Educational Applications of Technology Prerequisite(s): None
A broad spectrum of technology application is explored including the use of word processing, software evaluation, Internet use, multimedia, and telecommunications. Technology is used for communication, management, teaching, and learning. Software is reviewed and evaluated.

ETEC 5319 Internet Resource Management Prerequisite(s): None
Internet Resource Management is designed to allow participants to experience appropriate uses of technology as a learner, and thus better use technology in teaching and learning. The digital world can produce a management nightmare without the proper tools for resource management. The goal of this course is to provide a combination of hands-on and student-centered experiences that will assist in the management of Internet resources. These experiences will enable participants to search for information, share information, generate materials, and evaluate web-based instructional materials. Instructional strategies will focus on the acquisition, analysis, and synthesis of Internet resources that address appropriate educational needs. Graduate students will create a group of 4 inquiry based Webquest and make it available online for students.

ETEC 5381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

ETEC 6307 Design of Print-Based Media Prerequisite(s): ETEC 5306
Information acquisition activities include analysis of graphic and text layout design for various print-based media. Application competencies include creation and evaluation of documents using advanced standards and styles of publishing. Problem- solving activities will focus on matching the appropriate production software.

ETEC 6308 Distance Learning Prerequisite(s): ETEC 5306
Information acquisition focuses on case studies and research efforts documenting effective and ineffective applications of distance learning technologies. Application of research findings will lead to the development of a distance learning prospectus. By participating in distance learning demonstrations and simulations, students will apply and test instructional strategies appropriate for learners in a remote learning scenario. Problem-solving activities will include delivery system design and program design.

ETEC 6381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.


Finance (FINA) Course Descriptions

FINA 3315 Security Markets and Financial Institutions Prerequisite(s): FINA 3320
An introduction to the US financial system. Topics include interest rate theory, financial markets such as money markets and capital markets including stock and bond markets, and financial institutions such as banks and other depository institutions, finance companies, insurance companies, investment companies, pension funds, securities firms. (Offered also as ECON 3315.)

FINA 3320 Corporate Finance Prerequisite(s): ACCT 2301 and BUSA 2315
Introduction to the basic concepts, principles, and analytical techniques of financial management. Topics include financial planning and analysis, risk and return, time value of money, valuation and capital budgeting. The following key aspects of finance will be emphasized - net present value, cash flows, and the tradeoff between risk and return.
FINA 3322 Introduction to Risk Management Prerequisite(s): FINA 3320
This course provides an introduction to corporate risk management by combining concepts, tools, and techniques from finance and related disciplines such as economics and statistics. It discusses the identification, measurement, and management of risk from both personal and corporate perspectives. Topics covered include how to characterize and measure risks, compare and price risk, evaluate the effects that risk has upon stakeholder incentives and firm value, etc.
FINA 3330 International Finance Prerequisite(s): FINA 3320 and ECON 2311
A study of the theories and practices of international trade and finance, direction and composition of world trade, institutions for facilitating trade, international payments, capital movement, exchange rates. (Offered also as ECON 3330.)

FINA 4307 Investment Principles Prerequisite(s): FINA 3320 and ECON 2311
An introductory investment course designed to teach students how to make investment decisions. It helps prepare students become investment professionals and financial planners. It analyzes different types of investment products and discusses the characteristics of different kinds of investors for purposes of developing an effective investment policy. Topics include debt securities, equity securities, derivative securities, security analysis, and portfolio management. The course provides the first good step for those students who are interested in obtaining the CFP (Certified Financial Planner) certification or the CFA (Charted Financial Analyst) charter.

FINA 4318 Corporate Financial Management Prerequisite(s): FINA 3320 and ECON 2311
This course will examine the theories and practice of corporate finance and provide practical solutions to the problems faced by financial managers and analysts. This course will demonstrate the problems of utilizing financial decision making tools under uncertainty, establish a framework for the analysis of financial problems, and illustrate the breadth of financial decision making.
FINA 4322 Options and Futures Prerequisite(s): FINA 4307
The objective of this course is to give students an understanding of the wide range of derivative financial securities, including options and futures, and better prepare them for the types of careers available in today's complex financial world. Students will learn how these securities are priced and used in risk management and speculative strategies by individuals and companies.
FINA 4330 Financial Analysis and Modeling Prerequisite(s): FINA 3320 and ECON 2311
This course will introduce students to the fundamentals of financial modeling using the theories, concepts, and tools covered in FINA 3310, Corporate Finance, and FINA 4318, Corporate Financial Management. Extensive application of spreadsheet models incorporating real life financial data is used to familiarize students with the methodology in financial analysis and financial decision-making. Specific emphasis is on the interpretation of financial statements and their forecasts in support of planning, budgeting, and asset, as well as corporate, valuation objectives.
FINA 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): Approval of the Dean of the Dunham College of Business
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

FINA 5260 Principles of Finance Prerequisite(s): None
An introduction to the basic theory and tools of financial management. Topics include financial statement analysis, risk and return, time value of money, and security valuation.

FINA 6330 Financial Management Prerequisite(s): ACCT 6352 and MGMT 5260 and FINA 5260
Application of current financial analysis techniques within the firm. Topics covered include capital budgeting techniques, investment analysis, capital structure decisions, financial planning, and working capital management. The course includes review of multinational or global corporations and multinational versus domestic financial management. This course also looks at business ethics and social responsibility by firms, including agency problem, management compensation, and executive stock options. Legal aspects are considered throughout the course and involve Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), bankruptcy, reorganizations, liquidation proceedings, initial offerings (IPO's) and mergers, leveraged buyouts (LBO's), divestitures, and holding companies. Graduate Business programs only.

FINA 6332 Investments Prerequisite(s): FINA 6330
A detailed analysis of the types of investment media integrated with the basic concepts of portfolio selection, diversification, and risk management. Sophisticated investment techniques and strategy will be utilized. Graduate Business programs only.

FINA 6333 International Finance Prerequisite(s): ACCT 6352 and MGMT 5260 and FINA 5260
Studies of the factors that influence international financial decision making and the institutions and instruments that facilitate international trade and investment. Includes the international payments system, foreign exchange rates, and international capital movements. Graduate Business programs only.

FINA 6335 Risk Management Prerequisite(s): FINA 6330
Decision-making under uncertainty and the management of risk by corporations, recognizing the relationship between risk management and the overall goals of the firm. Emphasis is placed upon the identification, measurement and management of corporate risks. Risk exposures due to complex financial structures are also covered in this course. Graduate Business programs only.

FINA 6359 Healthcare Finance Prerequisite(s): FINA 6330
This course emphasizes financial management and financial operations theory, principles, and concepts as they relate to healthcare organizational decision-making and accountability. Students will apply current leadership principles to analyze healthcare delivery and financing challenges, assess customer base and facility mission to effectively manage and allocate human, financial and information resources in health organizations, and analyze health data to make data driven decisions in organizational policy and procedure.

FINA 6365 Financial Modeling and Valuation for New Ventures Prerequisite(s): ACCT 6365
This course focuses on the core concepts and best practices used to build sophisticated financial models for entrepreneurial ventures, including high-level scenarios analysis and valuation techniques for privately-held companies. Topics include: a) developing macros and interactive cross-tabs functions in MS-Excel spreadsheets, b) configuring multiple variables with "what if" scenario impacts and rationales for financial models, c) accounting risk and managing quantitative and qualitative components into the models that directly impact the decision making entrepreneurial managers, d) establishing solid metrics and sound underlying rationales for pre-money and post-money valuations of pre-public business ventures, and e) relating cash flow and operations models to changes in firm valuations.

FINA 6381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

Freshman Year Seminar (FYS) Course Descriptions

FYS 1300 Freshman Year Seminar Prerequisite(s): None
The ultimate purpose of college is student learning. The purpose of the first-year seminar is to help the new student begin exploring how to make his or her education, both in and out of the classroom, relevant and meaningful. Emphasis is on assisting the student in becoming aware of the spectrum of learning opportunities at this university, directing the student to the academic, social, cultural, recreational, and spiritual resources and opportunities to the university and teaching the new student how to effectively utilize and take part in these as a new member of the university community.


Government (GOVT) Course Descriptions

GOVT 2313 American and Texas Government Prerequisite(s): None
A survey of the structure and operation of the national and Texas governments. This course is required for certification to teach in the public schools of Texas.

GOVT 2343 Public Policy Prerequisite(s): None
This course will examine policy issues at the national level including crime, welfare, healthcare, the environment, taxation, immigration, defense, and education. The course will not only emphasize policy content, but also will focus upon the policy process, the influence of various political personalities on shaping public policy, and policy evaluation.

GOVT 2350 Introduction to Criminal Justice Prerequisite(s): None
This course is designed to provide an introduction into criminal justice. It will improve one's basic understanding of crime and the criminal justice systems and familiarize one with the key concepts and terminology utilized in the field by discussing the role of the core elements: police, courts, and corrections. It will force students to examine individual rights protected by the constitution and balance them against a community's need for public safety and public order. It highlights the complexities of the criminal justice discipline and encourages students to think critically and employ ethical reasoning by presenting real-life examples faced by criminal justice practitioners and asking the student to balance values, criminal procedures, and the law when coming up with solutions.

GOVT 3340 Legal Aspects of Criminal Justice Prerequisite(s): None
This course is designed to provide an in-depth look into the aspects of law which are relevant to and essential for a better understanding of the criminal justice system and its related processes. Laws that govern policing are primarily based upon the United States Constitution, United States Supreme Court decisions, and statutes passed by the United States Congress and state legislatures. This course focuses on these sources but will present the material in a format and in language designed to meet the needs and interests of non-lawyers while preserving the meaning and content of the law as interpreted by the courts. This class will force students to examine individual rights protected by the constitution and balance them against a community's need for public safety and public order. It highlights the complexities of the criminal justice discipline and encourages students to think critically and employ ethical reasoning by presenting real-life examples faced by criminal justice practitioners and asking the student to balance values, criminal procedures, and the law when coming up with solutions.

GOVT 3341 Ethics, Crime, and Criminal Justice Prerequisite(s): None
This course is designed to provide a comprehensive study of ethics, crime, and criminal justice by exploring different themes and issues, including concepts such as good vs. evil, right vs. wrong, duty, obligation, virtue, freedom, rationality, and free will. The themes that ethics explores underlie many circumstances we routinely confront as individuals, groups, organizations, communities, and cultures. Ultimately, if the criminal justice aim of ethics is realized, the student will be equipped to adopt more informed beliefs, to make better decisions, to undertake healthier actions, to be a better citizen, and consequently, to live a more rewarding and fulfilling life in the United States or any country on earth. The study into criminal justice ethics concludes by discussing why faith matters and how it could matter more.

GOVT 3342 Foundations of Criminal Law Prerequisite(s): None
The course will focus on introducing students to the substantive criminal law and the criminal justice system. The course will include a treatment of the origin of laws, the penal code, the definition of law and crime, general principles of criminal responsibility, elements of major crimes, punishments, conditions or circumstances which may excuse one from criminal responsibility or mitigate punishment, and introduce students to the court system. Although the course will familiarize students with federal criminal law, the main emphasis will be on the penal laws of Texas (Texas Penal Code).

GOVT 3344 The American Court System Prerequisite(s): None
Survey of state and federal court systems, the U.S. Supreme Court, introduction to civil and criminal law, the role of lawyers, judges, and juries in the American court system. This course is basic to pre-law.

GOVT 3345 Ancient and Medieval Political Thought Prerequisite(s): None
An examination of classic dilemmas and recurrent problems in political theory and how they are dealt with by ancient Greek, Roman, and feudal thinkers. This course will focus on the original writings of philosophers who have made a substantial contribution to political theory, from Plato to Machiavelli.

GOVT 3348 American Political Thought Prerequisite(s): None

This course covers American political thought from the colonial experience, the Revolution, the drafting of the Constitution, the Civil War, the Civil Rights movement, to the present - an analysis of ideas that shaped the American political system.

GOVT 3353 Contemporary Political Thought Prerequisite(s): None
A study of the major political doctrines of the present day, with primary emphasis upon Marxism, Fascism, and the doctrines of the modern democratic state.

GOVT 3374 The United States Congress Prerequisite(s): None
An analysis of the institutional behavior, procedures, and organization of Congress. Special attention paid to the roles of representatives, senators, lobbyists, and the legislative process.

GOVT 3384 The Presidency Prerequisite(s): None
Analysis of the nation's chief executive, including the origins of the office, electoral process, powers and duties of the office, organization and staffing of the White House, and influence on national and world politics.

GOVT 3387 Campaigns and Elections Prerequisite(s): None
An analysis of the American electoral system and political campaigns. This course focuses on political parties, campaign strategy, the electoral process, public opinion, and voter turnout.

GOVT 3390 Law and Justice: Great Trials of the Western Legal Tradition Prerequisite(s): None
An analysis of the great trials that shaped the Western legal tradition, from ancient Athens to contemporary America. This course focuses on the formation and justification of three principles of justice (reason, autonomy, and consent) which define the natural law jurisprudence underlying the legal and governmental institutions of England and the United States. This course also examines the horrific consequences of abandoning these principles of justice in three 20th century legal systems: The Soviet Union, Nazi Germany, and the United States.

GOVT 3394 Law and Religion in the United States Prerequisite(s): None
This course provides the historical background for the development of the separation of church and state and the subsequent development of secularism. Law and religion is designed to teach students to think in sophisticated ways about religious liberty and the interaction of religion and politics.

GOVT 3395 Comparative Politics Prerequisite(s): None
This course explores the purpose and function of government from both theoretical and applied perspectives. Students will read various foundational theories of government, understand different ways in which governments can be designed and implemented, and examine the working governments of countries other than the United States.

GOVT 4310 Jurisprudence, Law, and Legal Theory Prerequisite(s): None
This course presents an introduction to jurisprudence. It surveys (1) the rudiments of the common law system, (2) the existence conditions (essential elements) of law, and (3) what determines the legal validity (enforceability) of law. These issues necessarily involve a number of fundamental philosophical issues, including: 1) the appropriate relationship between law and morality, 2) the appropriate relationship of the individual to the state, and the appropriate limits and boundaries of governmental coercion, 3) the nature of justice, and the principles of reason, autonomy, and consent, 4) the relationship between individual liberty and the protection of property, freedom of expression, and freedom of religious belief and practice., 5) the appropriate limits and boundaries of judicial discretion, and 6) constitutional interpretation. The course also addresses important substantive issues of tort law, property law, contract law, and constitutional law. The course concludes by examining the recent emergence of "the economic approach to

law," a judicial philosophy that evaluates the morality of law by its ability to generate profits. (This course will be included in the Political Theory Option of the degree plan.)

GOVT 4313 Constitutional Law Prerequisite(s): None
Constitutional Law I focuses on the Bill of Rights (Amendments I through X) and the "Civil War Amendments" (Amendments XIII through XV). The course focuses on the historical events that led to the adoption of each Amendment and the major United States Supreme Court cases interpreting and applying each Amendment. This course focuses on the Constitution's guarantees of political liberty, the Constitution's requirements in criminal procedure, and the United States Supreme Court's expansion of federal power over private and state action through "substantive due process" and "incorporation" under Amendment XIV.

GOVT 4314 Constitutional Law II Prerequisite(s): None
This course is a continuation of the study of judicial review, the political role of the courts, American federalism, the jurisdiction of and the limitations of the judicial branch, the power of taxation, the commerce power, the substantive and procedural rights of the individual, and the powers of the President that began in GOVT 4313, Constitutional Law
I. Students will explore each of these dimensions of constitutional law in more depth and learn to analyze and evaluate current legislation and legal decisions of the legislative and judicial branches of government.

GOVT 4333 United States Foreign Policy Prerequisite(s): None
A survey of the foundation of foreign policy and the major diplomatic developments from the founding period to the present. Emphasis will be placed on the means and methods by which United States foreign policy is formulated and executed.

GOVT 4343 Intelligence and National Security Prerequisite(s): None
An analysis of the role played by the American intelligence community (CIA, NSA, DIA, etc.) in the assessment and realization of U.S. national security interests, with special attention to methods, duties, and prerogatives of the various agencies that make up the intelligence community.

GOVT 4353 International Relations Prerequisite(s): None
A survey of contemporary international political conditions. Along with the analysis of the forces and pressures behind contemporary events, the principles, origin, and development of international law and international organizations will be given consideration.

GOVT 4363 Political Economy of Latin America: Revolutions, Reform, and Resistance Prerequisite(s): None
This course explores the political dynamics involved in economic decision-making and action in contemporary Latin America. In examining the relationship between politics and economics in the region, the course will focus on issues of dependency and development, neo-liberalism, authoritarian rule and transition to democracy, and religious and social mobilization in revolution.

GOVT 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): Permission of the instructor and dean of the college/school.
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

GOVT 4383 Internship in Political Science Prerequisite(s): Permission of Instructor
Directed work experience in a variety of public and private organizations. The primary objective of this course is to provide students with opportunities to apply what they have learned in class in a career-oriented setting. Also provides students with the opportunity to attain applied research experience and develop analytic skills.

GOVT 4392 Independent Research Project Prerequisite(s): Permission of the instructor
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.


Greek (GREK) Course Descriptions

GREK 2312 Greek Grammar I Prerequisite(s): None
An introduction to the forms, vocabulary, and grammatical usage of the Koine Greek, designed to give the student the tools necessary for translation and analysis of the Greek New Testament.

GREK 2322 Greek Grammar Prerequisite(s): GREK 2312
A continuation of GREK 2312. An introduction to additional forms, vocabulary, and grammatical usage of Koine Greek designed to give the student the skills necessary for translation and analysis of the Greek New Testament.

GREK 2381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

GREK 3311 Greek Syntax and Reading Prerequisite(s): GREK 2312 and GREK 2322
An intermediate study of Greek syntax with application to the translation and analysis of the Greek New Testament.

GREK 4320 Synoptic Gospels Prerequisite(s): GREK 2312, 2322, 3311
GREK 4320 The Synoptic Gospels covers advanced study of biblical Greek through translation of the Greek text of the Synoptic Gospels. This course may be taken up to three times for credit if content differs.

GREK 4325 Johannine Literature Prerequisite(s): GREK 2312, 2322, 3311
GREK 4325 Johannine Literature covers advanced study of biblical Greek through translation of the Greek text of the Johannine Literature.

GREK 4330 Acts I Prerequisite(s): GREK 2312, 2322, 3311
GREK 4330 Acts I covers advanced study of biblical Greek through translation of the Greek text of the Acts of the Apostles chapters 1-14.

GREK 4331 Acts II Prerequisite(s): GREK 2312, 2322, 3311
GREK 4331 Acts II covers advanced study of biblical Greek through translation of the Greek text of the Acts of the Apostles chapters 15-28.

GREK 4335 Pauline Epistles Prerequisite(s): GREK 2312, 2322, 3311
GREK 4335 Pauline Epistles covers advanced study of biblical Greek through translation of the Greek text of the Pauline Epistles. This course may be taken up to three times for credit if content differs.

GREK 4340 Revelation Prerequisite(s): GREK 2312, 2322, 3311
GREK 4340 Revelation covers advanced study of biblical Greek through translation of the Greek text of the book of Revelation.

GREK 4345 Septuagint Prerequisite(s): GREK 2312, 2322, 3311
GREK 4345 Septuagint covers advanced study of biblical Greek through translation of the Greek text of the Septuagint.

GREK 4350 Apostolic Fathers Prerequisite(s): GREK 2312, 2322, 3311
GREK 4350 Apostolic Fathers covers advanced study of biblical Greek through translation of the Greek text of the Apostolic Fathers.

GREK 4352 Directed Studies in Greek Prerequisite(s): GREK 2312 and GREK 2322 and GREK 3311 Restriction(s): This course may not be repeated more than twice. Advanced study of Greek literature of the Koine period.

GREK 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

GREK 5301 Greek I Prerequisite(s): None
Greek I is a study of Koine Greek grammar and syntax for reading the Greek New Testament and selected extrabiblical literature.
GREK 5302 Greek II Prerequisite(s): GREK 5301
Greek II is an advanced study of Koine Greek grammar and syntax for reading and exegesis of the Greek New Testament and other selected literature.

GREK 5381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

GREK 6301 Intermediate Greek Prerequisite(s): GREK 2312 and GREK 2322 or GREK 5301 and GREK 5302 Introductory studies in Greek grammar and syntax of select literature of the Koine period.

GREK 6320 Synoptic Gospels Prerequisite(s): (GREK 2312 and GREK 2322 and (GREK 3311 or GREK 6301)) or GREK 5301 and GREK 5302
and GREK 6301
Restriction(s): This course may be taken up to three times for credit if content differs.
GREK 6320 The Synoptic Gospels covers advanced study of biblical Greek through translation of the Greek text of the Synoptic Gospels.

GREK 6325 Johannine Literature Prerequisite(s): (GREK 2312 and GREK 2322 and (GREK 3311 or GREK 6301)) or GREK 5301 and GREK 5302
and GREK 6301
GREK 6325 Johannine Literature covers advanced study of biblical Greek through translation of the Greek text of the Johannine Literature.

GREK 6330 Acts I Prerequisite(s): (GREK 2312 and GREK 2322 and (GREK 3311 or GREK 6301)) or GREK 5301 and GREK 5302
and GREK 6301
GREK 6330 Acts I covers advanced study of biblical Greek through translation of the Greek text of the Acts of the Apostles chapters 1-14.

GREK 6331 Acts II Prerequisite(s): (GREK 2312 and GREK 2322 and (GREK 3311 or GREK 6301)) or GREK 5301 and GREK 5302
and GREK 6301
GREK 6331 Acts II covers advanced study of biblical Greek through translation of the Greek text of the Acts of the Apostles chapters 15-28.
GREK 6335 Pauline Epistles Prerequisite(s): (GREK 2312 and GREK 2322 and (GREK 3311 or GREK 6301)) or GREK 5301 and GREK 5302
and GREK 6301
Restriction(s): This course may be taken up to three times for credit if content differs.
GREK 6335 Pauline Epistles covers advanced study of biblical Greek through translation of the Greek text of the Pauline Epistles.

GREK 6340 Revelation Prerequisite(s): (GREK 2312 and GREK 2322 and (GREK 3311 or GREK 6301)) or GREK 5301 and GREK 5302
and GREK 6301
GREK 6340 Revelation covers advanced study of biblical Greek through translation of the Greek text of the book of Revelation.

GREK 6345 Septuagint Prerequisite(s): (GREK 2312 and GREK 2322 and (GREK 3311 or GREK 6301)) or GREK 5301 and GREK 5302
and GREK 6301
GREK 6345 Septuagint covers advanced study of biblical Greek through translation of the Greek text of the Septuagint.

GREK 6350 Apostolic Fathers Prerequisite(s): (GREK 2312 and GREK 2322 and (GREK 3311 or GREK 6301)) or GREK 5301 and GREK 5302
and GREK 6301
GREK 6350 Apostolic Fathers covers advanced study of biblical Greek through translation of the Greek text of the Apostolic Fathers.

GREK 6352 Advanced Directed Studies in Greek Prerequisite(s): (GREK 2312 and GREK 2322 and (GREK 3311 or GREK 6301)) or GREK 5301 and GREK 5302
and GREK 6301
Restriction(s): Course may be repeated as course content differs.
Advanced studies in Greek grammar, syntax, linguistic approaches, and/or text critical theories with application to literature of the Koine Period.

GREK 6381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.


Hebrew (HEBR) Course Descriptions

HEBR 2312 Hebrew Grammar I Prerequisite(s): None
An introduction to the forms, vocabulary, and grammatical usage of biblical Hebrew designed to give the student the skills necessary for the translation and analysis of the Hebrew Bible.

HEBR 2322 Hebrew Grammar II Prerequisite(s): HEBR 2312
A continuation of HEBR 2312. An introduction to additional forms, vocabulary, and grammatical usage of biblical Hebrew designed to give the student the skills necessary for the translation and analysis of the Hebrew Bible.

HEBR 2381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisites: None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

HEBR 3311 Hebrew Reading and Syntax I Prerequisite(s): HEBR 2312 and HEBR 2322
An intermediate study of Hebrew syntax with application to the translation and analysis of selected portions of the Hebrew Bible and/or Second Temple literature.

HEBR 4351 Hebrew Reading and Syntax II Prerequisite(s): HEBR 2312 and HEBR 2322
Advanced study of Hebrew syntax with application to the translation of selected portions of the Hebrew Bible and/or Second Temple literature.

HEBR 4352 Directed Studies in Hebrew Prerequisite(s): HEBR 3311 and HEBR 4351
Restriction(s): This course may not be repeated more than twice.
Advanced study of the Hebrew Bible and/or selected Second Temple literature.

HEBR 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

HEBR 4393 Senior Seminar Prerequisite(s): HEBR 2312 and HEBR 2322 and HEBR 3311 and HEBR 4351 Directed studies in the Hebrew Bible and other Second Temple literature.

HEBR 5301 Hebrew I Prerequisite(s): None
Hebrew I is a study of Hebrew grammar and syntax for reading the Hebrew Bible and other Second Temple literature.

HEBR 5302 Hebrew II Prerequisite(s): HEBR 5301
Hebrew II is an advanced study of Hebrew grammar and syntax for reading the Hebrew Bible and other Second Temple literature.

HEBR 5381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

HEBR 6301 Intermediate Hebrew Prerequisite(s): HEBR 2312 and HEBR 2313 or HEBR 5301 and HEBR 5302
Introductory studies in Hebrew grammar and syntax of select literature of the Hebrew Bible and/or Second Temple period.

HEBR 6320 Pentateuch Prerequisite(s): (HEBR 2312 and HEBR 2322 and (HEBR 3311 or HEBR 6301)) or HEBR 5301 and HEBR 5302 and
HEBR 6301 Prerequisite: None
Restriction(s): This course may be taken up to three times for credit if course content differs.
Advanced studies in ancient Hebrew grammar, syntax, and linguistic approaches through translation and analysis of the Hebrew text of the Pentateuch.

HEBR 6325 Historical Books Prerequisite(s): (HEBR 2312 and HEBR 2322 and (HEBR 3311 or HEBR 6301)) or HEBR 5301 and HEBR 5302 and
HEBR 6301
Restriction(s): This course may be taken up to three times for credit if course content differs.
Advanced studies in ancient Hebrew grammar, syntax, and linguistic approaches through translation and analysis of the Hebrew text of the Historical Books.

HEBR 6330 Psalms Prerequisite(s): (HEBR 2312 and HEBR 2322 and (HEBR 3311 or HEBR 6301)) or HEBR 5301 and HEBR 5302 and
HEBR 6301
Restriction(s): This course may be taken up to three times for credit if course content differs.
Advanced studies in ancient Hebrew grammar, syntax, and linguistic approaches through translation and analysis of the Hebrew text of the Psalms.

HEBR 6335 Wisdom Literature
Prerequisite(s): (HEBR 2312 and HEBR 2322 and (HEBR 3311 or HEBR 6301)) or HEBR 5301 and HEBR 5302 and
HEBR 6301
Restriction(s): This course may be taken up to three times for credit if course content differs.
Advanced studies in ancient Hebrew grammar, syntax, and linguistic approaches through translation and analysis of the Hebrew text of the Wisdom Literature.

HEBR 6340 Major Prophets
Prerequisite(s): (HEBR 2312 and HEBR 2322 and (HEBR 3311 or HEBR 6301)) or HEBR 5301 and HEBR 5302 and
HEBR 6301
Restriction(s): This course may be taken up to three times for credit if course content differs.
Advanced studies in ancient Hebrew grammar, syntax, and linguistic approaches through translation and analysis of the Hebrew text of the Major Prophets.

HEBR 6345 Minor Prophets Prerequisite(s): (HEBR 2312 and HEBR 2322 and (HEBR 3311 or HEBR 6301)) or HEBR 5301 and HEBR 5302 and
HEBR 6301
Restriction(s): This course may be taken up to three times for credit if course content differs.
Advanced studies in ancient Hebrew grammar, syntax, and linguistic approaches through translation and analysis of the Hebrew text of the Minor Prophets.

HEBR 6352 Advanced Directed Studies in Hebrew Prerequisite(s): (HEBR 2312 and HEBR 2322 and (HEBR 3311 or HEBR 6301)) or HEBR 5301 and HEBR 5302 and
HEBR 6301
Restriction(s): Course may be repeated as course content differs.
Advanced studies in Hebrew grammar, syntax, linguistic approaches, and/or text critical theories with application to literature of the Hebrew Bible and/or Second Temple literature.


Higher Education (HIED) Course Descriptions

HIED 5301 History and Philosophy of Higher Education Prerequisite(s): None
This course examines the development of American higher education against the background of influential social, political, economic, and intellectual issues.

HIED 5302 College and University Administration Prerequisite(s): None
An introduction of the various types of institutions of higher education, their organization and roles on a national scope. The principal administrative functions, including faculty personnel, business management, public relations, and the liaisons of student personnel with other administrative functions will be discussed.

HIED 5303 Legal Aspects and Finance in Higher Education Prerequisite(s): None
This course analyzes case law on issues of access, student rights, employment, church and state, private sector, liability, academic freedom, and civil rights. Additionally, this course examines revenue, fund-raising and development, types of expenditures, tuition and financial aid policies, budgeting and accounting practices.

HIED 5304 Introduction to Student Affairs Work Prerequisite(s): None
An introduction to the basic functions and professional issues in student affairs work. Relevant concepts of administration, enrollment management, student development theory, and spiritual development are introduced. The functions of and relationships between various student services departments are also discussed.

HIED 5305 Christian Colleges and Universities Prerequisite(s): None
This course examines the most salient aspects of Christian colleges and universities. Specifically, students will have the opportunity to ascertain the distinctiveness of member institutions of the Christian College Collation (CCCU) and the International Association of Baptist Colleges and Universities (IABCU).

HIED 5306 Practicum in Higher Education Prerequisite(s): None
Practical application of learning and skills developed during coursework by serving in a particular higher education department/office. This is to be completed toward the end of the student's program of study.

HIED 5381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.


History (HIST) Course Descriptions

HIST 2311 Western Civilization I Prerequisite(s): None
A survey of Western Civilization from the Ancient World to the end of the Middle Ages in Europe.

HIST 2312 Western Civilization II Prerequisite(s): None
A survey of Western Civilization from the Renaissance and Reformation to the present.

HIST 2313 U.S. History to 1877 Prerequisite(s): None
A survey of American history from its origins to the close of Reconstruction.

HIST 2323 U.S. History from 1877 Prerequisite(s): None
A survey of American history from the close of Reconstruction to the present.

HIST 3311 American Religious History Prerequisite(s): None
This course covers the history of American religion from the pre-contact period to the present.

HIST 3313 Colonial America Prerequisite(s): None
This course covers the history of colonial North America, from the first European settlements in the sixteenth century to the end of Spanish rule in northern New Spain in 1821. The primary focus is on the regions that later become part of the United States.

HIST 3314 Revolutionary and Early National America Prerequisite(s): None
A study of the causes and consequences of the American Revolution and the development of the United States between 1763 and 1789.

HIST 3323 Civil War and Reconstruction Prerequisite(s): None
A study of the rise of sectionalism, the abolition crusade, the secession crisis, United States versus Confederate States, aftermath of the war, reconstruction, economic and social consequences of the war, and emergence of a New South.

HIST 3333 History of Texas Prerequisite(s): None
A survey course from the period of exploration and early colonization to the present. It includes the struggle for independence, the Civil War in Texas, and the growth of the state into an industrialized, urbanized society.

HIST 3354 History of Britain I - To 1688 Prerequisite(s): None
This class focuses on the origins and development of the political, social, and cultural institutions in the British Isles and extends from the Roman era to 1688.

HIST 3364 History of Britain II - From 1688 Prerequisite(s): None
This class focuses on the development of the political, social, and cultural institutions in the British Isles from the Glorious Revolution to the present.

HIST 3375 Great Texts in History Prerequisite(s): None
Restriction(s): Students may repeat this course with each new concentration of focus, in consultation with their advisor and with the professor’s permission. This course introduces students to a variety of ideas, methods, and texts, and the kinds of genres and sources that compose historical studies. Emphasis is placed on the Great Books of the Western Tradition and other key historical texts that are important to the discipline.

HIST 3380 Blood & Fire: Religion, Science, and Medicine, 1000-1700 Prerequisite(s): None
This course explores the changes in natural philosophy and scientific thought in Christian Europe and the Muslim world during the medieval and early modern periods, as well as the role of religion in these changes. Particular emphasis is placed on advances in medicine and physics as well as the transition from a medieval to modern view of science.

HIST 3385 History of Medicine Prerequisite(s): None
This course introduces students to key issues and debates in the history of medicine, exploring both the continuity and change over time in the medical theory and practice. Particular texts and topics will vary based upon the instructor’s expertise and research interests.

HIST 3388 Comparative World Civilizations Prerequisite(s): None
This course focuses on major world civilizations from ancient times to the present.

HIST 3396 Early Modern Europe: 1400-1815 Prerequisites: None
This course examines the political, social, and cultural events in Europe from the Renaissance and Reformation through the Age of Napoleon.

HIST 4181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

HIST 4281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

HIST 4310 The Medieval World Prerequisite(s): None
This course examines the political, social, religious, and cultural history of Europe from the Carolingian Empire to the birth of the Renaissance. Topics include the formation of medieval states, the Crusades, and the Roman Catholic Church.

HIST 4311 Renaissance and Reformation Prerequisite(s): None
This course examines the European cultural, religious, and social transformations that occurred between 1350 and 1650-- transformations known as the Renaissance and Reformation.

HIST 4330 United States Legal History Prerequisite(s): None
This course provides an introduction to the history of American law from the Declaration of Independence in 1776 to the establishment of women's suffrage in 1920.

HIST 4340 Unborn Life in the Western Tradition and American History Prerequisite(s): None
This course explores the history of American ideas and practices regarding unborn human life within the context of the philosophical and religious traditions of the West.

HIST 4357 American Experience in Vietnam Prerequisite(s): None
A study of the American military experience in Vietnam, 1950-1975.

HIST 4373 Studies in British History Prerequisite(s): None
An advanced study of special problems or periods in British history, examined through lectures, discussions, and presentations, in one of the following periods: (a) Tudor-Stuart England, (b) Victorian Britain, (c) the British Empire,
(d) Modern Britain.

HIST 4380 The Making of Modern America Prerequisite(s): None
An advanced study of the long Progressive Era (1870-1917) as the formative stage of modern America.

HIST 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

HIST 4382 The Greek World Prerequisite(s): None
This course introduces students to the world of Ancient Greece. The goals of the course are to read the foundational texts of the Archaic, Classical, and Hellenistic periods, to place them in their historical, philosophical, and archaeological contexts, and to consider their impact on western civilization. Authors read in this class may include Homer, Aeschylus, Sophocles, Europides, Aristophanes, Plato, Aristotle, and Thucydides.

HIST 4383 Internship in History Prerequisite(s): Permission of the Instructor
Directed work experience in a variety of public and private organizations. The primary objective of this course is to provide students with opportunities to apply what they have learned in class in a career-oriented setting. Also provides students with the opportunity to attain applied research experience and develop analytic skills.

HIST 4384 The Roman World Prerequisite(s): None
This course introduces students to the world of Ancient Rome. The goals of the course are to read the foundational texts of the Republican and Imperial periods, to place them in their historical, philosophical, and archaeological contexts, to understand the interrelationship between the Greek and Roman worlds, to discuss the emergence of Christianity in its classical context, and to consider the impact of Ancient Rome on western civilization. Authors read in this class may include Vergil, Cicero, Lucretius, Horace, Plautus, Terrence, Suetonius, Tacitus, and Pliny.

HIST 4388 The American South in the Atlantic World, 1400 – 1888 Prerequisite(s): None
This course covers the American South from the pre-contact period to 1888, with an emphasis on social, cultural, and intellectual history. The course will examine the cosmopolitan character of the South in the international context of the Atlantic World.

HIST 4389 Augustine and His World Prerequisite(s): None
This course examines the life and writings of Augustine of Hippo. Special attention is given to his theological and philosophical contributions to western thought, as well as the importance of his political theories to subsequent history. The course places Augustine within his social context and examines the roles he played in the religious and political upheavals of the late Roman Empire.

HIST 4392 Independent Research Projects and Directed Readings Prerequisite(s): None
A research-intensive capstone history course involving important historical terminology, source materials, documentation formats, historiography, and investigative methodologies, with a rigorous emphasis on the analytical proficiencies and advanced writing techniques used by historians.

HIST 5199 Thesis Continuation Prerequisite(s): HIST 5399 (taken twice)
Restriction(s): Credit hours earned in this course may not be applied toward any course or credit hour requirement in the Master of Arts in History degree. This course continues research, writing and defense of a thesis project begin in HIST 5399. This course earns one credit hour and may be taken twice.

HIST 5310 Readings in European History Prerequisite(s): None
Restriction(s): This course may be taken up to three (3) times for course credit.
This course provides directed readings in selected areas of European history to introduce students to the themes, concepts, and historiographical trends in European history.

HIST 5320 Readings in American History Prerequisite(s): None
Restriction(s): This course may be taken up to three (3) times for course credit.
This course provides directed readings in selected areas of U.S. history to introduce students to the themes, concepts, and historiographical trends in U.S. history.

HIST 5330 History of Christianity Prerequisite(s): None
In this course, the student will study the history of Christianity in the ancient, medieval, and modern periods. Although the primary focus will be on the development of Western (Latin) Christianity, some consideration will be given to Byzantine (Eastern) Christendom as well as the spread of Christianity throughout the third world. In addition to the

basic content of the history of Christianity, attention will be given to the application of a critical historiography in the interpretation of events and movements.

HIST 5381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on the basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular classes are not conducted, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour of credit must be included.

HIST 5382 The Greek World Prerequisite(s): None
This course introduces students to the world of Ancient Greece. The goals of the course are to read the foundational texts of the Archaic, Classical, and Hellenistic periods, to place them in their historical, philosophical, and archaeological contexts, and to consider their impact on western civilization. Authors read in this class may include Homer, Aeschylus, Sophocles, Europides, Aristophanes, Plato, Aristotle, and Thucydides.

HIST 5383 The Roman World Prerequisite(s): None
This course introduces students to the world of Ancient Rome. The goals of the course are to read the foundational texts of the Republican and Imperial periods, to place them in their historical, philosophical, and archaeological contexts, to understand the interrelationship between the Greek and Roman worlds, to discuss the emergence of Christianity in its classical context, and to consider the impact of Ancient Rome on western civilization. Authors read in this class may include Vergil, Cicero, Lucretius, Horace, Plautus, Terrence, Suetonius, Tacitus, and Pliny.

HIST 5384 The Medieval World Prerequisite(s): None
This course introduces students to the Medieval World. The goals of the course are to read the foundational texts of the Medieval period, to place them in their historical, philosophical, and architectural contexts, to understand the relationship between the Classical Antiquity and the emergence of Christian Europe, and to consider the impact of the Medieval period on western civilization. Authors read in this class may include Boethius, Augustine, Aquinas, Dante, Bede and Chaucer.

HIST 5385 The Renaissance and Reformation Prerequisite(s): None
This course introduces students to the period of the Renaissance and Reformation. The goals of the course are to read the foundational texts of the Reformation period, to place them in their historical, philosophical, and religious contexts, to understand the relationship between the Classical Antiquity, the middle ages, and the emergence of early modern Europe, and to consider the impact of the Renaissance and Reformation on western civilization. Authors read in this class may include Luther, Calvin, Machiavelli, Erasmus, Petrarch, Shakespeare, Milton, and Donne.

HIST 5386 The Enlightenment Prerequisite(s): None
This course introduces students to the period of the Enlightenment. The goals of the course are to read the foundational texts of the Enlightenment period, to place them in their historical, philosophical, scientific and religious contexts, to understand the relationship between the Classical Antiquity, the scientific revolution, and the emergence of representative democracy, and to consider the impact of the Enlightenment on western civilization. Authors read in this class may include Locke, Hobbes, Pope, Swift, Austen, Voltaire, Rousseau and Kant.

HIST 5388 The American South in the Atlantic World, 1400-1888 Prerequisite(s): None
This course covers the American South from the pre-contact period to 1888, with an emphasis on social, cultural, and intellectual history. The course will examine the cosmopolitan character of the South in the international context of the Atlantic World.

HIST 5389 Augustine and His World Prerequisite(s): None
This course examines the life and writings of Augustine of Hippo. Special attention is given to his theological and

philosophical contributions to western thought, as well as the importance of his political theories to subsequent history. The course places Augustine within his social context and examines the roles he played in the religious and political upheavals of the late Roman Empire.

HIST 5399 Thesis Prerequisite(s): Approval of research topic by supervisor
Restriction(s): This course may be taken for up to six hours of credit toward a degree.
This course is for the research, writing, and defense of a thesis project that is supervised by a faculty member.

HIST 6310 Unborn Life in the Western Tradition and American History Prerequisite(s): None
Through a close study of great texts as well as individual scholarly research, this graduate-level course explores the history of ideas, attitudes, and practices regarding unborn life in the Western Tradition. The course pays special attention to American history as an expression of that tradition and to Christian reflection on the unborn from antiquity to the present.

HIST 6319 Revolutionary America in the Age of Enlightenment Prerequisite(s): None
This course explores the ideas and events of the American revolutionary era, 1763-1789, against the backdrop of the Enlightenment.

HIST 6360 Philosophy of History Prerequisite(s): None
This course explores topics in both substantive and critical philosophy of history. These topics may include the nature of historical explanation and narrative, the relation of history to other disciplines, and the way in which scholars have viewed historical progress. Of interest will be the way in which the Philosophy of History can inform our theological beliefs, and in particular, our understanding of the life of Christ.


Honors College (HNRS) Course Descriptions

HNRS 1020 Honors Writing I Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Honors College
Corequisite(s): Concurrent enrollment in HNRS 1710 and HNRS 1030
A course designed to teach the writing and rhetorical skills needed to complement HNRS 1710.

HNRS 1030 Honors Lecture I Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Honors College Corequisite(s): HNRS 1710 or HNRS 1610 or HNRS 1310
A lecture course designed to complement HNRS 1710, 1610, or 1310 by providing information on the texts and authors that students examine in HNRS 1710, 1610, or 1310.

HNRS 1050 Honors Writing II Prerequisite(s): HNRS 1710
Corequisite(s): Concurrent enrollment in HNRS 1740 and HNRS 1060
A course designed to teach the writing and rhetorical skills needed to complement HNRS 1740.

HNRS 1060 Honors Lecture II Prerequisite(s): HNRS 1710 or HNRS 1610 or HNRS 1310
Corequisite(s): HNRS 1740 or HNRS 1640
A lecture course designed to complement HNRS 1740 or 1640 by providing information on the texts and authors that students examine in HNRS 1740 or 1640.

HNRS 1099 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None

Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. A laboratory may or may not be included.

HNRS 1310 Walking to Piraeus: The Ancient Greek World Prerequisite(s): (HNRS 1323 OR ENGL 1323) AND majoring in COSC or CYEN or ELEN or IS Corequisite(s): HNRS 1030
This course will explore the human intellectual tradition during the Classical Age. Students will examine themes that underscore human experience during a particular historical period from various academic perspectives. The themes may be chosen from leadership, war, race, ethics, globalization and community. Students will gain a critical understanding of the literary, philosophical, historical, theological, and socio-cultural traditions that shape our world.

HNRS 1313 Honors Composition I Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Honors College AND majoring in COSC or CYEN or ELEN or IS
An introduction to the principles of composition and rhetoric accomplished through the writing of expository essays and through the study both of the principles of composition and of essays which employ specific rhetorical strategies. Students complete a research paper.

HNRS 1323 Honors Composition II Prerequisite(s): HNRS 1313
An introduction to the principles of composition and rhetoric accomplished through the writing of expository essays and through the study both of the principles of composition and of essays which employ specific rhetorical strategies. HNRS 1323 is a continuation of the study of composition and rhetoric introduced in HNRS 1313. HNRS 1323 concentrates on the writing of expository, argumentative, and researched essays through the study of the principles of composition, of research, and of literary analysis. Students complete a research paper.

HNRS 1399 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. A laboratory may or may not be included.

HNRS 1610 Walking to Piraeus: The Ancient Greek World Prerequisite(s): (HNRS 1323 OR ENGL 1323) AND majoring in COSC or CYEN or ELEN or IS Corequisite(s): HNRS 1030
This course will explore the human intellectual tradition during the Classical Age. Students will examine themes that underscore human experience during a particular historical period from various academic perspectives. The themes may be chosen from leadership, war, race, ethics, globalization and community. Students will gain a critical understanding of the literary, philosophical, historical, theological, and socio-cultural traditions that shape our world.

HNRS 1640 All Roads Lead to Rome: The Ancient Roman & Early Christian Worlds Prerequisite(s): HNRS 1310 OR HNRS 1610
Corequisite(s): HNRS 1060
This course will explore the human intellectual tradition during the classical Roman period and the period of the early Christian church. Students will examine themes that underscore human experience during a particular historical period from various academic perspectives. The themes may be chosen from leadership, war, race, ethics, globalization, and community. Students will gain a critical understanding of the literary, philosophical, historical, theological, and socio- cultural traditions that shape our world.

HNRS 1699 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. A laboratory may or may not be included.

HNRS 1710 Walking to Piraeus: The Ancient Greek World Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Honors College
Corequisite(s): Concurrent enrollment in HNRS 1020 and HNRS 1030

This course will explore the human intellectual tradition during the Classical Age. Students will examine themes that underscore human experience during a particular historical period from various academic perspectives. The themes may be chosen from leadership, war, race, ethics, globalization and community. Students will gain a critical understanding of the literary, philosophical, historical, theological, and socio-cultural traditions that shape our world. (Also offered as ENGL 2710)

HNRS 1740 All Roads Lead to Rome: The Ancient Roman & Early Christian Worlds Prerequisite(s): HNRS 1710
Corequisites(s): Concurrent enrollment in HNRS 1050 and HNRS 1060
This course will explore the human intellectual tradition during the classical Roman period and the period of the early Christian church. Students will examine themes that underscore human experience during a particular historical period from various academic perspectives. The themes may be chosen from leadership, war, race, ethics, globalization, and community. Students will gain a critical understanding of the literary, philosophical, historical, theological, and socio- cultural traditions that shape our world.

HNRS 2020 Honors Writing III Prerequisite(s): HNRS 1740
Corequisite(s): Concurrent enrollment in HNRS 2710 and HNRS 2030
A course designed to teach the writing and rhetorical skills needed to complement HNRS 2710.

HNRS 2030 Honors Lecture III Prerequisite(s): HNRS 1740 or HNRS 1640
Corequisite(s): Concurrent enrollment in HNRS 2610 OR HNRS 2311 OR (HNRS 2020 AND HNRS 2710)
A lecture course designed to complement HNRS 2710, 2610, or 2311 by providing information on the texts and authors that students examine in HNRS 2710, 2610, or 2311.

HNRS 2050 Honors Writing IV Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Honors College and HNRS 2710 Corequisite(s): Concurrent enrollment in HNRS 2740 and HNRS 2060
A course designed to teach the writing and rhetorical skills needed to complement HNRS 2740.

HNRS 2060 Honors Lecture IV Prerequisite(s): HNRS 2311 OR HNRS 2610 OR HNRS 2710
Corequisite(s): HRNS 2640 OR (HNRS 2050 AND HNRS 2740)
A lecture course designed to complement HNRS 2740 or 2640 by providing information on the texts and authors that students examine in HNRS 2740 or 2640.

HNRS 2099 Special Topics: Honors Laboratory Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

HNRS 2311 Faith, Reason & Romance: The Medieval & Renaissance Worlds Prerequisite(s): HNRS 1640
Corequisite(s): HNRS 2030
This course will explore the human intellectual tradition during the Medieval and Renaissance periods. Students will examine themes that underscore human experience during a particular historical period from various academic perspectives. The themes may be chosen from leadership, war, race, ethics, globalization and community. Students will gain a critical understanding of the literary, philosophical, historical, theological, and socio-cultural traditions that shape our world.

HNRS 2610 Faith, Reason & Romance: The Medieval & Renaissance Worlds Prerequisite(s): HNRS 1640
Corequisite(s): HNRS 2030
This course will explore the human intellectual tradition during the Medieval and Renaissance periods. Students will examine themes that underscore human experience during a particular historical period from various academic

perspectives. The themes may be chosen from leadership, war, race, ethics, globalization and community. Students will gain a critical understanding of the literary, philosophical, historical, theological, and socio-cultural traditions that shape our world.

HNRS 2640 Enlightenment & Modernity: 1600–1900 Prerequisite(s): HNRS 2610 or HNRS 2311
Corequisite(s): HNRS 2060
This course will explore the human intellectual tradition during the Enlightenment and Modern periods. Students will examine themes that underscore human experience during a particular historical period from various academic perspectives. The themes may be chosen from leadership, war, race, ethics, globalization and community. Students will gain a critical understanding of the literary, philosophical, historical, theological, and socio-cultural traditions that shape our world.

HNRS 2699 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

HNRS 2710 Faith, Reason & Romance: The Medieval & Renaissance Worlds Prerequisite(s): HNRS 1740
Corequisite(s): Concurrent enrollment in HNRS 2020 and HNRS 2030
This course will explore the human intellectual tradition during the medieval and Renaissance periods. Students will examine themes that underscore human experience during a particular historical period from various academic perspectives. The themes may be chosen from leadership, war, race, ethics, globalization and community. Students will gain a critical understanding of the literary, philosophical, historical, theological, and socio-cultural traditions that shape our world. (Also offered as ENGL 2720)

HNRS 2740 Enlightenment & Modernity: 1600-1800 Prerequisite(s): HNRS 2710
Corequisite(s): Concurrent enrollment in HNRS 2050 and HNRS 2060
This course will explore the human intellectual tradition during the Enlightenment and Modern periods. Students will examine themes that underscore human experience during a particular period from various academic perspectives. The themes may be chosen from leadership, war, race, ethics, globalization and community. Students will gain a critical understanding of the literary, philosophical, historical, theological, and socio-cultural traditions that shape our world.

HNRS 2799 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

HNRS 3020 Honors Writing V Prerequisite(s): HNRS 2740
Corequisite(s): Concurrent enrollment in HNRS 3710 and HNRS 3030
A course designed to teach the writing and rhetorical skills needed to complement HNRS 3710.

HNRS 3030 Honors Lecture V Prerequisite(s): HNRS 2640 or HNRS 2740
Corequisite(s): HNRS 3710 or HNRS 3610
A lecture course designed to complement HNRS 3710 or 3610 by providing information on the texts and authors that students examine in HNRS 3710 or 3610.

HNRS 3050 Honors Writing VI Prerequisite(s): HNRS 3710
Corequisite(s): Concurrent enrollment in HNRS 3740 and HNRS 3060
A course designed to teach the writing and rhetorical skills needed to complement HNRS 3740.

HNRS 3060 Honors Lecture VI Prerequisite(s): HNRS 3710 or HNRS 3610
Corequisites: Concurrent enrollment in HNRS 3740 or 3640
A lecture course designed to complement HNRS 3740 or 3640 by providing information on the texts and authors that students examine in HNRS 3740 or 3640.

HNRS 3099 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisites: Admission to the Honors College; permission of the instructor Restriction(s): May be repeated for credit only if the research topic differs. Independent study on a research topic directed by a faculty member.

HNRS 3130 Honors Science Readings Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Honors College
This course is a reading course to complement the texts studied throughout the Honors College curriculum that address themes in the history of science. Students read texts in the history of science in order to understand the development of the scientific method.

HNRS 3135 Honors Laboratory Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Honors College
This course is a laboratory course to supplement the texts studied throughout the Honors College curriculum that address themes in the history of science. Students recreate important experiments in the history of science in order to understand the development of the scientific method.

HNRS 3199 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Honors College and permission of the Honors College director
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

HNRS 3299 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Honors College and permission of the Honors College director
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

HNRS 3300 Honors College Study Abroad Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Honors College, HNRS 1710, or permission of the Honors College Director
This course will explore the human intellectual and artistic traditions of specific regions of the world. Students will examine themes that underscore human experience in a specific region from various academic perspectives. Students will gain a critical understanding of the artistic, literary, philosophical, historical, theological, and socio-cultural traditions that shape our world. Travel to the region of study will be a significant part of the course. The course may be repeated as course content differs.
HNRS 3399 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Honors College and permission of the Honors College director
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

HNRS 3610 The Last Two Hundred Years: 1800 to the Present Prerequisite(s): HNRS 2640
Corequisite(s): HNRS 3030
This course will explore the human intellectual tradition during the last two hundred years. Students will examine themes that underscore human experience during a particular historical period from various academic perspectives. The themes may be chosen from leadership, war, race, ethics, globalization and community. Students will gain a critical understanding of the literary, philosophical, historical, theological, and socio-cultural traditions that shape our world.

HNRS 3640 The Story of Scripture: The Biblical Narrative from Genesis to Revelation Prerequisite(s): HNRS 3610
Corequisite(s): HNRS 3060
This course will explore the biblical narrative from the beginning of the Old Testament to the end of the New Testament. Students will examine themes that underscore human experience recorded in the biblical text from various academic perspectives. The themes may be chosen from leadership, war, race, ethics, globalization and community. Students will gain a critical understanding of the literary, philosophical, historical, theological, and socio-cultural traditions that shape our world.

HNRS 3710 The Last Two Hundred Years: 1800 to the Present Prerequisite(s): HNRS 2740
Corequisite(s): Concurrent enrollment in HNRS 3020 and HNRS 3030
This course will explore the human intellectual tradition during the last one hundred years. Students will examine themes that underscore human experience during a particular historical period from various academic perspectives. The themes may be chosen from leadership, war, race, ethics, globalization, community, and science. Students will gain a critical understanding of the literary, philosophical, historical, theological, and socio-cultural traditions that shape our world.

HNRS 3740 The Story of Scripture: The Biblical Narrative from Genesis to Revelation Prerequisite(s): HNRS 3710
Corequisite(s): Concurrent enrollment in HNRS 3050 and HNRS 3060
This course will explore the biblical narrative from the beginning of the Old Testament to the end of the New Testament. Students will examine themes that underscore human experience recorded in the biblical text. The themes may be chosen from leadership, war, race, ethics, globalization, and community. Students will gain a critical understanding of the literary, philosophical, historical, theological, and socio-cultural traditions that shape our world.

HNRS 3781 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

HNRS 3799 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

HNRS 4310 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): HNRS 3740 or permission of the instructor
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

HNRS 4320 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): HNRS 3740 or permission of the instructor
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

HNRS 4330 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): HNRS 3740 or permission of the instructor
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

HNRS 4340 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): HNRS 3740 or permission of the instructor
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

HNRS 4398 Senior Thesis Prerequisite(s): HNRS 3740 and permission of the Honors College director
The Senior Thesis is a capstone learning experience in the Honors College. The thesis must be on an original topic, involve significant research and writing, and be defended orally upon its completion. A faculty advisor shall direct the research and writing project.

HNRS 4399 Senior Thesis Prerequisite(s): HNRS 3740 and permission of the Honors College director
The Senior Thesis is a capstone learning experience in the Honors College. The thesis must be on an original topic, involve significant research and writing, and be defended orally upon its completion. A faculty advisor shall direct the research and writing project.


Honors Program (HONR) Course Descriptions

HONR 4399 Senior Honors Thesis Prerequisite(s): An approved prospectus
The Senior Honors Thesis is the capstone learning experience in the departmental honors program. The thesis must be at least 35 pages in length, include a one-page abstract, be on an original topic, involve significant research, and must be defended orally upon its completion. A faculty thesis advisor shall direct the research and writing project.


Human Services (HSRV) Course Descriptions

HSRV 7301 Mental Health and Communities Prerequisites(s): None
Mental Health and Communities provides a foundation for understanding the complexities of community mental health services and the acquisition of related resources to minimize disparities in the field. The roles of social, political, and economic factors in the development of community care will be discussed within the established historical context. Topics include multicultural considerations, approaches to prevention and intervention, application of systems theories, disparities in service utilization, historical underpinnings, recovery, community mental health challenges, special populations, access across the lifespan, best practices, social trends, policy issues, and vision for future directions.

HSRV 7302 Program Planning and Consultation in Mental Health Prerequisite(s): None
This course provides an overview of the program planning process and consultation services, administration, and program evaluation procedures for various agencies, hospitals, schools, churches, and related entities. Students will acquire skills in identifying and implementing effective facilitation approaches, negotiation, and advocacy action plans.

HSRV 7303 Policies, Economics, and Services in Mental Health Prerequisite(s): None
In this course students will analyze major policy issues and the economic impact on communities as it relates to mental health issues. Students will explore the access to mental health treatment and utilization patterns and use economic theory to predict changes in access and how they influence the design and implementation of mental health services and policies.

HSRV 7304 Multicultural Issues in Mental Health Prerequisite(s): None
This course is designed to examine the advanced scope of multicultural issues in mental health and communities. It explores the systemic and community perspectives relevant to multicultural, diversity, and social justice issues and the role of racial, ethnic, and cultural heritage, nationality, socioeconomic status, family structure, age, gender, religious, and spiritual beliefs, occupation, physical, and mental status, local, regional, national, international perspective, and issues of equity such as oppression, under represented, power, and privilege.

HSRV 7305 Community Mental Health Administration and Law Prerequisite(s): None
In this course students will discuss current trends, technology, and opportunities related to mental health management. This course will include topics such as mental health business and management, budget models, ethical business and marketing practices, billing, insurance, integrated behavioral healthcare models, Medicaid, Medicare, and HIPPA and FERPA compliances.

HSRV 7306 Trauma and Community Crisis Prerequisite(s): None
This course examines the nature and effects of crisis, trauma, and natural disasters on or within communities. Exploring and developing strategies and training to work with situational crisis and epidemics that affect schools, faith institutions, emergency care facilities, and communities at large. This course will examine human service delivery systems and guidelines for attending to the emotional and mental health needs of both disaster survivors and responders as well as counseling responses and interactions with national, religious, and governmental relief agencies such as FEMA and The American Red Cross.

HSRV 7381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.


Humanities (HUM) Course Descriptions

HUM 3310 Technical Communication Prerequisite(s): COMM 1323 or CLAS 1343
This course is designed to help students develop advanced skills for producing accessible and effective medical, scientific, and technical written documents and oral presentations. Focusing on audience analysis, the students will apply good writing and speaking principles to the professional work common in different organizations.

HUM 3320 Introduction to Bioethics Prerequisite(s): None
This course surveys the most pressing ethical issues that are emerging in the field of biomedical research and medical care. It includes ethical theory training from which consistent principled medical decisions can be made. Although the course provides insights from different ethical theories, it will be taught from a Christ-centered ethic.

HUM 3360 Medical Humanities Prerequisite(s): None
A course designed to introduce students to medical humanities. The course is an interdisciplinary approach to looking at medical ethics and culture that will focus on the humanities and especially philosophy. Subjects to be covered may include the concept of personhood at the beginning and end of life, the arts and medicine, the historical development of medicine, theology of medicine, and the philosophy of science and medicine.

HUM 3370 Health and the Law Prerequisite(s): None
This course introduces students to the essential legal issues within the healthcare industry and the medical field, including negligence, liability, and malpractice.

HUM 5301 The Trivium in the Western Tradition Prerequisite(s): None
Course Equivalency: MLA 5301
This course explores the historical and practical importance of the Trivium as a fundamental part of teaching and learning. It incorporates the basic elements of the Western tradition and the liberal arts, focusing them around the disciplines of grammar, logic, and rhetoric.

HUM 5330 Cloak and Dagger – Spies in Fiction and Film Prerequisite(s): None
Course Equivalency: MLA 5330
Spies appear in some of humankind’s oldest stories; in modern culture, the spy is viewed as both hero and antihero. The moral and political ambiguities of espionage fiction are considered parables of the moral dilemmas of modern humankind.

HUM 5332 Old South: History & Literature Prerequisite(s): None
Course Equivalency: MLA 5332
This course covers the Old South (American South) from the pre-contact period to the beginning of the Civil War, with an emphasis on social, cultural, and intellectual history and on literature. The course will focus particularly on eastern Texas and on the Gulf South as a distinctive region of the South.

HUM 5354 Law & Lawyers in Literature, Film, and Video Prerequisite(s): None
Course Equivalency: MLA 5354
A study of the ways in which lawyers have been viewed in literature, cinema, and television.

HUM 5360 Mythology in Literature and Arts Prerequisite(s): None
Course Equivalency: MLA 5360
This course provides an overview of the major myths, the archetypes based on those myths, and their use in literature and the arts. It emphasizes the Greco-Roman, Norse, and Celtic myths, but also covers other mythologies. Coverage will include major stories from the Old and New Testaments.

HUM 5381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Course Equivalency: MLA 5381
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

HUM 5390 Western Culture and Human Experience I Prerequisite(s): None
Course Equivalency: MLA 5390
This course is a core component of the MLA program and offers a broad overview of history, politics, art, and philosophy. HUM 5390 will cover the years from the time of classical Greece through the medieval period; HUM 5391 will cover the Renaissance, Reformation, and Early Modern period; HUM 5392 will cover from the French revolution through Modern times.

HUM 5391 Western Culture and Human Experience II Prerequisite(s): None
Course Equivalency: MLA 5391
This course is a core component of the MLA program and offers a broad overview of history, politics, art, and philosophy. HUM 5390 will cover the years from the time of classical Greece through the medieval period; HUM 5391 will cover the Renaissance, Reformation, and Early Modern period; HUM 5392 will cover from the French revolution through Modern times.

HUM 5392 Western Culture and Human Experience III Prerequisite(s): None
Course Equivalency: MLA 5392
This course is a core component of the MLA program and offers a broad overview of history, politics, art, and philosophy. HUM 5390 will cover the years from the time of classical Greece through the medieval period; HUM 5391 will cover the Renaissance, Reformation, and Early Modern period; HUM 5392 will cover from the French revolution through Modern times.

HUM 5393 The Grandeur That Was Rome Prerequisite(s): None
Through a vigorous dialogue with the Aeneid, the Metamorphoses, and The Divine Comedy, supplemented by lectures on ancient Roman and medieval history, religion, philosophy, and culture, students will enter in to the Great Conversation of the key Roman poets. The class will center on the perennial questions of life and will seek to gain true wisdom and virtue from a direct wrestling with those questions. Although Virgil and Ovid’s epics will be assessed in terms of their own culture, they will also be studied as pre-Christian works that point ahead to the fuller revelation of Christ and the Bible and that find their culmination in Dante’s fusion of Athens and Jerusalem.

HUM 5394 The Glory That Was Greece Prerequisite(s): None
Through a vigorous dialogue with the Iliad, the Odyssey, and the tragedies of Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides, supplemented by lectures on ancient Greek history, religion, philosophy, and culture, students will enter in to the Great Conversation that begins with the ancient Greeks. The class will center on the perennial questions of life and will seek to gain true wisdom and virtue from a direct wrestling with those questions. Although the works will be studied in terms of their own culture, they will also be studied as pre-Christian works that point ahead to the fuller revelation of Christ and the Bible.

HUM 6344 American Popular Culture Prerequisite(s): None
Course Equivalency: MLA 6344
A study of the development and impact of the mass media and society with an emphasis on the 20th century. Materials to be studied include dime novels, pulp magazines, comic books, and paperback books as well as their relationships to other mass media, particularly radio, television, and motion pictures. Other aspects include the production, marketing and distribution of popular culture as well as the sociological and psychological implications.

HUM 6346 King Arthur in History and the Arts Prerequisite(s): None
Course Equivalency: MLA 6346
This course examines the major literary, musical, and artistic works inspired by the legends of King Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table. The course will cover the historical roots of the legends, their use by major historians, and their influence on European and English literature.

HUM 6381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Course Equivalency: MLA 6381
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

HUM 6397 Shakespeare: History and Film Prerequisite(s): None
Course Equivalency: MLA 6397
The purpose of this course is to introduce students to William Shakespeare’s plays about the Wars of the Roses, to examine those plays in the contexts of Shakespeare’s era and our own, to analyze his use and misuse of his sources for dramatic and political purposes, and to study the major modern cinematic and televised adaptations of the plays.


Interdisciplinary Courses (INDC) Course Descriptions

INDC 2333 American Heritage Destinations Prerequisite(s): None
Restriction(s): Only offered during the May Fast Term.
This course explores various historical and cultural aspects of the nation's heritage in three specific locations: Boston, Philadelphia, and Washington D.C. The first week of the course will be spent in preparation for an academically oriented field trip during the second week. Students may repeat this course for each NEW destination.

INDC 3310 Essential Elements of Art Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Educator Preparation Program
This course adds a concentrated focus on art education to an overview of fine arts history and education (including art, music and theatre). It explores the philosophy of preschool and elementary pedagogy based upon Discipline-based Art Education (DBAE) and Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills standards. Practical applications for integrating the arts into a cross- curriculum program are emphasized.

INDC 3315 Cultural Craft for the Pre-Adolescent Student Prerequisite(s): Admission to the HCU Educator Preparation Program
This course combines a basic multicultural study of classical and traditional craft and creative problems in three- dimensional media for teaching in the pre-adolescent (EC-6) classroom.

INDC 3316 Cultural Craft for the Adolescent Student Prerequisite(s): Admission to the HCU Educator Preparation Program
This course encourages expanded multicultural appreciation of classical and traditional craft and includes practical experience and preparation for teaching a variety of fiber arts, printmaking, bookbinding, mosaic and three- dimensional design in the adolescent (6-8 and 9-12) classroom.

INDC 3320 Essential Elements of Music Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Educator Preparation Program
This course adds a concentrated focus on music education to an overview of fine arts history and education (including art, music and theatre). It includes a study of the child voice, rote singing, development of rhythmic and melodic expression, directed listening, and music reading readiness. Basic materials including song text are studied, and simple percussion and melodic instruments are used in creative activities.

INDC 3381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

INDC 4100 Humanities Capstone Experience Prerequisite(s): None
This course is a one-hour classroom and field-based learning experience constructed around student preparation for the next steps after graduation. Students will learn about effective communication, constructing essential documents, impression management during important social occasions, and how to present a best self during interviews and similar professional interactions. Included in the curriculum will be seminars with business and academic leaders who will be able to provide guidance and coaching. At the end of the capstone course, students will be better prepared professionally, socially, and spiritually to enter the next stage of their life.

INDC 4160 Wellness and Fitness for Children Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Educator Preparation Program
This course prepares students to effectively teach health and P.E. in grades PK-6. In addition to PK-6 health content and methodology, it includes exploration of developmentally appropriate movement education methods for PK through grade 6 as well as ways to use movement activities to help children learn academic content areas other than health and P.E. (such as math, science, social studies and language arts).

INDC 4181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

INDC 4281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

INDC 4302 Multimedia Instructional Strategies Prerequisite(s): None
This course is designed to develop skills necessary for today’s educators in the development and integration of multimedia projects into their curriculum and to explore trends and issues in the use of multimedia tools for communication and instruction.

INDC 4319 Internet Resource Management Prerequisite(s): None
Internet Resource Management is designed to allow participants to experience appropriate uses of technology as a learner, and thus better use technology in teaching and learning. The goal of this course is to provide a combination of hands-on and student-centered experiences that will assist in the management of Internet resources. These experiences will enable participants to search for information, share information, generate materials, and evaluate web- based instructional materials. Instructional strategies will focus on the acquisition, analysis, and synthesis of Internet resources that address appropriate educational needs.

INDC 4340 Social Studies for Pre-Adolescents Prerequisite(s): EDUC 4301
Restriction(s): Field-based experiences and technology applications are required.
This course provides an exploration of social studies content and skills as well as teaching/learning materials and strategies for developing content and skills at preschool through grade 6 levels. Essential knowledge and skills are emphasized.

INDC 4350 Essential Elements of Science Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Educator Preparation Program and (EDUC 4301 or EDUC 4311) Restriction(s): Technology applications are required.
This course provides an exploration of science content and skills, as well as teaching/learning materials and strategies for helping preschool through grade six students learn science. It includes an overview of the Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills (TEKS) for science at these grade levels and exploration of discipline specific pedagogy and reading strategies.

INDC 4360 Essential Elements of Math Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Educator Preparation Program and (EDUC 4301 or EDUC 4311) and MATH 2302and MATH 2303
Restriction(s): Fieldwork in which students teach mathematics in an elementary or middle school is required.
This math methods course prepares prospective elementary and middle school teachers with knowledge of methods and materials needed to teach math effectively. EC-6 math content is briefly reviewed as students explore research validated ways to develop children’s problem solving and reasoning abilities as well as their understanding and use of whole numbers, decimals and fractions. Active learning using models and inquiry is emphasized.

INDC 4380 Essential Elements of Social Studies Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Educator Preparation Program and (EDUC 4301 or EDUC 4311)
This course is an introduction to theories, pedagogical considerations and current methodology, including technology integration, in the teaching of social studies to elementary age children. Students gain experience in applying this knowledge through instructional design projects and simulated teaching experiences. The course includes an overview of PK-8 social studies content including Texas history and world geography and an exploration of discipline specific reading strategies.

INDC 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

INDC 4385 Essential Elements of Fine Arts Prerequisite(s): None

This course explores EC-6 fine arts content and methodology. It includes development of knowledge, skills and dispositions identified in the art, music and theatre Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills (TEKS) as well as ways to integrate fine arts into learning in other content areas.

INDC 4390 Advanced Elements of Social Studies Prerequisite(s): Admission to the Educator Preparation Program and (EDUC 4301 or EDUC 4311)
This course provides an exploration of social studies content and skills. Social studies content will include World History, Geography, and Texas History. The course will introduce students to teaching/learning materials and strategies for developing concepts and skills for middle to high school students. Integration of technology and interactive learning are integral aspects of this course.

INDC 6330 Global Political Economy Prerequisite(s): None
Restriction(s): Graduate Business programs only.
This course examines the interaction of politics and the economy at the global level. In particular, it evaluates how political and economic decisions of one country or groups of countries affect institutions and life circumstances in others and assesses the causes and consequences of globalization as rooted in political economy. Key topics include major conceptual frameworks for understanding the linkages between international politics and international economics, international monetary and financial relations, international trade, foreign investment and multinational enterprises, key international economic institutions such as the International Monetary Fund, World Trade Organization, and World Bank, the rise of the BRIC economics and the shift of global balance, and global economic governance.

INDC 6332 International Organizations Prerequisite(s): None
Restriction(s): Graduate Business programs only.
As global corporations span national boundaries, they must interact with a large number of international organizations. This course examines the major international institutions that deal with crime, diplomacy, grade, finance, the environment, and human rights, and how these institutions both facilitate and constrain the activities of global corporations. Examples of such organizations are the United Nations, the World Bank and IMF, the World Trade Organization, the World Court, and others. This course deals with a wide variety of issues, including, but not limited to: theoretical frameworks of international organizations; the historical evolution of international organizations; the structure and governance of international organizations; classification of international organizations; and the functions and roles of individual international organizations.


Information Systems (IS) Course Descriptions

IS 3341 Information Technology Infrastructure Prerequisite(s): COSC 1352
Hardware, software, networks, and other physical resources required to develop, test, deliver, monitor, control or support IT services; cloud-based IT assets.

IS 4311 Project Management Prerequisite(s): Senior Standing or consent of instructor
Information technology project planning, resource organization and controlling, overview of software engineering principles, principles of software management, planning, risk management and software cost estimation. Topics include defining the project, estimating schedules and costs, developing a plan, and managing risks. Students will gain working knowledge of current widely used project management methodologies and gain hands-on experience by working through real world case studies.

IS 4341: Data and Information Management Prerequisite(s): IS 3341 or consent of instructor
This course provides an introduction to the core concepts in data and information management. Topics may include coverage of basic database administration tasks and key concepts of data quality and data security. Building on the

transactional database understanding, the course provides an introduction to data and information management technologies that provide decision support capabilities under the broad business intelligence umbrella.

IS 4342: Cyber Human Systems Prerequisite(s): COSC 3342
An interdisciplinary topic that requires the understanding of human interaction with computer systems as well as computer security and privacy. Topics may include human-computer-device interfaces, cloud and distributed computing, database development and management, and information assurance as well as the NIST Cybersecurity Framework standards, guidelines and best practices to manage cybersecurity risk. Impact of AI and machine learning.


Kinesiology (KINE) Course Descriptions
KINE 1310 Basic Health Assessment and Terminology Prerequisite(s): None
This course is a study of the basic structure of medical terms, including prefixes, suffixes, roots, and general rules and guidelines. Emphasis is placed on pronunciation, spelling, and application of general rules for translation and composition of medical terms. Commonly used medical terms are presented for each body system. This course also provides the basic knowledge and skills necessary to obtain a detailed health assessment of individuals across the age continuum. Emphasis is placed on obtaining a systematic health history and physical exam using the techniques of inspection, palpation, percussion, and auscultation.

KINE 1381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

KINE 2202 Creating a Wellness Lifestyle Prerequisite(s): None
Restriction(s): Required for all baccalaureate degrees.
Provides information regarding the components of physical fitness: cardiorespiratory endurance, muscular strength and endurance, flexibility, and body composition. In addition, nutrition, disease control, stress management, proper diet and exercise procedures are emphasized. Pre-selected physical activities will be conducted during many of the class sessions to allow the application of principles taught in the lecture sessions. Students are expected to design and implement a wellness plan during the class.

KINE 2310 Foundations of Kinesiology Prerequisite(s): Kinesiology major or minor
Students will study the various areas of kinesiology and will learn basic information concerning each discipline studied. Students will also study the history and philosophy of kinesiology, and will develop their own philosophy or goals regarding the kinesiology field. Field trips, guest speakers, class projects, and lectures are utilized to highlight the different fields such as exercise science, teaching, coaching, sports psychology and sociology, and sports media.

KINE 2334 Tests and Measurements in Kinesiology Prerequisite(s): None
Introductory course in the area of measurement and evaluation in kinesiology. Fundamental statistics and practical experiences of administering and taking physical education skills tests are included. Students also learn how to construct knowledge tests.

KINE 2335 Sports and Fitness Activities Prerequisite(s): None
Methods and materials are provided in the areas of teaching team and individual activities to elementary and secondary students, church recreation programs, or summer recreation programs. A variety of activities will be presented such as archery, golf, horseshoes, table tennis, bowling, pickleball, and badminton to name a few. Students will also be

required to develop an activity and teach it to the class as well as take tests, and learn the rules of the sport activities that are taught.

KINE 2336 Strategies and Principles of Coaching Prerequisite(s): None
An overview of strategies and principles involved in coaching are emphasized. In addition, organization and administration of practices and games is discussed. The student will learn to develop drills and teach students in the proper developmental sequences appropriate for both junior and senior high school age students.

KINE 2340 Health Psychology Prerequisite(s): None
Health Psychology is an introductory course dealing with the major content areas of health psychology. Topics include an overview of the field of health psychology, major body systems, important theoretical models for explaining, promoting, and changing health behaviors, moderators for stress and coping, and an introduction to health services including patient provider relations. The psychosocial aspects of pain, coronary heart disease, hypertension, stroke, diabetes, and other chronic health conditions will be introduced. (Offered also as PSYC 2340.)

KINE 3301 Prevention and Treatment of Sports Injuries Prerequisite(s): Completion of or concurrent enrollment in KINE 2310
Basic instruction in the prevention, care, and evaluation of athletic injuries through lectures, discussions, and laboratories, for the future trainer, coach, or physical education instructor.

KINE 3305 Nutrition for Health Prerequisite(s): Kinesiology Major and BIOL 2404
A course designed to study foods and their effects upon health, development, and performance of the individual. The student will be introduced to concepts of nutrition for optimal health, sports nutrition, and basic essential nutrient dietary needs.

KINE 3310 Exercise Prescription Prerequisite(s): KINE 2310 and KINE 3393 and BIOL 2404 with grade C or better
An upper level required class designed to teach students how to use the concepts of periodization in order to develop training plans for athletes of various skill levels. Planning will include assessing fitness levels using field and laboratory tests and equipment, creating training objectives, and organizing training schedules throughout a training year.

KINE 3342 Wellness for Special Populations Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2404
Course material will cover anatomical and physiological differences of special populations, including but not limited to children, pregnant, elderly, and obese populations. Students will learn to prescribe healthy nutrition and exercise programs for special populations based on national standards and recommendations.

KINE 3345 Foundations of Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation Prerequisite(s): KINE 3301 and BIOL 2404
This course will introduce students to the history of physical therapy (PT) and the various roles and settings where PT’s serve within the health care system. Learners will develop competency in the understanding of the practical and clinical reasoning skills required to successfully rehabilitate injured athletes. Students will understand exercise techniques, biomechanics, and specific rehabilitative programs to excel in designing and implementing rehab programs. An understanding of the concepts of range of motion, strength, power, endurance, and return to activity will be obtained in this course.

KINE 3360 Administration in Sports and Kinesiology Prerequisite(s): KINE 2310
Students will learn leadership, management, communication, and motivation skills necessary for dealing with sports and kinesiology programs. In addition, the course will cover human resource issues, public relation opportunities, how to develop partnerships and market wellness and sport programs. Other areas also covered are risk management, facility management, finances, transportation, and law issues.

KINE 3365 Practical ECG Interpretation Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2404
This course examines the anatomy and function of the heart and the role of electrocardiogram testing for measuring and quantifying heart health.

KINE 3370 Fieldwork in Sports Administration Prerequisite(s): KINE 3360
This internship course provides students with real world experience in the area of sport management. Students are placed based on internship site availability.

KINE 3381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): KINE 2310
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

KINE 3393 Physiology of Exercise Prerequisite(s): KINE 2310 and BIOL 2404 with grade C or better
A course concerning human physiology and its relationship to exercise. All in the body are studied with regard to how each system reacts and adapts to the stress of exercise.

KINE 3395 Kinesiology/Applied Biomechanics Prerequisite(s): KINE 2310 and KINE 3393 and BIOL 2404
Muscles of the human body and their functions in relation to movement will be studied. Simple examples and analyses of human motion will be studied in an effort to acquaint the student with the reasons for teaching specific sport movements.

KINE 3398 Foundations of Health Instruction Prerequisite(s): KINE 2310
The class emphasizes the dimensions of wellness and how to teach school age children (K-12) and or adults. Areas that will be covered involve the health components (cardiorespiratory endurance, muscular strength and endurance, flexibility and body composition), proper hygiene, sex education, disease prevention, drug use prevention, mental health stability, environmental health management, and stress management. In addition to learning details about the health components, students will learn how to teach, develop, and present health lessons to a class of students of individual with whom a student is developing a wellness program.

KINE 4181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): KINE 2310
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

KINE 4323 Motor Learning Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2404 and KINE 2310 and KINE 3393
A course structured around the basics of human movement and motor performance. Subject matter includes perceptual- motor foundations of physical education with emphasis on the state of the performer and his ability to learn motor skills.

KINE 4328 Wellness and Fitness in EC-12 Schools Prerequisite(s): KINE 2310
This course is designed to introduce the kinesiology major to practical concepts and programs that are presently being taught in elementary, junior high, and secondary physical education programs. The course includes information on daily and unit lesson plan preparation, class organization, classroom management, and field experience. A big part of this class is devoted to what is going on in the schools, as well as what is effective and valuable in a modern physical education curriculum. (12-hour practicum included)

KINE 4341 Kinesiology Internship Prerequisite(s): KINE 2310 and (BIOL 2404 with a grade of ‘C’ or better) and completion of 22 hours of KINE courses excluding activity courses and senior standing
A field experience in kinesiology involving supervised experiences working in either an on-campus or off-campus setting that must be approved by the Department of Kinesiology. Students will be required to complete 150 field experience hours. In addition, students will complete a portfolio of work assigned by the profession.

KINE 4351 Sports Facility and Event Management Prerequisite(s): KINE 3360
This course will focus on elements of planning, design and management related to maintenance, operations, security, and marketing for successful facility and event management of high school, collegiate, professional and recreational facilities and events. During the semester, students will get hands-on experience through the planning of their own event, and upon completion of the course, students will then be prepared to design, run, and evaluate a key event.

KINE 4352 Sports Media and Ethics Prerequisite(s): KINE 3360
The purpose of this course is to provide students an opportunity to reflect on and discuss ethical and media concerns in athletics. It is designed to allow students the opportunity to examine the concepts of ethics throughout sport without being limited to just considering those competing on the field or court. Topics will include ergogenic aids, exploitation, cheating, genetic enhancement, violence and spectatorship, as well as broadcast and social media.

KINE 4353 Sports Law Prerequisite(s): KINE 3360
This course is designed to enable students to expand their knowledge on laws, rules, and regulations surrounding sport and recreation, including legal issues associated with sports, sporting events, sports-related industries, sports programs, athletic education, recreation management and their constituents. Topics include negligence, property and premises law, risk management, contract law, constitutional law, and sports legislation.

KINE 4363 Sports Sociology Prerequisite(s): KINE 2310
Sport Sociology is designed to thoughtfully examine and analyze the role of sports in modern society. Understanding sports as a part of our American culture is appropriate in analyzing the many subcultures involved in the world of sport.

KINE 4365 Research Methods in Kinesiology Prerequisite(s): 20 hours of kinesiology course work
This course covers research methods, designs, analysis, and interpretation of data. The course will examine the types of research conducted in kinesiology and sport sciences and the various approaches to conducting research. The course is a writing intensive course. The course is intended to prepare the student to be a critical consumer of new information and emerging trends in exercise and sport sciences in the understanding and creation of research.

KINE 4370 Research in Kinesiology Prerequisite(s): KINE 2310 and KINE 4365 and completion of 22 hours of Kinesiology courses (excluding activity courses) and senior standing
Research in current issues of kinesiology will be addressed to provide information regarding the field of kinesiology. Students will write a research paper and give a presentation addressing the issues. Additional research projects will be assigned.

KINE 4380 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): KINE 2310
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

KINE 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): KINE 2310
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

KINE 5301 Applied Research Methods in Sports and Kinesiology Prerequisite(s): None
Students will be given the opportunity to develop, implement and apply evidence-based research methods to sport management and kinesiology problems identified from their professional experience. Inductive and deductive approaches will be explored.

KINE 5302 Legal Issues in Sport Prerequisite(s): None
This course is designed to expand student knowledge of the laws, rules, and regulations surrounding sport and recreation law, including legal issues associated with sports, sporting events, sports related industries, sports programs, athletic education, recreation management and their constituents. This course seeks to demonstrate how legal aspects of sport are integrated within the American legal system. Students will analyze sport cases that cover divergent legal areas including sponsors, liability, negligence, property and premises law, risk management, contract law, constitutional law and sports legislation.

KINE 5305 History and Culture of Sport Prerequisite(s): None
This course considers the intersection of sport and society in shaping American history. Course materials will consider the development of sport from primitive cultures to modern day society. Additional topics include modernity, the rise of the city, religious thought, consumerism, mass media, women’s sport history, and sport in a global world.

KINE 5306 Ethical Issues in Sport Management Prerequisite(s): None
This course is intended to equip students to consider major moral and/or ethical decisions in sport management based upon theoretical frameworks. These theoretical frameworks from both inside and outside of sport will assist students in expanding their values and moral reasoning skills as it applies to the sport management industry. Topics are to include competition and fair play, doping and genetic enhancement, gender equality, and social ethics.

KINE 5308 Event and Facility Management Prerequisite(s): None
This course is designed to study the planning, implementation, and evaluation of sport and recreational events. This course will focus on elements of planning, design and management related to maintenance, operations, security and marketing for successful facility and event management of high school, collegiate, professional and recreational facilities and events.

KINE 5309 Management of Sport Delivery Systems and Organizations Prerequisite(s): None
The purpose of this course is to consider the necessary organizational theory and techniques to successfully manage the delivery of sport in professional, educational, and fitness settings. Emphasis will be placed upon various areas of leadership, including diversity leadership, globalization and leadership, leadership development and crisis leadership. In the end, students will be able to identify and implement appropriate organizational factors in order to promote an effective organization.

KINE 5310 Financial Management in Sport Prerequisite(s): None
The goal of this course is to consider the financial principles that are most significant to the sport industry. Students will study public and private financing options for professional, intercollegiate, interscholastic and recreational sport, including budgeting and generating revenue. Economic and financial theories are considered in order to give students insight into how sport managers can successfully manage the finances of particular sport organizations.

KINE 5311 Internship in Sport Management Prerequisite(s): None
Non-thesis option. Minimum of 6 credit hours. Program Director must approve internship location and student role. KINE 5312 Thesis

Prerequisite(s): None
Non-internship option. Minimum of 6 credit hours. Program Director must approve topic. Student works with advisor/committee to complete the research project. Students will prepare their project for presentation/publication.

KINE 5381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.


Latin (LATN) Course Descriptions

LATN 1311 Elementary Latin Prerequisite(s): None
Introduction to the fundamentals of classical Latin. Topics include: pronunciation, basic vocabulary, grammar and syntax, practice in reading basic Latin. Graded reading material is adapted from classical texts and cultivates an appreciation of Latin literature and culture.

LATN 1312 Elementary Latin II Prerequisite(s): LATN 1311
Continuation of elementary Latin sequence. Topics include: continued study of vocabulary, grammar and syntax; reading more difficult Latin; gaining greater appreciation of Latin literature and culture.

LATN 1381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

LATN 2311 Intermediate Latin Prerequisite(s): LATN 1312
This course has three main goals: to develop proficiency in reading Latin, to strengthen command of Latin grammar and vocabulary, and to explore key features of Roman life and culture. Students read extended selections in the original Latin prose/poetry; and classroom discussion addresses cultural and historical issues while also reviewing grammar, stylistics, and poetics.

LATN 2381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

LATN 3302 Cicero Prerequisite(s): LATN 2311
Selected Latin readings from Cicero's oratory, philosophy, or letters.

LATN 3303 Vergil Prerequisite(s): LATN 2311
Selected Latin readings from Vergil's Aeneid, Georgics, or Eclogues.

LATN 3304 Horace Prerequisite(s): LATN 2311
Selected Latin readings from Horace's poetic works.

LATN 3305 Ovid Prerequisite(s): LATN 2311
Selected Latin readings from Ovid's poetic works.

LATN 3306 Plautus and Terrence Prerequisite(s): LATN 2311
Selected Latin readings from the comedies of Plautus and/or Terrence.

LATN 3307 St. Augustine Prerequisite(s): LATN 2311
Selected Latin readings from St. Augustine's Confessions, City of God, or other works.

LATN 4181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

LATN 4301 Latin Letters Prerequisite(s): LATN 2311
Selected Latin readings from the letters of Cicero, Pliny, Seneca, or others.

LATN 4302 Roman Satire Prerequisite(s): LATN 2311
Selected Latin readings from the satires of Horace, Juvenal, Martial, Apuleius, and/or others.

LATN 4303 Roman Philosophical Works Prerequisite(s): LATN 2311
Selected Latin readings from Roman philosophical works including Cicero, Seneca, and others.

LATN 4304 Roman Historians Prerequisite(s): LATN 2311
Selected Latin readings from Caesar, Sallust, Livy, Suetonius, or Tacitus.

LATN 4305 Roman Lyric Poetry Prerequisite(s): LATN 2311
Selected Latin readings from Horace, Catullus, Propertius, Tibullus, and/or others.

LATN 4306 Readings from Christian Latin Prerequisite(s): LATN 2311
Selected Latin readings from Christian authors from Late Antiquity through the Medieval period.

LATN 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

LATN 4399 Readings from Latin Literature Prerequisite(s): Consent of instructor
Restriction(s): With content changed, this course may be repeated. Latin authors to be read are selected to meet the needs of the student.

LATN 5301 Elementary Latin I Prerequisite(s): None
Introduction to the fundamentals of classical Latin. Topics include: pronunciation, basic vocabulary, grammar and syntax, practice in reading basic Latin. Graded reading material is adapted from classical texts and cultivates an appreciation of Latin literature and culture.

LATN 5302 Elementary Latin II Prerequisite(s): LATN 5301

Continuation of elementary Latin sequence. Topics include: continued study of vocabulary, grammar and syntax; reading more difficult Latin; gaining greater appreciation of Latin literature and culture.

LATN 5381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

LATN 6302 Cicero Prerequisite(s): LATN 5302
Selected Latin readings from Cicero’s oratory, philosophy, or letters. Emphasizes translation and critical analysis.

LATN 6303 Vergil Prerequisite(s): LATN 5381
Selected Latin readings from Vergil’s Aeneid, Georgics, or Ecolgues. Emphasizes translation and critical analysis.

LATN 6304 Roman Historians Prerequisite(s): LATN 5302
Selected Latin readings from Ceasar, Sallust, Livy, Suetonius, or Tacitus. Emphasizes translation and critical analysis.

LATN 6305 Roman Lyric Poetry Prerequisite(s): LATN 5302
Selected Latin readings from Horace, Catallus, Propertius, Tibillus, and/or others. Emphasizes translation and critical analysis.

LATN 6306 Readings from Christian Latin Prerequisite(s): LATN 5302
Selected Latin readings from Christian authors from Late  Antiquity through the Medieval period. Emphasizes translation and critical analysis.

LATN 6314 Roman Philosophical Works Prerequisite(s): LATN 5302
Selected Latin readings from Vergil’s Aeneid, Georgics, or Ecolgues. Emphasizes translation and critical analysis.

LATN 6399 readings from Latin Literature Prerequisite(s): LATN 5302
Restriction(s): With content changes, this course mey be repeated. Latin authors to be read are selected to meet the needs of the student.

General Linguistics (LING) Course Descriptions

LING 3310 General Linguistics Prerequisite(s): GREK 2312 and GREK 2322
An introduction to basic linguistic concepts and applications for biblical languages students as applied to biblical texts.

LING 5310 General Linguistics Prerequisite(s): GREK 5301 and GREK 5302
An introduction to basic linguistic concepts and applications for biblical languages students as applied to biblical texts.

LING 5381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

Learning, Technology, and Design (LTDE) Course Descriptions

LTDE 5302 Foundations of Learning, Technology, and Design Prerequisite(s): None
This foundational course introduces professionals in a variety of fields to innovative, authentic applications of technology within instructional design and learning endeavors. Information acquisition focuses on methodologies and appropriate use of technologies as instructional tools. Application of skill focuses on the creation of a digital portfolio showcasing authentic assessment pieces designed throughout the course. The online portfolio created in this course will be expanded through future courses within the program. This course is to be taken in the first nine hours.

LTDE 5305 Instructional Design in a Digital Age Prerequisite(s): None
This course provides students with experiences in applying digital tools and resources to the design of instructional strategies. Through a combination of hands-on, learner-centered experiences, students will synthesize information, share information, generate materials, and evaluate digitally based instructional resources. Instructional strategies will focus on the acquisition, analysis, and creation of digital resources that address appropriate instructional needs.

LTDE 5306 Technology Planning and Administration Prerequisite(s): None
This course provides an overview and foundation in systems theory and the administration of performance technology. Students will develop a vision for design and implementation of instructional solutions using technology. Topics covered include performance technology, general systems theory, needs assessment, data analytics, change management and the key elements of the instructional design cycle. An authentic professional project, including a needs assessment and final report of potential solutions, is required of all students.

LTDE 5308 Design, Development, and Assessment of Online Learning Prerequisite(s): None
Through this course, students will explore case studies and research efforts documenting effective and ineffective applications of online learning technologies. Through participating in online learning demonstrations and simulations, students will apply and assess instructional strategies appropriate for learners in distance learning scenarios, ultimately developing original online learning experiences to be applied in academic and/or professional settings. Through the process of creating such learning experiences, students will develop appropriate outcomes, as well as authentic assessment methods designed to address set outcomes.

LTDE 5317 Current Topics in Learning with Technology Prerequisite(s): None
This course provides an in-depth exploration of special topics in instructional design, including assistive technology and gamification, as well as relevant applications in instructional programs and professional endeavors. Presentation and exploration opportunities enable students to effectively incorporate assistive technology, gamification, and other specialized instructional strategies to enhance learning experiences within academic and professional environments.

LTDE 5319 Technology Tools for Learning Prerequisite(s): None
This course provides students opportunities to explore, evaluate, and design learning management systems (LMS) and their tools with a focus on features necessary to improve learner engagement. Students will create a digital learning environment designed to serve as an effective platform for meaningful and memorable learning experiences.

LTDE 5320 Design and Development of Multimedia Instruction Prerequisite(s): None
This course focuses upon the design and development of authentic applications of multimedia instructional tools and strategies within professional settings. Information acquisition focuses on methodologies and appropriate use of multimedia as an instructional tool. Application of skill focuses on demonstrated proficiency in manipulation of text, graphics, and sound. Problem-solving endeavors focus on the integration of multimedia programs within appropriate professional contexts.

LTDE 5330 Professional Development for Technology Integration Prerequisite(s): None

This course provides an integrated and in-depth understanding of the principles and processes of delivery of professional development and training programs which incorporate technology, as well as training others in its use. Students will explore the application of instructional strategies within a variety of contexts, ultimately designing digitally enhanced professional development resources, activities, and assessments.

LTDE 5350 Emerging Technologies Prerequisite(s): None
This course examines the current and potential future impacts of innovative, emerging, and rapidly evolving technologies on organizations and their operations across a range of academic and professional settings. Students will investigate these technologies and how various organizations are responding to the resulting disruptive innovation. In addition to exploring tools and instructional practices, students will investigate opportunities and challenges in designing authentic assessment pieces that feature emerging technologies.

LTDE 6300 Learning, Technology, and Design Capstone Course Prerequisite(s): None
This course features practical applications of learning and skills developed throughout preceding courses within the program. Students will demonstrate the knowledge and skills acquired as they design, implement, and evaluate an authentic assessment product intended to solve a real-world issue within an academic and/or professional setting. This course is to be completed at the conclusion of the student’s program of study.

Master of Arts in Pastoral Counseling (MAPC) Course Descriptions

MAPC 5301 Introduction to Pastoral Counseling Prerequisite(s): None
This course surveys the field of pastoral counseling and will focus on the student’s people helping skills, discernment of spiritual and biblical issues, the use of relevant Scripture in pastoral counseling settings, grief and loss issues, and relevant chaplaincy related factors.

MAPC 5302 Theories and Techniques in Pastoral Counseling Prerequisite(s): MAPC 5301
This course introduces students to major theories of counseling and Psychotherapy. It involves an intensive counseling experience on campus designed to enhance self-awareness, promote personality exploration, and provide case discussion and analysis. Fundamentals of the therapeutic relationship and essential skills are examined.

MAPC 5303 Theories and Techniques in Counseling Prerequisite(s): MAPC 5301
This course introduces students to major theories and techniques of counseling. It includes an intensive supervised counseling experience on campus designed to enhance self-awareness, promote personality exploration, and provide case discussion and analysis. Fundamentals of the therapeutic relationship and essential helping skills and techniques are examined and practiced.

MAPC 6301 Pastoral Counseling Internship Prerequisite: 21 hours of MAPC coursework, which must include COUN 6322, MAPC 5301, and MAPC 5303
This course offers students the opportunity to apply knowledge and experience gained through the academic program within an approved pastoral counseling setting, while also being under both onsite supervision and supervision by a university faculty member.


Mathematics (MATH) Course Descriptions

MATH 1034 Precalculus Mathematics Laboratory Prerequisite(s): MATH 1313 or a satisfactory score on a departmental placement exam Corequisite(s): MATH 1434
This is the laboratory portion of MATH 1434, Precalculus Mathematics.

MATH 1051 Calculus I Laboratory Prerequisite(s): MATH 1434 or a satisfactory score on a departmental placement exam Corequisite(s): MATH 1451
This is the laboratory portion of MATH 1451, Calculus I.

MATH 1052 Calculus II Laboratory Prerequisite(s): MATH 1451
Corequisite(s): MATH 1452
This is the laboratory portion of MATH 1452, Calculus II.

MATH 1281 Special Topics in Mathematics Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included

MATH 1302 Intermediate Algebra Prerequisite(s): None
A review of arithmetic and algebraic skills needed for success in college-level mathematics. Students take assessments and will study and practice topics needed to strengthen their math skills as identified by their personal assessment. Topics may include fractions, signed arithmetic, order of operations, signed and fractional exponents, solving linear equations and inequalities, absolute value, quadratic equations, polynomials, rational functions, algebraic fractions, exponentials and radicals. This course is offered to aid students needing to strengthen their basic mathematical skills. Students who already have credit for a higher- level mathematics course will not be given credit for this course. This course may not be counted as part of the mathematics major or the mathematical studies major.

MATH 1305 Math for Critical Thinking Prerequisite(s): MATH 1301 or MATH 1302 or a MATH SAT/ACT score of at least 530/22 or a satisfactory score on an HCU required math placement exam
Mathematical topics needed for the critical evaluation of quantitative information and arguments, including set theory, counting, logic, and the critical appraisal of graphs and tables, including the use of some simple mathematical models, and an introduction to probability and statistics. Additional topics may be selected from finance, graph theory, number theory, geometry and matrix theory. This course may not be counted as part of a mathematics major or a mathematical studies major.

MATH 1313 College Algebra Prerequisite(s): MATH 1302 or a satisfactory score on a HCU required math placement exam
Evaluating and manipulating algebraic expressions, the laws of exponents, polynomials, factoring, rational expressions, radicals, the quadratic formula, solving equations and inequalities, systems of linear equations, an introduction to graphing, and applications. Students with no previous exposure to algebra should take MATH 1302 before MATH 1313. MATH 1313 may not be counted as part of a mathematics major. It may not be counted as part of a mathematical studies major except by students with a specialization in middle grades.

MATH 1323 Trigonometry Prerequisite(s): MATH 1313 or a satisfactory score on a HCU required math placement exam
A study of trigonometric functions, exponentials, logarithms, and applications for students needing a more comprehensive background than the accelerated coverage given in MATH 1434. This course may not be counted as part of the mathematics major.

MATH 1434 Precalculus Mathematics Prerequisite(s): MATH 1313 or a satisfactory score on a HCU required math placement exam Corequisite(s): MATH 1034
Sets, relations, functions, roots of polynomial equations, trigonometry, and analytic geometry. This course may not be counted as part of the mathematics major. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions.

MATH 1451 Calculus I Prerequisite(s): MATH 1434 or a satisfactory score on a HCU required math placement test Corequisite(s): MATH 1051
Limits, continuity, differentiation and integration of elementary and transcendental functions, L'Hôpital's Rule. Applications, including rates of change, max/min problems, and area between curves. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions.

MATH 1452 Calculus II Prerequisite(s): MATH 1451
Corequisite(s): MATH 1052
A continuation of MATH 1451. Topics include: Techniques and applications of integration, improper integrals, parametric representations of curves, polar coordinates, L'Hôpital's Rule, numerical approximation of integrals, an introduction to differential equations, and infinite series. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions.

MATH 2051 Calculus III Laboratory Prerequisite(s): MATH 1452
Corequisite(s): MATH 2451
This is the laboratory portion of MATH 2451, Calculus III.

MATH 2181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. A laboratory may or may not be included.

MATH 2201 Foundations of Higher Mathematics Prerequisite(s): MATH 1451
This course is a mathematically rigorous introduction to fundamental concepts required for higher-level mathematics. Topics include logic, sets, relations, functions, and algebraic structures, with an emphasis on formal mathematical proof techniques. It is required for the mathematics major.

MATH 2281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. A laboratory may or may not be included.

MATH 2302 Foundations of Arithmetic and Numeration Prerequisite(s): MATH 1305 or higher-level mathematics
A study, from an advanced perspective, of the concepts and skills involved in arithmetic and numeration. Topics include sets, rational numbers (whole numbers and place value, fractions, integers and decimals), number theory, properties and algebraic reasoning, arithmetic operations, percents, ratios, and proportions. Problem solving is emphasized. This course, designed for education majors, may not be counted as part of the mathematics major or minor or meet the Liberal Arts Core Curriculum, math proficiency requirement.

MATH 2303 Foundations of Geometry, Measurement, Probability & Statistics Prerequisite(s): MATH 1305 or higher-level mathematics
A study, from an advanced perspective, of the basic concepts and methods of geometry, measurement, probability and statistics. Topics include: representation and analysis of data; discrete and conditional probability; measurement; and geometry as approached through similarity and congruence, through coordinates, and through transformations. Problem solving is emphasized. This course, designed for education majors, may not be counted as part of the mathematics major or minor or meet the Liberal Arts Core Curriculum, math proficiency requirement.

MATH 2323 Linear Algebra Prerequisite(s): MATH 1451
Introduction to linearity in mathematics. Topics include: matrices, determinants, abstract vector spaces, linear dependence, bases, eigenvalues and eigenvectors, and linear transformations.

MATH 2381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. A laboratory may or may not be included.

MATH 2451 Calculus III Prerequisite(s): MATH 1452
Corequisite(s): MATH 2051
A continuation of MATH 1452. Topics include: three-dimensional coordinate systems, quadric surfaces, cylindrical and spherical coordinates, vector calculus in three dimensions, partial derivatives, the total differential, multiple integrals, line integrals, surface integrals, vector fields, Green's Theorem, Stokes' Theorem, the Divergence Theorem, and applications. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions.

MATH 2481 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

MATH 3111 Advanced Topics in Mathematics Prerequisite(s): MATH 1451
Corequisite(s): None
This is a seminar style course covering topics related to computer science and cybersecurity that are not covered in MATH 2323, MATH 3311, and MATH 3314. Topics may include, but are not limited to, cryptography, graph theory, probability and statistics, discrete mathematics, and numerical methods and their implementation.

MATH 3181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. A laboratory may or may not be included.

MATH 3281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. A laboratory may or may not be included.

MATH 3302 Foundations of Geometry Prerequisite(s): MATH 1451
A study of classical Euclidean geometry using both analytic and synthetic techniques, with an emphasis on the formal development of geometry. Topics include: axiomatic systems, congruence and similarity, transformations, area and volume, Euclidean construction, finite geometries, and a brief introduction to non-Euclidean geometry. This course is required for the mathematical studies major but may not be counted as part of a mathematics major.

MATH 3304 Introductory Statistics for the Life Sciences Prerequisite(s): MATH 1434 or MATH 1451 or a satisfactory score on a Calculus I qualifying HCU required math placement examination
An introduction to elementary probability and statistics with applications to the life sciences. Topics include: frequency distributions, measures of central tendency and spread, probability concepts, discrete and continuous distributions, point and interval estimation, hypothesis testing, analysis of variance, and an introduction to linear correlation and regression. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions. May not be counted as part of a math major or a math studies major. Students may not receive credit for both MATH 3304 and MATH 3404.

MATH 3311 Introduction to Discrete Mathematics and Combinatorics Prerequisite(s): MATH 1451
This course introduces students to elements of combinatorics, number theory, and discrete structures. Topics covered include: permutations, combinations, prime factorizations, the Euclidean Algorithm, relations, the pigeonhole

principles, inclusion and exclusion, and finite state machines. It exposes students to areas of mathematics of current practical interest and involves the use of proof and algorithmic thinking.

MATH 3314 Probability and Statistics Prerequisite(s): MATH 1451
A mathematical development of the basic concepts of probability and statistics, emphasizing the theory of discrete and continuous random variables, with applications in science and engineering. Topics include descriptive statistics, probability theory, random variables, expected value, probability density functions, probability distributions, correlation and regression, and an introduction to statistical inference. Students may not receive credit for both MATH 3304 and MATH 3314.

MATH 3331 Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos Prerequisite(s): MATH 3333
An introduction to dynamical systems. This course develops the theory for normal forms, structural stability of solutions, robust behavior, transversality, and local bifurcations.

MATH 3333 Ordinary Differential Equations Prerequisite(s): MATH 1452
A first course. Topics include: existence and uniqueness of solutions, solutions of linear equations, solutions of higher order linear equations with constant coefficients, infinite series solutions, numerical solutions, solutions of linear systems, an introduction to nonlinear differential equations, and application.

MATH 3334 Partial differential Equations Prerequisite(s): MATH 3333
An introduction to the basic properties of partial differential equations, including ideas and techniques that have proven useful in analyzing and solving them. Topics include: vibrations of solids, fluid flow, molecular structure, photon and electron interactions, and radiation of electromagnetic waves, with emphasis on the role of partial differential equations in modern mathematics, especially in geometry and analysis.

MATH 3353 Introduction to Abstract Algebra Prerequisite(s): MATH 1452 and MATH 2323
An introduction to algebraic structures. Topics include: sets, operations, relations, groups, subgroups, equivalence classes, Lagrange's Theorem, homomorphisms, rings, and ideals.

MATH 3364 Mathematical Computing Prerequisite(s): MATH 1451 or consent of instructor
An introductory course in computer programming with applications to mathematics. The programming language used will vary; possible choices include but are not restricted to Java, C++, C#, Maple, and MATLAB. Topics include: design of algorithms, structured programming, data types, control structures, functions and procedures, and mathematical problem solving. This course may be repeated for credit provided a different computer programming language is used.

MATH 3371 Introduction to Complex Variables Prerequisite(s): MATH 2451
An introduction to complex analysis and the study of complex-valued functions of a single complex variable. Topics include: the complex number system; the Cauchy-Riemann conditions; analytic functions including linear, exponential, logarithmic and trigonometric transformations; differentiation and integration of complex-valued functions; line integrals; and Taylor and Laurent Series expansions.

MATH 3381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

MATH 3383 Mathematical Methods for Science and Engineering Prerequisite(s): Credit for or concurrent enrollment in MATH 3333 and MATH 2451

Advanced techniques in applied mathematics for students of science and engineering, with topics chosen from partial differential equations, Laplace transforms, Fourier series, complex analysis, and vector analysis. (Offered also as PHYS 3383.)

MATH 3481 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

MATH 4181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

MATH 4201 Mathematical Topics for Teachers Prerequisite(s): 15 hours of mathematics and junior or senior standing
A review of mathematical topics of special interest to students obtaining teacher certification in mathematics, including material from algebra, geometry, probability, statistics, linear algebra, discrete math, and others. This course includes instruction on technology used in teaching mathematics, both graphing calculators and computer software. Required for the mathematical studies major, but may not be counted as part of a mathematics major.

MATH 4281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.
MATH 4301 Real Variables I Prerequisite(s): MATH 2451
A rigorous introduction to mathematical analysis. Topics covered include: the real and complex number systems, basic topology, numerical sequences and series, continuity of functions, and differentiation.

MATH 4302 Real Variables II Prerequisite(s): MATH 4301
A continuation of MATH 4301. Further study of mathematical analysis. Topics covered include: Riemann integration, sequences and series of functions, functions of several variables, and integration of differential forms.
MATH 4303 Introduction to Numerical Analysis Prerequisite(s): MATH 2451 and MATH 3364
An introduction to modern approximation techniques. This course shows how, why, and when numerical techniques can be expected to work and fail. It demonstrates the relevance of numerical analysis to a variety of disciplines and provides ample practice for students. Topics covered include: approximating solutions to equations in one variable, interpolation and approximation of polynomials, numerical differentiation and integration, applications to differential equations, and solutions of both linear and nonlinear systems of equations.

MATH 4310 Advanced Discrete Mathematics and Combinatorics Prerequisite(s): MATH 3311
Further study of enumerative techniques and discrete structures including generating functions, recurrence relations, graph theory, spanning trees, optimization, and Boolean algebras.

MATH 4311 Topology I Prerequisite(s): MATH 3353 or MATH 4301
An introduction to topology and its applications. Topics include: a review of basic abstract algebra; the definition of a topological space, interior, closure, and boundary of sets; subspace, product, and quotient topologies; continuity and homeomorphisms; metrics and metric spaces; connectedness; and compactness.
MATH 4312 Topology II Prerequisite(s): MATH 4311

A continuation of MATH 4311. Topics include: dynamical systems and chaos, homotopy and degree theory, fixed point theorems, embeddings, knots, graphs, and manifolds.

MATH 4332 Dynamics and Bifurcations Prerequisite(s): MATH 2451
Introduction to the theory of equilibrium solutions of nonlinear equations. Presentation of the theory of bifurcations includes the analysis of the nonlinear ordinary and algebraic equations that arise from the methods of reduction by projections.
MATH 4341 Mathematical Biology Prerequisite(s): MATH 3333
Introduction to modeling in biology and genetics. Some of the models covered include populations models; host- parasite models; and gene spread models as described by difference equations, differential equations, and partial differential equations. The emphasis of this course will be to familiarize students with the selection of models and predictions based on the models chosen.

MATH 4353 Advanced Abstract Algebra Prerequisite(s): MATH 3353
A continuation of MATH 3353. The focus of this course is on rings, domains, fields, polynomials, Galois theory, Boolean algebra, and modules. Other topics may be covered if time permits.
MATH 4372 Advanced Complex Variables Prerequisite(s): MATH 3371
Further study of differentiable complex-valued functions of a single complex variable. Topics include: residue theory and contour integrals, z-transforms, conformal mapping, harmonic functions and their applications, Fourier Series, and Laplace transforms.

MATH 4380 Differential Geometry Prerequisite(s): MATH 2451
An introduction to diffeomorphisms and smooth manifolds. Topics covered include: tangent spaces, orientation of manifolds, vector fields, homotopy, and the index of a map.

MATH 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

MATH 4481 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.


Master of Fine Arts (MFA) Course Descriptions
MFA 5363 Graduate Experimental Digital Methods and Materials III Prerequisite(s): (None)
These courses will enhance the fine arts studio experience by integrating experimental digital tools. Starting with simple and practical image editing and correction, the student quickly branches out into using the computer as another important tool in creating art. Course topics may include: working with digital photography, digital drawing and painting, 3D software, sound art, video art and the technology behind installation art. The students will research the history of movements within digital art (Generative Art, glitch, Datamoshing, etc.) They will explore the virtual tools and materials that state-of-the-art digital media has to offer. These cutting-edge programs (including Painter, Illustrator, Photoshop, After Effects, Ableton Live, etc.) provide an amazing variety of flexible and expressive possibilities. This digital studio course is designed to integrate with the hands-on studio experience, opening new dynamic, creative directions for the student as they develop their thesis.


Management (MGMT) Course Descriptions
MGMT 3302 Principles of Management Prerequisite(s): None
This course provides background in the theory and practice of management principles centered around leading, controlling, planning and organizing for a more effective workplace. Students will learn the historical underpinnings of current management practice in the areas of organization design, theory, strategy and planning, team building, motivation, leadership and decision- making, among others. Heavy emphasis is placed upon application in the modern organization.

MGMT 3305 Organization Behavior and Management Prerequisite(s): MGMT 3302
An introduction to problems and decision making processes of organizations from a behavioral theory viewpoint. The level of analysis of the material is that of the individual manager and groups within the organizations. Topics include personality, motivation and attitude effects on organizational effectiveness, decision making models, leadership traits and behaviors, stress management, and group and team behavior. The integration of these concepts occurs within the organizational structures and processes. Emphasis is on effective management leading to effective organizations.

MGMT 3308 Business Stewardship Prerequisite(s): PHIL 3320
This course introduces students to the notion of corporate social responsibility and theories of business stakeholder relations. The application of these ideas requires businesses to consider their pursuit of profit within the context of the impact of their business activities on a diverse set of organizational stakeholders. This course will explore issues surrounding the obligations of business to society, and the interests of corporations and their stakeholders in order to provide students with the ability to recognize potential conflicts of interest and act as effective business stewards to address them.

MGMT 3316 Innovation and New Offering Development Prerequisite(s): MGMT 3302
This course deals with the critical issues in the management of highly innovative enterprises and the way they create value through innovation. Innovation can be applied at all levels of the value chain and in the areas of research and development, manufacturing, marketing, and new offering development and support. The concept of innovation in the area of new offering development will be examined in great detail and the students will become familiar with how some of the best-in-class companies create products and services much more quickly and effectively than the rest of the industry.

MGMT 3322 Human Resources Management Prerequisite(s): MGMT 3302
Study of all phases of the human resources management (HRM) function from recruitment to retirement of the employee. Included are employment strategic planning, recruitment, selection, training and development, compensation, discipline, and the various laws under which employers must operate. Emphasis is on improving organizational effectiveness through the HRM function.

MGMT 3336 Organizational Theory Prerequisite(s): MGMT 3302
This course provides the student with a foundation in the area of organizational theory. The focus of the course is on the structure of organizations and the interrelationship of organizations and their environments. Emphasis will be given to theoretical development, comparison of theoretical foundations, the assessment of empirical support for the theories, current perspectives of management, and current frontiers in organizational research. Applications of the theoretical perspectives to management and to current organizational events will be discussed.

MGMT 4315 Power and Negotiation Prerequisite(s): MGMT 3302 or MGMT 3305
This course examines the art and science of management negotiation. The use of power to affect outcomes is explored.

Students are exposed to cooperation theory, as well as multiple perspectives and analytical skills, in power management with a firm and between firms. Labor relations negotiations are also discussed. The course heavily depends upon cases that stimulate decision-making in the real business setting.

MGMT 4323 Transformational Leadership and Change Prerequisite(s): MGMT 3302
In-depth overview of the behaviors and characteristics of an effective leader conducted through current readings from experts on management, leadership, and business and through the study of the habits of visionary companies. Emphasizes the importance of innovation while studying various ways of leading people and organizations to become innovative. Examines common misconceptions about leadership and provides a practical understanding of leadership by analyzing great leaders and their organizations.

MGMT 4335 Managing the Global Enterprise Prerequisite(s): MGMT 3302
Focuses on general management and integration of functional area skills needed to compete in a complex international business environment. Case material addresses strategic issues, operational practices, and governmental relations of multinational companies. Key topics include identifying, developing, and defending an international competitive advantage; evaluating the international environment; and, organizing to become a successful global competitor.

MGMT 4396 Global Business Strategy Prerequisite(s): FINA 3320 and MGMT 3302 and MKTG 3301 and completion of 90 credit hours
Global Business Strategy is a capstone course in business designed to integrate concepts and knowledge from a broad range of core business courses. The course considers the increasingly global context in which firms operate and develops a strategic view of the firm through a variety of management tools, models, and current debates. The capstone experience encourages significant group-based work through use of case studies and a computer simulation with global participants.

MGMT 5260 Decision Making Techniques for Managers Prerequisite(s): None
Restriction(s): Graduate Business programs only
This course will provide a sound knowledge of many quantitative methods used by managers in the decision-making process—linear programming, multi-objective decision making, analytic hierarchy process, decision making under uncertainty, decision trees and simulations. The course will integrate modeling into many functional areas of business, including Finance, Management, Marketing and Economics. Students will get hands-on modeling experience in the Microsoft Excel environment. Basic principles of probability and statistics are also explored.

MGMT 5261 Management Principles Prerequisite(s): None
Restriction(s): Graduate Business programs only
This course provides background in the theory and practice of management principles centered around leading, controlling, planning and organizing for a more effective workplace. Students will learn the fundamental and historical underpinnings of current management practice in the areas of human resources management, motivation, leadership operations, and decision-making, among others.

MGMT 5340 Internship: MBA Prerequisite(s): Current enrollment in MBA Program and completion of 12 credit hours in the MBA Program and a cumulative GPA of 3.0 or higher
An opportunity or experience by which students learn by undertaking responsible roles in organizations where the business practices of the enterprise will be studied. The students will have the opportunity to develop interpersonal skills while acquiring practical knowledge in their disciplines. The students will be exposed to various work roles and career choices.

MGMT 5361 Staffing and Performance Management Prerequisite(s): None
Restriction(s): Graduate Business programs only
Examines strategic approaches for determining staffing requirements. Focuses on the overall staffing process

including identifying non-traditional innovative recruiting sources, labor and supply and demand impacts, candidate evaluation/selection methods, legal framework, interviewing techniques and marketing strategies for attracting the best candidates. Development of knowledge and skills in contemporary performance management processes, and coaching methods.

MGMT 5362 Human Resources Information Technology Prerequisite(s): None
Restriction(s): Graduate Business programs only
Examines the application of technology to human resource administrative processes and management information requirements. Applications include resume management, training, interviewing and selection, performance management, compensation administration, governmental reporting, payroll and benefits administration. The theory is reinforced through a series of real-world exercises using current software technologies. Topics also include defining technology needs based on business requirements, selecting technology vendors, outsourcing and preparing cost/benefit analyses for proposed projects.

MGMT 6131 Spirituality at Work I Prerequisite(s): None
This seminar intends to introduce students to the field of Spirituality at Work. Students will explore the history of Spirituality at Work in America and focus on spiritualty’s natural applications in leadership, religious faith in the workplace, Protestant Christian beliefs about faith and work, and organizational approaches to religion in the workplace. The course resolves by providing a tool for integrating a person’s faith or spirituality in the workplace.

MGMT 6132 Spirituality at Work II Prerequisite(s): MGMT 6131
This seminar focuses on implementation of the personal faith/spirituality integration plan developed by students in MGMT 6131. In this seminar, students will set weekly goals or activities at the beginning of the seminar and then maintain an online journal concerning their successes and growth. Students will be guided by reflective readings which emphasize integration dynamics on the personal, organizational, and societal levels. Students will also explore a case study.

MGMT 6133 Spirituality at Work III Prerequisite(s): MGMT 6132
MGMT 6133 combines elements of MGMT 6131 and MGMT 6132 by bringing content, experiences, and practical insights together to demonstrate personal learning In this seminar, students will develop a personal spiritual leadership profile as a means to influence organizational change with goals for future personal development and corresponding “others directed” mentoring.

MGMT 6181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

MGMT 6303 Global Project Management Prerequisite(s): ACCT 5362 and ECON 5363 and FINA 5260 and MGMT 5260 and MGMT 5261 Restriction(s): Graduate Business programs only
This course focuses on the increasingly valuable and specialized field of Project Management as it applies to global business projects. As organizations seek sourcing, production, partnership, and market development opportunities in international markets, managers who have expertise in defining, coordinating, and bringing projects to closure will be of increasing value to their organizations. The course is a first step in preparing students to pursue future certification in the Project Management profession, should they wish to do so.

MGMT 6307 International Law Prerequisite(s): None
Restriction(s): Graduate Business programs only
As global corporations span national boundaries, they must interact with a large number of national legal systems, international agreements, and international organizations. This course deals with a wide variety of international legal

issues which affect the conduct of business, including, but not limited to, the following: the evolution of international law; laws and regulations that concern international trade; organizations that regulate and promote international trade, such as WTO, NAFTA, and the EU; employment law; criminal law for business fraud; laws for the protection of IP- patents, copyrights, and trade secrets; environmental laws and organizations; issues of personal privacy and confidentiality; and laws that govern property rights and the resolution of ownership.

MGMT 6329 Foreign Cultures Prerequisite(s): None
Restriction(s): Graduate Business programs only
As global corporations span national boundaries, their employees must interact with a wide variety of national cultures, societal structures, and world views. This course adopts the viewpoint of foreign cultures, applying anthropological theory to business situations. This course covers a wide variety of topics, including, but not limited to, the following: methods of anthropology; issues of culture; issues of language and communication; the economic aspects of foreign cultures; the role of family and kinship in society; religion and ethics; gender; and issues of ethnicity. It also examines how national cultures affect behaviors in business situations.

MGMT 6331 Compensation and Benefits Prerequisite(s): None
Restriction(s): Graduate Business programs only.
This course provides an in-depth understanding of total rewards including compensation and benefits. The content of the course considers the role of total rewards within the larger context of human resources management and business strategy with an emphasis on the theories, principles, design, implementation and administration of total rewards programs. Topics include internal and external pay relationships, job analysis, job evaluation, compensation models, performance appraisals, salary structures, short and long-term incentives, benefit designs and cost management.

MGMT 6332 Managing the HR Function Prerequisite(s): None
Restriction(s): MS-HRM Program only
This course introduces students to the tools and techniques to manage human resource functions. The context of the course will emphasize the implementation of human resource functions as projects and includes a discussion of organizational behavior and project management. The course focuses on various aspects of organizational behavior including culture, performance and reward systems, ethics, organizational change and teams. Applications include the methodology, tools and techniques used to design, track, and manage human resource functions as projects. The focus of the course will include the knowledge and skills necessary to manage the challenges of implementing human resource functions.

MGMT 6334 Legal Challenges in HR Management Prerequisite(s): None
Restriction(s): Graduate Business programs only
This course explores the legal aspects of the employee/employer relationship from a functional standpoint- beginning with the recruiting and selecting of employees, through their development and growth in the organization and ultimately, in some cases, their departure. Emphasis is on limiting employer liability though effective and sound interviewing processes, documentation of employee performance, execution and the ultimate handling of employee/employer conflict, including but not limited to labor relations and discrimination issues such as harassment, disability, etc.

MGMT 6335 History of Management, Human Resources, and Employment Relations Prerequisite(s): None
Tracing the evolution of managerial thought from the Industrial Revolution to contemporary theory, this course provides background in the theory and practice of management and human resources. Principles of scientific management, the human relations movement, and the modernization of personnel to the modern models of human resource management will be examined. Concomitantly, employee relations will be examined both as a by-product of management systems and socio- cultural pressures.

MGMT 6337 Organizational Development and Change Prerequisite(s): None

Restriction(s): Graduate Business programs only
This course focuses on organizational development and change management as mechanisms to improve organizational performance. Various theories and models are discussed. Emphasis is placed on determining appropriate organizational interventions within complex environments. The roles and skills of internal and external consultants are addressed.

MGMT 6338 Human Resource Management for HR Professionals Prerequisite(s): None
Restriction(s): Graduate Business programs only
The course provides a strategic overview and integrated perspective of all the primary human resources functions. Emphasis is on the integration of HR practices and programs with the business strategy and culture of the organization. Topics include formulating HR strategy, staffing, performance management, strategic compensation, managing change, benefits, policy development, embracing diversity, employee development, and HR technology. Since students are HR professionals, the course is structured to draw upon their work experience.

MGMT 6339 Business Stewardship Prerequisite(s): None
Business Stewardship introduces students to the notion of corporate social responsibility (CSR), theories of business stakeholder relations and the role Prosocial leadership plays in the CSR process. The application of these ideas requires businesses to consider their pursuit of profit within the context of the impact of their business activities on a diverse set of organizational stakeholders. This course will explore issues surrounding the obligations of business to society, and the interests of corporations and their stakeholders, to provide students with the ability to recognize potential conflicts of interest and act as effective business stewards to address them. This course contains a service learning component.

MGMT 6346 Global Supply Chain Management Prerequisite(s): None
Restriction(s): Graduate Business programs only
This course presents a methodology that links all the organizations involved with a company’s global supply-chain in an integrated two-way communication system to manage high-quality inventory in the most effective and efficient manner. It examines the multitude of policies, procedures, and organizational structures that are required to do this. It presents the evolution of the Purchasing function into Supply Management, examining such issues as buyer-supplier relationship, cross- functional teams, total cost of ownership, quality management, and others. It further presents the whole process of product development. Other management issues include outsourcing, strategic sourcing, strategic cost management, and pricing. In addition, the course examines legal and ethical issues, government procurement, and institutional supply management.

MGMT 6352 Organizational Behavior Prerequisite(s): MGMT 5261
Restriction(s): Graduate Business programs only
This course deals with the basic concepts of management from a behavioral viewpoint. The behavior of individuals and groups in an organizational setting as well as the dynamics of the organization as the aggregate of individual behaviors are emphasized. Organizational theory and human resource management are discussed. Production operations management will be introduced.

MGMT 6357 Project Management Prerequisite(s): None
Restriction(s): Graduate Business programs only
This course will introduce students to project management by providing an overview of project management activities. The focus of the course is to execute a standardized body of knowledge that can be used to handle projects in various industries and institutions, such as engineering, construction, business, and education.

MGMT 6359 Health Services Management Prerequisite(s): None
This course analyzes current issues facing health care leaders. The course examines the competencies (knowledge, skills, attributes, and behaviors) health services leaders need to thrive in a complex health system. Students will build

their business skills, knowledge, and communications skills by analyzing commentaries, case studies, trends, and policies to improve decision-making and transformation.

MGMT 6364 Training and Development Prerequisite(s): None
Restriction(s): Graduate Business programs only
Focuses on creating learning designs and delivery approaches to meet employee development needs and business priorities. Topics include training needs analysis, methods of instruction, consulting skills to determine performance issues and potential training solutions, audio-visual hardware, educational software, validation and evaluation. Students are exposed to new learning technologies and authoring tools and the broader issues of employee development, including career planning and succession management.

MGMT 6374 Global Business Strategy Prerequisite(s): ACCT 5362 and ECON 5363 and FINA 5260 and MGMT 5260 and MGMT 5261 Restriction(s): Graduate Business programs only
This course deals with the management of global enterprises in their pursuit to maximize value provided to their respective stakeholders. It examines the evolution from international to global competition and how this affects a variety of industry types. It also looks at the different competitive structures that have appeared in the global area-- alliances, partnerships, and acquisitions. Related to this, it presents the resulting organizational structures and business models. It further examines many issues of global management, such as global marketing, global risk management, global supply chains, global R&D, global knowledge management, and others.

MGMT 6376 Business Strategy and Policy Prerequisite(s): MGMT 6331 and MGMT 6334 and MGMT 6364 and MGMT 6337, or ACCT 6352 and ECON 6353
and FINA 6330 and MGMT 6352 and MKTG 6310
Restriction(s): Graduate Business programs only
This course focuses on strategic management from a value-based perspective. The corporate level of decision-making is emphasized. Various models of the strategic process from formulation to implementation to evaluation are discussed. How resources, including such intangible assets as knowledge, are used to implement strategic decisions is evaluated.

MGMT 6378 Management of Global Human Resources Prerequisite(s): None
Restriction(s): Graduate Business programs only
Examines the human resources issues facing multi-national organizations and joint venture. Areas covered include the process of expanding internationally, the process of understanding culture and applying human resource management concepts in a multinational environment. Provides an understanding of organizational design in multinational corporations. The course will develop skills in gathering information on the business, economic, legal and cultural environment in various regions and countries around the world.

MGMT 6380 Seminar: Selected Topics Prerequisite(s): None
Restriction(s): Graduate Business programs only
Directed study. Involves specification and approval of a study design; development of data; and analysis and reporting results.

MGMT 6381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

MGMT 6390 Managing Innovation Strategically Prerequisite(s): ECON 5363 and MGMT 5260 and MGMT 5261
This course focuses on the role of innovation in the 21st-century organization. It addresses the need for a systematic approach to building innovation capabilities and the challenges of integrating the many facets of innovation management. Concepts of innovative leadership and building innovative organizations are covered from a theoretical and applied approach. Topics addressed include fundamental theories of innovation, developing innovation strategy,

innovation as a business process, and the role of the innovation context including leadership and organization, culture and values, people and skills, processes and tools, and assessing and improving innovation performance.

MGMT 6392 Transformational Leadership and Ethics in Business Prerequisite(s): MGMT 5261
Restriction(s): Graduate Business programs only
This course focuses on integrating leadership theory, ethical frameworks, current events, and experiential practice to help students become leaders who are grounded in ethical foundations. While a breadth of Leadership models will be explored and discussed, special attention will be given to the transformational leadership that becomes necessary in the midst of organizational change. The course will further emphasize the importance of ethical behavior in leadership, strategic thinking, leading transformational change, and shaping organizational culture to nurture leadership development.

MGMT 6393 Global Enterprise Management Prerequisite(s): ACCT 5362 and ECON 5363 and FINA 5260 and MGMT 5260 and MGMT 5261 Restriction(s): Graduate Business programs only
The multinational enterprise must deal with a variety of institutions, forces, and problems that extend far beyond those faced by the organization which operates in only one economy. Effective management of the multinational requires solving a set of problems that differ intrinsically from those faced by the manager in a single economy. This course addresses the nature of these problems and their effective solutions.


Master Arts in Human Services Counseling (MHSC) Course Descriptions
MHSC 5301: Introduction to Human Services Counseling Prerequisite(s): None
This course surveys the field of human services counseling and focuses on core people helping skills, the role of faith and spirituality in mental health care, characteristics of the counselor and counselee, understanding the ethical and personal nature of the healing relationship with diverse populations, and incorporating relevant community-based resources and programs.

MHSC 5302 Theories and Techniques in Counseling Prerequisite(s): MHSC 5301
This course introduces students to major theories and techniques of counseling. It includes an intensive supervised counseling experience on campus designed to enhance self-awareness, promote personality exploration, and provide case discussion and analysis. Fundamentals of the therapeutic relationship and essential helping skills and techniques are examined and practiced.

MHSC 5381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.


Management Information Systems (MIS) Course Descriptions
MIS 3330 Information Systems and Business Analytics Prerequisite(s): BUSA 2315
This course provides students with basic knowledge of Information Systems and Business Analytics and their use for business operations, managerial decision-making, and strategic advantage. The computer hardware, software, and networks are discussed. The development and use of databases and data warehouses are addressed. Various tools and techniques for data interrogation, visualization, presentation, data mining, and predictive analytics are examined. Students will gain hands-on experience and develop skills necessary for working with large data sets from various business areas.

MIS 4350 Predictive Analytics and Data Mining Prerequisite(s): MIS 3330 Co-requisite(s): None
This course provides knowledge and practical skills involving contemporary techniques and methods for data mining and predictive analytics. Methods and techniques covered include cluster analysis, associations, multiple and logistic regressions, classification, and regression trees. Several software packages used for contemporary data analytics will be reviewed and compared. The course includes practical experience using MS Excel and IBM SPSS.

MIS 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.


Marketing (MKTG) Course Descriptions
MKTG 3301 Principles of Marketing Prerequisite(s): ECON 2311
The fundamental marketing concepts and functions are analyzed and interpreted within the framework of the competitive, legal, economic, and social environments.

MKTG 3310 Consumer Behavior Prerequisite(s): MKTG 3301
A study of human behavior in the marketplace. Attention is focused on applying concepts from the social sciences to understanding the consumer decision processes and buying patterns.

MKTG 3313 Social Media Marketing Prerequisite(s): None
A study of social media marketing and the various strategies that promotes successful usage of this promotion and consumer engagement tool. Marketing's role in e-commerce, Web-design, and Internet advertising principles are also explored. Students, through a real-world project/case, apply the functions of marketing to a social media marketing problem situation/case.

MKTG 3333 Sports, Entertainment, & Event Marketing Prerequisite(s): None
A study of the sports, entertainment, and event sectors of the economy. Marketing strategies used in these three venues are emphasized. Real-life projects are used in each of the three areas to enhance learning experiences and reinforce knowledge acquisition. Marketing and management problem-solving techniques guide student-generated marketing plans.

MKTG 3360 Professional Sales Prerequisite(s): None
A study of the principles and techniques of personal selling using a behavioral approach.

MKTG 4330 International Marketing Prerequisite(s): MKTG 3301
A study of the problems and procedures of marketing in foreign countries, including the effects of cultural dynamics in assessing world markets.

MKTG 4336 Principles of Advertising Prerequisite(s): Junior or senior standing
A study of the advertising component of the firm. Emphasizes the interactive coordination and strategy of this promotional tool. Applications necessary for developing target markets, utilization of the mass media, advertising research, and analysis of the complete campaign are stressed.

MKTG 4340 Internship Prerequisite(s): None

Restriction(s): Open to junior and senior H-campus (residential) students only
The course is an integrating field experience by which students learn actual business practices by undertaking responsible roles in an organization. The students develop interpersonal skills while acquiring practical knowledge in their disciplines. The students are exposed to various work roles and career choices.

MKTG 4350 Marketing Research Prerequisite(s): MKTG 3301
Students study the methodology and procedures used to meet the information needs of marketing management.

MKTG 4360 Marketing Strategy Prerequisite(s): Senior standing
A comprehensive course designed to study marketing strategy using case histories. This is a capstone course and requires the basic knowledge the student has acquired in earlier marketing courses.

MKTG 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

MKTG 6310 Marketing Management Prerequisite(s): None
Restriction(s): Graduate Business programs only
An inquiry into marketing decision-making. Emphasis is placed on strategic planning and analytical procedures for marketing decisions. The course integrates all areas of marketing management and relates marketing activities to the other functional areas of the firm. This course culminates with the presentation of a comprehensive marketing plan to a panel of venture capitalists.

MKTG 6333 International Marketing Seminar Prerequisite(s): None
Restriction(s): Graduate Business programs only
The study of marketing structures, organization, policies, and procedures as applied to the international environment. This course examines competition, strategies, and technology in the global marketplace.

MKTG 6355 Sustainability and Brand Value Prerequisite(s): MKTG 6310
Companies that invest in sustainability programs and initiatives can improve the reputation of their brands, the volume of their sales, and the pricing power of their products and services. This case-based learning activity will review the experiences of firms that have invested (or failed to invest) in sustainability programs, and will highlight “best practices” for creating brand value from such activities. Key Cases: Deepwater Horizon (BP), Global Social Impact Program (Starbucks), Mesa Wind/Natural Gas Power (T. Boone Pickens), and Valdez (Exxon Mobil).

MKTG 6365 Marketing Strategies for Entrepreneurial New Ventures Prerequisite(s): None
This course focuses on how entrepreneurial teams develop successful marketing strategies for start-up and emerging growth ventures. The emphasis is on assessing the external competitive environment, creating a distinctive price- features profile for the product-service concept, leveraging high-level partnership-referral networks, and executing the marketing message around a clear value proposition for specific target markets. Topics include: a) stages product development life-cycles, b) mapping the existing competitive environment, c) mapping the projected future market profile, d) product-service adoption stages among buyers in a target market, e) marketing research principles, methods/models, and assessment, f) aligning the product-place- promotion-price components for the product-service offering, g) potential partnerships and referral networks to drive market awareness, h) promotions-public relations- advertising tactics, and i) packaging and merchandising for in-store and online selling.

MKTG 6366 Develop and Manage Social Media Strategies for New Ventures Prerequisite(s): MKTG 6365
This course focuses on the development and on-going management of targeted social media strategies for emerging

entrepreneurial ventures. Topics include the launch, start-up and on-going costs, performance metrics, and operating logistics for utilizing widely available social media platforms within a formal, well-coordinated strategy for success.

MKTG 6381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.


Master of Liberal Arts (MLA) Course Descriptions
MLA 5399 Thesis Prerequisite(s): None
This course is for the research, writing, and defense of a faculty-approved Master of Liberal Arts thesis. Course may be taken twice for credit.


Military Science (MSCI) Course Descriptions
MSCI 1125 Physical Readiness Training
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Military Science department at University of Houston.

MSCI 1126 Physical Readiness Training
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Military Science department at University of Houston.

MSCI 1131 Intermediate Physical Fitness
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Military Science department at University of Houston.

MSCI 1210 Introduction to Leadership
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Military Science department at University of Houston.

MSCI 1211 Introduction to Leadership (Non-Majors)
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Military Science department at University of Houston.

MSCI 1220 Survival/Unarmed Self-Defense
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Military Science department at University of Houston.

MSCI 1221 Introduction to Leadership (Non-Majors)
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Military Science department at University of Houston.

MSCI 2210 Foundations of Leadership
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Military Science department at University of Houston.

MSCI 2211 Foundations of Leadership (Non-Major)
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Military Science department at University of Houston.

MSCI 2220 Military Science II
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Military Science department at University of Houston.

MSCI 2221 Foundations of Leadership (Non-Majors)
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Military Science department at University of Houston.

MSCI 3239 Special Problems
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Military Science department at University of Houston.

MSCI 3310 Adaptive Team Leadership
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Military Science department at University of Houston.

MSCI 3311 Adaptive Team Leadership (Non-Majors)
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Military Science department at University of Houston.

MSCI 3320 Advanced Military Science
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Military Science department at University of Houston.

MSCI 3321 Applied Leadership (Non-Majors)
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Military Science department at University of Houston.

MSCI 3398 Special Problems
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Military Science department at University of Houston.

MSCI 4310 Adaptive Leadership
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Military Science department at University of Houston.

MSCI 4311 Adaptive Leadership (Non-Majors)
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Military Science department at University of Houston.

MSCI 4320 Advanced Military Science
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Military Science department at University of Houston.

MSCI 4321 Leadership/Complex World (Non-Majors)
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Military Science department at University of Houston.

MSCI 4398 Special Problems
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Military Science department at University of Houston.


Music Education (MUED) Course Descriptions
MUED 2181 Instrumental Techniques: Brass Prerequisite(s): MUSI 0003
The study of technical problems, teaching materials, and basic performance problems of brass instruments. Teaching each instrument at the elementary level is included.

MUED 2182 Instrumental Techniques: Percussion Prerequisite(s): MUSI 0003
The study of technical problems, teaching materials, and basic performance problems of percussion instruments. Teaching each instrument at the elementary level is included.

MUED 2183 Instrumental Techniques: Strings Prerequisite(s): MUSI 0003
The study of technical problems, teaching materials, and basic performance problems of string instruments. Teaching each instrument at the elementary level is included.

MUED 2184 Instrumental Techniques: Woodwinds Prerequisite(s): MUSI 0003
The study of technical problems, teaching materials, and basic performance problems of woodwind instruments. Teaching each instrument at the elementary level is included.

MUED 2381 Foundations of Music Education Prerequisite(s): Music Education (BME) Majors Restriction(s): Field experience is required.
An introductory survey course for music teacher certification candidates designed to present philosophical, historical, and psychological foundations for music education. This course is a prerequisite for Elementary Music Methods (MUED 4382) and Secondary Music Methods (MUED 4383).

MUED 3180 Performance Recital Prerequisite(s): MUSI 0003
The exploration of techniques for understanding and developing the young voice, including a survey of literature and other resources for teachers and directors working with young voices.

MUED 3181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. A laboratory may or may not be included.

MUED 4382 Elementary Music Methods Prerequisite(s): MUSI 0003 and MUED 2381 and BME major degree plan filed Restriction(s): Field experience is required.
Develops competencies necessary for implementing music learning and skill development for pre-adolescents, in addition to surveying important methodologies used in elementary general music teaching for the music specialist.

MUED 4383 Secondary Music Methods Prerequisite(s): MUSI 0003 and MUED 2381 and BME major degree plan filed Restriction(s): Field experience is required.
Develops competencies necessary for implementing musical learning and skill development for students at the secondary school level. Examines principles and strategies relevant to successful music production in the junior and senior high student in schools.


Music (MUSI) Course Descriptions
MUSI 0001 Forum/Recital Attendance Prerequisite(s): Declared Music Major or Music Minor
Music majors must enroll in this course to document forum and recital attendance each semester. Grades on a pass/fail basis. For credit, attendance at six (6) recitals is required and a maximum of two (2) Forum absences are

permitted. Students admitted to the Department of Music are required to register for this course (unless enrolled in EDUC 4494, EDUC 4497, or MUSI 4090). Recital credit is not granted for a student performing on all/part of a concert or recital. Transfer students should review current Department of Music Handbook policies for specific details.

MUSI 0002 Piano Proficiency Prerequisite(s): Declared Music Major
All Department of Music students (except Bachelor of Music piano majors) must enroll in Class Piano 1143, 1144, 1145, or 1146 until this proficiency is passed. Music majors must enroll in this course in order to take the piano proficiency exam, which is grades on a pass/fail basis. Students who pass Piano Proficiency upon entrance audition must enroll during their first semester. Transfer students should review current Department of Music Handbook policies for specific details.

MUSI 0003 Sophomore Review Prerequisite(s): Completion of or concurrent enrollment in MUSI 2323 and MUSI 2123
Includes an essay, performance, interview, and the Theory I-IV Cumulative Exam. Two failed attempts to pass all four sections will result in the student being advised toward the Music Minor and an alternative major. All Music Majors MUST file a degree plan upon passing MUSI 0003, Sophomore Review, at which point they will become eligible to enroll in MUSI 3000 and 4000 level courses. Transfer students should review current Department of Music Handbook policies for specific details. MUSI 0003 should be taken in the spring semester of the sophomore or just prior to completing 60 credit hours.

MUSI 0222 Fundamentals of Music Theory Prerequisite(s): Audition Theory Placement Exam
A basic course designed only for "conditional admit" students to the Department of Music who do not meet the minimum level score required on the Audition Theory Placement Exam for entrance into Music Theory I (MUSI 1322). MUSI 0222 is not applicable to degree requirements for a music major or minor. Students placed in MUSI 0222 will continue on with MUSI 1322, Theory I, and MUSI 1122, Theory I Lab, only after they pass this course. It will be only offered in the summer at HCU. As another option, "conditional admit" students may choose to enroll in and pass an "approved" Fundamentals of Music Theory on-line course or elsewhere with written permission from the Director of the Department of Music or the Office of the Dean of the School of Fine Arts. An official transcript for the course (whether taken on-line or elsewhere) must also be sent to and received in the Office of Academic Records prior to full Department of Music admission and scholarship eligibility.
MUSI 1022 Theory I Lab Corequisite(s): MUSI 1322
Restriction(s): This course may not be taken out of sequence.
A course designed to teach the aural and sight singing skills needed to complement MUSI 1322.

MUSI 1023 Theory II Lab Prerequisite(s): MUSI 1022
Corequisite(s): MUSI 1323
Restriction(s): This course may not be taken out of sequence.
A course designed to teach the aural skills needed to complement MUSI 1323.
MUSI 1111 Husky Band Prerequisite(s): Permission of the Instructor/Band Director
Restriction(s): Course may be repeated for credit. Open to non-music majors.
An instrumental ensemble rehearing 3-4 hours per week, performing primarily for University basketball games and other HCU functions.

MUSI 1113 University Singers Prerequisite(s): Permission of the Program Coordinator of Music or the Choral Master Restriction(s): Course may be repeated for credit. Open to non-music majors.
Rehearsal and performance of the finest music written for choral ensembles.

MUSI 1114 Guitar Ensemble Prerequisite(s): Permission of the Instructor Restriction(s): Course may be repeated for credit. Group guitar performance of classical guitar literature.

MUSI 1119 Opera Workshop Ensemble Prerequisite(s): Permission of the Program Coordinator of Music or the Choral Master Restriction(s): Course may be repeated for credit.
Basic technical preparation and performance of individual scenes or complete operas, including dramatic exercises, improvisations, and the integration of music, acting, and opera staging, allowing students to experience all facets of production technique.

MUSI 1143 Class Piano I Prerequisite(s): Declared Music Major or Music Minor
Basic keyboard instruction for music majors and music minors whose applied instrument is not piano.

MUSI 1144 Class Piano II Prerequisite(s): Declared Music Major or Music Minor and MUSI 1143 with a grade of "C" or higher Continued basic keyboard instruction for non-piano majors.

MUSI 1145 Class Piano III Prerequisite(s): Declared Music Major or Music Minor and MUSI 1144 with a grade of "C" or higher Intermediate instruction in keyboard skills for non-piano majors.

MUSI 1146 Class Piano IV Prerequisite(s): Declared Music Major or Music Minor and MUSI 1145 with a grade of "C" or higher Corequisite(s): MUSI 0002
Advanced keyboard instruction directed toward demonstrated completion of Piano Proficiency requirements.

MUSI 1256 English/Italian Diction Prerequisite(s): None
Introduction to the speech sounds and rhythms of the English and Italian languages as applied to vocal literature.

MUSI 1257 French/German Diction Prerequisite(s): None
Introduction to the speech sounds and rhythms of German and French languages as applied to vocal literature.

MUSI 1322 Theory I Prerequisite(s): Approved online Fundamentals of Music Theory preparation studies. Corequisite(s): Concurrent enrollment in MUSI 1022.
Music Theory I begins with a review of the rudiments of music (intervals, scales, keys, rhythm notation). Also covered are: an introduction to species counterpoint, basic triadic harmony, voice-leading principles, and non-chord tones. Additionally, ear-training and sightseeing lab includes aural/vocal work in parallel topics. Music Theory courses must be taken in sequence.

MUSI 1323 Theory II Prerequisite(s): MUSI 1322
Corequisite(s): MUSI 1023
An integrated course involving more in-depth analysis and elementary composition of melody, two-part, three-part, and four-part homophonic textures, binary and ternary forms, tonal harmony through secondary dominant chords, and near-related modulations. Music Theory courses must be taken in sequence.

MUSI 1331 Music Appreciation Prerequisite(s): None
An entry level music course for all non-music majors, surveying a variety of musical styles. No music reading skills are required.

MUSI 2022 Theory III Lab Prerequisite(s): MUSI 1023
Corequisite(s): MUSI 2322
Restriction(s): Course may not be taken out of sequence.
A course designed to teach the aural skills needed to complement MUSI 2322.

MUSI 2023 Theory IV Lab Prerequisite(s): MUSI 2022
Corequisite(s): MUSI 2323
Restriction(s): Course may not be taken out of sequence.
A course designed to teach the aural skills needed to complement MUSI 2323.

MUSI 2111 Schola Cantorum Prerequisite(s): Audition and Permission of the Program Coordinator of Music or the Choral Master Restriction(s): Course may be repeated for credit. Open to non-music majors.
A select chamber ensemble which may be divided into smaller groups of quartets, sextets, and octets, studying and performing chamber choral literature.

MUSI 2112 Chamber Music Ensemble Prerequisite(s): Permission of Instructor and the Program Coordinator of Music Restriction(s): May be repeated for ensemble credit. Open to non-music majors.
The study and performance of the major chamber music literature written for combinations of instruments including the piano.

MUSI 2249 Class Piano Pedagogy Prerequisite(s): Piano Major Corequisite(s): MUSI 0002
Devoted to the development of keyboard skills covered in Class Piano I-IV including improvisation, harmonization, realization of figured bass, transposition, sigh-reading, accompanying, and basic score reading. Observation and guided field experience is included.

MUSI 2322 Theory III Prerequisite(s): MUSI 1323
Corequisite(s): MUSI 2022
This course examines the rudiments of analysis of larger 17th-19th Century forms, Chromatic Harmony (altered and borrowed harmony in particular) integrated with analysis and basic composition techniques. It includes Theme and Variations (Cantus Firmus or Continuous Variations) and Sectional Theme and Variations. Music Theory courses must be taken in sequence.

MUSI 2323 Theory IV Prerequisite(s): MUSI 2322
Corequisite(s): MUSI 2023
This course includes the study of chromatic harmony/remote modulation techniques, large-scale form analysis (Sonata-Allegro and Sonata-Rondo), study of contrapuntal forms, and comprehensive analysis with attention to thematic growth processes. Music Theory courses must be taken in sequence.

MUSI 2341 Vocal Accompanying Prerequisite(s): Piano must be primary Applied Instrument; MUSI 1323 and MUSI 1023
Techniques for collaboration with singers are taught through the exploration of repertoire for piano and voice. Additionally, students learn rehearsal and vocal coaching techniques through performance and individualized instruction in a performance class setting.

MUSI 2351 Music History and Literature I Prerequisite(s): Completion of or concurrent enrollment in MUSI 1322 and MUSI 1022 Fee(s): Music Literature Fee
In-depth survey of European music from the Medieval through the Renaissance periods. Emphasis on the lives, representative works, and cultural context of major composers from historical, analytical, and critical perspectives.

Development of skills necessary to identify, define, and analyze the various musical genres, forms, and style characteristics.

MUSI 2352 Music History and Literature II Prerequisite(s): Completion of or concurrent enrollment in MUSI 1323 and MUSI 1023 Fee(s): Music Literature Fee
In-depth survey of European music from the Baroque through the Classical periods. Emphasis on lives, representative works, and cultural context of major composers from historical, analytical, and critical perspectives. Development of skills necessary to identify, define, and analyze the various musical genres, forms, and style characteristics.

MUSI 3090 Performance Recital Prerequisite(s): MUSI 0003
A solo recital of at least thirty minutes but not more than forty minutes of music usually performed at the end of the sixth semester of study. Required of all students majoring in music. A pre-recital hearing must be passed at least two weeks prior to the performance date.

MUSI 3140 Studio Accompanying Prerequisite(s): MUSI 0003 and MUSI 2341 Restriction(s): May be repeated for credit.
Guided practical experience in Collaborative Arts for Piano Majors through assigned studio accompaniment and performance.

MUSI 32S2 Viola Prerequisite(s): None
One-hour private lesson per week. A minimum of two hours per day of individual practice and solo performance of a required recital before graduation is required.

MUSI 3240 Functional Skills for Keyboard Majors Prerequisite(s): None
This course covers skills such as transposition, modulation, improvisation, sight-reading, reharmonization, accompanying, open score reading and dealing with transcriptions. Applies to both pianist and organist.

MUSI 3243 Service Playing I Prerequisite(s): MUSI 0003 and permission of the Instructor
Service literature, techniques, accompanying, and conducting from the keyboard. Organ proficiency requirements are covered.

MUSI 3244 Service Playing II Prerequisite(s): MUSI 3243
Advanced training and continued development in service playing skills. Organ Proficiency will be administered at the conclusion of this course.

MUSI 3260 Introduction to Conducting Prerequisite(s): MUSI 0003 and Junior Standing (64 hours)
The course seeks to develop skill in conducting small and larger works for chorus and orchestra and to develop the necessary conducting grammar to accomplish this task.

MUSI 3262 Advanced Conducting Prerequisite(s): MUSI 0003 and MUSI 3260 and Junior Standing (64 hours)
The course continues to develop skill in conducting smaller and larger works for chorus and orchestra and to develop the necessary conducting grammar to accomplish the task.

MUSI 3263 Choral Conducting Prerequisite(s): MUSI 0003
The conducting of choral groups, including a study in basic technique, style, and interpretation.

MUSI 3264 Advanced Choral Conducting Prerequisite(s): MUSI 0003 and MUSI 3263
The conducting of choral groups, including a study in advanced techniques, style, and interpretation as it applies to conducting choruses.

MUSI 3265 Choral Arranging Prerequisite(s): MUSI 0003
The course provides practical study of the techniques needed for arranging choral music. Includes setting music for worship, secular situations, choral counterpoint, chorale textures, and study of varying accompaniment styles.

MUSI 3266 Conducting I Prerequisite(s): MUSI 0003 and Junior Standing (64 hours)
This course seeks to develop basic technique, style, and interpretation in order to conduct small and large works for ensembles.

MUSI 3267 Conducting II Prerequisite(s): MUSI 0003 and MUSI 3266 and Junior Standing (64 hours)
This course continues to develop advanced techniques, style, and interpretation as it applies to conducting ensembles.

MUSI 3281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

MUSI 3322 Theory V: Contemporary Theory Prerequisite(s): MUSI 0003
This course is a study of new compositional materials and analytical techniques in the 20th Century and includes intensive work in aural skills. It is a continuation of skills and techniques introduced in MUSI 2322 and MUSI 2323. Music Theory courses must be taken in sequence.

MUSI 3324 Instrumentation Prerequisite(s): MUSI 0003
An introduction to the principles of instrumentation and orchestration.

MUSI 3340 Instrumental Accompanying Prerequisite(s): Piano must be Primary Applied Instrument
Through the exploration of repertoire for piano and other instruments, this course encompasses techniques for collaboration with instrumentalists. Rehearsal and instrumental coaching techniques are developed through performance and individualized instruction in a performance class setting.

MUSI 3342 Organ Construction and Design Prerequisite(s): Permission of the Instructor
Study of the construction and design of the organ, minor organ repairs and registration guidelines.

MUSI 3351 Music History and Literature III Prerequisite(s): MUSI 2352
In-depth survey of European music of the Romantic period. Emphasis on the lives, representative works, and cultural context of major composers from historical, analytical, and critical perspectives. Development of skills necessary to identify, define, and analyze the various music genres, forms, and style characteristics.

MUSI 3352 Music History and Literature IV Prerequisite(s): MUSI 3351
In-depth survey of European music of the 20th and 21st centuries. Emphasis on the lives, representative works, and cultural context of major composers from historical, analytical, and critical perspectives. Development of skills necessary to identify, define, and analyze the various musical genres, forms, and style characteristics.

MUSI 3357 Vocal Literature I Prerequisite(s): MUSI 0003 and Permission of the Instructor
This course covers aspects of solo vocal art song in German, Italian, and lesser known languages, from its origins to the 20th century. An emphasis will be placed on the poetry and music from an historical and cultural perspective.
MUSI 3358 Vocal Literature II Prerequisite(s): MUSI 0003 and Permission of the Instructor
This course covers aspects of solo vocal art song in French and English, from both the United Kingdom and the United States, from its origins to the 20th century. An emphasis will be placed on the poetry and music from an historical and cultural perspective.

MUSI 3381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.
MUSI 4090 Senior Recital Prerequisite(s): MUSI 0003 and MUSI 3090 and Permission of Applied Instrument Professor
A solo recital of at least fifty minutes of music, usually performed at the end of the eighth semester of study. A pre- recital hearing must be passed at least two weeks prior to the performance date.

MUSI 4273 Technical Church Musician Skills Prerequisite(s): MUSI 0003
This course assists students in developing competencies for the vast array of technical skills required for today's church musician. Areas explored may include the church organ, hand bells, keyboards, multi-media computer technology including music notation and sequencing software, sound reinforcement systems, and microphone techniques. Visiting consultants will augment instruction.

MUSI 4281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

MUSI 4299 Senior Capstone Prerequisite(s): MUSI 0003 and successful completion of at least 110 credit hours
An advanced study, critical analysis, and/or research-oriented course required for all BM majors covering one or more of the following rotating special topics/areas: history, musical works, sacred music, or notable composers. Should be taken during the final year of a student's undergraduate music program.
MUSI 4343 Piano Pedagogy Prerequisite(s): Keyboard must be Primary Applied instrument
Covers aspects of piano pedagogy including instruction for beginning and advanced students, as well as business considerations needed for private studio instruction. Field experience is included.

MUSI 4344 Keyboard Pedagogy Prerequisite(s): Keyboard must be Primary Applied instrument
While the technique of playing the piano and organ are distinctive, learning to teach keyboard instruments are analogous. Students will learn to teach both instruments. Piano and organ method books will be examined and students will have the opportunity to teach on both instruments.

MUSI 4345 Organ Pedagogy Prerequisite(s): MUSI 0003 and permission of the Instructor
This course covers aspects of organ pedagogy including instruction for beginning and advanced students, as well as business considerations needed for private studio instruction.

MUSI 4346 Piano Literature I Prerequisite(s): MUSI 0003 and permission of the Instructor

Piano Literature I is an intensive literature study of the music by the predecessors of the pianoforte: harpsichord, clavichord, and fortepiano (but not organ). Included is the study of historical structure and style elements, and performance practices from pre-Baroque to early Classical periods. Taking Piano Literature I prior to Piano Literature II is recommended.

MUSI 4347 Piano Literature II Prerequisite(s): MUSI 0003 and permission of the Instructor
Piano Literature II is an intensive literature study of the music of the early and modern-day pianoforte. Included is study of historical structure and style elements of the late-Classical period through present day compositions. Taking Piano Literature I prior to Piano Literature II is recommended.

MUSI 4348 Organ Literature I Prerequisite(s): MUSI 0003 and permission of the instructor Survey of organ literature from 1300-1750.

MUSI 4349 Organ Literature II Prerequisite(s): MUSI 0003 and permission of the instructor Survey of organ literature from 1750 through the present.

MUSI 4355 Vocal Pedagogy Prerequisite(s): Voice must be Primary Applied Instrument
A historical and practical approach to the art of teaching voice. Emphasis is on research, writing, and observation, involving some student teaching as directed by the instructor.

MUSI 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.


Music (MUSI) Course Descriptions: Private Lessons
MUSI 11B1 Horn Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One half-hour private lesson per week. A minimum of one hour per day of individual practice is required.

MUSI 11B2 Trumpet Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One half-hour private lesson per week. A minimum of one hour per day of individual practice is required.

MUSI 11B3 Trombone Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One half-hour private lesson per week. A minimum of one hour per day of individual practice is required.

MUSI 11B4 Euphonium Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One half-hour private lesson per week. A minimum of one hour per day of individual practice is required.

MUSI 11B5 Tuba Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One half-hour private lesson per week. A minimum of one hour per day of individual practice is required.

MUSI 11C1 Composition Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One half-hour private lesson per week in music composition.

MUSI 11K1 Piano Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One half-hour private lesson per week. A minimum of one hour per day of individual practice is required.

MUSI 11K2 Organ Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One half-hour private lesson per week. A minimum of one hour per day of individual practice is required.

MUSI 11P1 Percussion Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One half-hour private lesson per week. A minimum of one hour per day of individual practice is required.

MUSI 11V1 Voice Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One half-hour private lesson per week. A minimum of one hour per day of individual practice is required.

MUSI 11W1 Flute Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One half-hour private lesson per week. A minimum of one hour per day of individual practice is required.

MUSI 11W2 Oboe Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One half-hour private lesson per week. A minimum of one hour per day of individual practice is required.

MUSI 11W3 Clarinet Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One half-hour private lesson per week. A minimum of one hour per day of individual practice is required.

MUSI 11W4 Bassoon Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One half-hour private lesson per week. A minimum of one hour per day of individual practice is required.

MUSI 11W5 Saxophone Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One half-hour private lesson per week. A minimum of one hour per day of individual practice is required.

MUSI 12B1 Horn Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One hour private lesson per week. A minimum of two hours per day of individual practice and solo performance on Department of Music Forum once annually is required.

MUSI 12B2 Trumpet Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One hour private lesson per week. A minimum of two hours per day of individual practice and solo performance on Department of Music Forum once annually is required.

MUSI 12B3 Trombone Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One hour private lesson per week. A minimum of two hours per day of individual practice and solo performance on Department of Music Forum one annually is required.

MUSI 12B4 Euphonium Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One hour private lesson per week. A minimum of two hours per day of individual practice and solo performance on Department of Music Forum once annually is required.

MUSI 12B5 Tuba Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One hour private lesson per week. A minimum of two hours per day of individual practice and solo performance on Department of Music Forum once annually is required.

MUSI 12C1 Composition Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One hour private lesson per week in music composition.

MUSI 12K1 Piano Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One hour private lesson per week. A minimum of two hours per day of individual practice and solo performance on Department of Music Forum one annually is required.

MUSI 12K2 Organ Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One hour private lesson per week. A minimum of two hours per day of individual practice and solo performance on Department of Music Forum once annually is required.

MUSI 12P1 Percussion Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One hour private lesson per week. A minimum of two hours per day of individual practice and solo performance on Department of Music Forum once annually is required.

MUSI 12V1 Voice Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One hour private lesson per week. A minimum of two hours per day of individual practice and solo performance on Department of Music Forum once annually is required.

MUSI 12W1 Flute Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at

https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One half-hour private lesson per week. A minimum of one hour per day of individual practice is required.

MUSI 12W2 Oboe Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One hour private lesson per week. A minimum of two hours per day of individual practice and solo performance on Department of Music Forum once annually is required.

MUSI 12W3 Clarinet Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One hour private lesson per week. A minimum of two hours per day of individual practice and solo performance on Department of Music Forum once annually is required.

MUSI 12W4 Bassoon Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One hour private lesson per week. A minimum of two hours per day of individual practice and solo performance on Department of Music Forum once annually is required.

MUSI 12W5 Saxophone Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One hour private lesson per week. A minimum of two hours per day of individual practice and solo performance on Department of Music Forum once annually is required.

MUSI 31B1 Horn Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One half-hour private lesson per week. This course is eligible only for fulfilling degree requirements with permission of the Program Coordinator of Music and the Chair of the Department of Music. A minimum of one hour per day of individual practice is required.

MUSI 31B2 Trumpet Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One half hour private lesson per week. This course is eligible only for fulfilling degree requirements with permission of the Program Coordinator of Music and the Chair of the Department of Music. A minimum of one hour per day of individual practice is required.

MUSI 31B3 Trombone Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One half hour private lesson per week. This course is eligible only for fulfilling degree requirements with permission of the Program Coordinator of Music and the Chair of the Department of Music. A minimum of one hour per day of individual practice is required.

MUSI 31B4 Euphonium Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One half-hour private lesson per week. This course is eligible only for fulfilling degree requirements with permission of the Program Coordinator of Music and the Chair of the Department of Music. A minimum of one hour per day of individual practice is required.

MUSI 31B5 Tuba Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One half-hour private lesson per week. This course is eligible only for fulfilling degree requirements with permission of the Program Coordinator of Music and the Chair of the Department of Music. A minimum of one hour per day of individual practice is required.

MUSI 31C1 Composition Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One half hour private lesson per week in music composition. This course is eligible only for fulfilling degree requirements with permission of the Program Coordinator of Music and the Chair of the Department of Music.

MUSI 31K1 Piano Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One half-hour private lesson per week. This course is eligible only for fulfilling degree requirements with permission of the Program Coordinator of Music and the Chair of the Department of Music. A minimum of one hour per day of individual practice is required.

MUSI 31K2 Organ Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One half-hour private lesson per week. This course is eligible only for fulfilling degree requirements with permission of the Program Coordinator of Music and the Chair of the Department of Music. A minimum of one hour per day of individual practice is required.

MUSI 31P1 Percussion Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One half-hour private lesson per week. This course is eligible only for fulfilling degree requirements with permission of the Program Coordinator of Music and the Chair of the Department of Music. A minimum of one hour per day of individual practice is required.

MUSI 31V1 Voice Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One half hour private lesson per week. This course is eligible only for fulfilling degree requirements with permission of the Program Coordinator of Music and the Chair of the Department of Music. A minimum of one hour per day of individual practice is required.

MUSI 31W1 Flute Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One half-hour private lesson per week. This course is eligible only for fulfilling degree requirements with permission of the Program Coordinator of Music and the Chair of the Department of Music. A minimum of one hour per day of individual practice is required.

MUSI 31W2 Oboe Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One half-hour private lesson per week. This course is eligible only for fulfilling degree requirements with permission of the Program Coordinator of Music and the Chair of the Department of Music. A minimum of one hour per day of individual practice is required.

MUSI 31W3 Clarinet Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at

https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One half-hour private lesson per week. This course is eligible only for fulfilling degree requirements with permission of the Program Coordinator of Music and the Chair of the Department of Music. A minimum of one hour per day of individual practice is required.

MUSI 31W4 Bassoon Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One half-hour private lesson per week. This course is eligible only for fulfilling degree requirements with permission of the Program Coordinator of Music and the Chair of the Department of Music. A minimum of one hour per day of individual practice is required.

MUSI 31W5 Saxophone Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One half hour private lesson per week. This course is eligible only for fulfilling degree requirements with permission of the Program Coordinator of Music and the Chair of the Department of Music. A minimum of one hour per day of individual practice is required.

MUSI 32B1 Horn Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One hour private lesson per week. A minimum of two hours per day of individual practice and solo performance of a required recital before graduation is required.

MUSI 32B2 Trumpet Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One hour private lesson per week. A minimum of two hours per day of individual practice and solo performance of a required recital before graduation is required.

MUSI 32B3 Trombone Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One hour private lesson per week. A minimum of two hours per day of individual practice and solo performance of a required recital before graduation is required.

MUSI 32B4 Euphonium Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One hour private lesson per week. A minimum of two hours per day of individual practice and solo performance of a required recital before graduation is required.

MUSI 32B5 Tuba Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One hour private lesson per week. A minimum of two hours per day of individual practice and solo performance of a required recital before graduation is required.

MUSI 32C1 Composition Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One hour private lesson per week in music composition.

MUSI 32K1 Piano Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at

https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One hour private lesson per week. A minimum of two hours per day of individual practice and solo performance of a required recital before graduation is required.

MUSI 32K2 Organ Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One hour private lesson per week. A minimum of two hours per day of individual practice and solo performance of a required recital before graduation is required.

MUSI 32P1 Percussion Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One hour private lesson per week. A minimum of two hours per day of individual practice and solo performance of a required recital before graduation is required.

MUSI 32V1 Voice Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One hour private lesson per week. A minimum of two hours per day of individual practice and solo performance of a required recital before graduation is required.

MUSI 32W1 Flute Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One hour private lesson per week. A minimum of two hours per day of individual practice and solo performance of a required recital before graduation is required.

MUSI 32W2 Oboe Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One half-hour private lesson per week. This course is eligible only for fulfilling degree requirements with permission of the Program Coordinator and the Chair of the Department of Music. A minimum of one hour per day of individual practice is required.

MUSI 32W3 Clarinet Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One hour private lesson per week. A minimum of two hours per day of individual practice and solo performance of a required recital before graduation is required.

MUSI 32W4 Bassoon Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One hour private lesson per week. A minimum of two hours per day of individual practice and solo performance of a required recital before graduation is required.

MUSI 32W5 Saxophone Prerequisite(s): Admittance to the Department of Music through audition. Auditions can be scheduled at https://hc.edu/MusicAudition.
One hour private lesson per week. A minimum of two hours per day of individual practice and solo performance of a required recital before graduation is required.

MUSI 4300 Advanced Studies in Music Prerequisite(s): MUSI 0003 and MUSI 2323 and MUSI 1023 and MUSI 3333 and MUSI 3334
An advanced study, critical analysis, and/or research-oriented course required for all BM and BA majors covering one

or more of the following rotating special topics/areas: musicological or theoretical studies, musical works or literature, sacred music, notable composers, or advanced applied techniques. Should be taken during the final year of a student’s undergraduate music program.


Narrative Arts (NARR) Course Descriptions
NARR 1000 Narrative Arts Forum Prerequisite(s): None
Restriction(s): This course may be repeated for credit.
All majors within Narrative Arts must enroll in this course to document forum attendance each semester. Graded on a pass/fail basis.

NARR 1300 Narrative Arts: Fiction, Film, and Games Prerequisite(s): None
This course introduces students to narrative theory and aesthetics, communication principles, and media literacy through a comprehensive survey of creative writing, cinematic arts, and digital media.

NARR 2200 Art of Storytelling Prerequisite(s): NARR 1300
Corequisite(s): CINE 2100 or DIGI 2100 or WRIT 2100 Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
Building on the theory of narrative arts, this class will explore the role storytelling plays in different mediums and helps train students in the development and presentation of their own stories. Students are required to take CINE 2100 or DIGI 2100 or WRIT 2100 simultaneously with this course.

NARR 2310 Media & Careers Survey Prerequisite(s): None
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
A broad overview of the history and scope of the modern media industry and the particular opportunities and challenges within this dynamic, multi-platform landscape.

NARR 2312 Collaboration & Communication Prerequisite(s): None
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities; Narrative Arts Equipment
Collaborative mediums require individuals to come together and work efficiently as a team. This course explores communication theory and uses collaborative projects to introduce students to the various challenges they may face and helps them find the best ways to overcome those challenges as a team.

NARR 3120 Faith, Culture, & the Arts Prerequisite(s): None
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
Restriction(s): This course may be repeated for credit.
This class explores the role of Christian artists in culture. Students will study how great Christian thinkers have thought about culture and art throughout church history and be challenged to understand their vocation as artists and media creators from a biblical perspective. Students will also develop an understanding of how to live out their faith through their work as they seek to affect the culture around them.

NARR 3220 Faith, Culture, & the Arts Prerequisite(s): None
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
Restriction(s): This course may be repeated for credit.
This class explores the role of Christian artists in culture. Students will study how great Christian thinkers have thought about culture and art throughout church history and be challenged to understand their vocation as artists and media creators from a biblical perspective. Students will also develop an understanding of how to live out their faith through their work as they seek to affect the culture around them.

NARR 3310 Portfolio, Pitching, & Networking Prerequisite(s): NARR 2200, NARR 2310, NARR 2312 and at least 9 hours of CINE, DIGI, or WRIT courses Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities; Narrative Arts Equipment
Students develop professional portfolios reflecting their best creative work, while also practicing pitching, job interviewing, and networking in preparation for internships and future jobs.

NARR 3320 Faith, Culture, & the Arts Prerequisite(s): None
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
Restriction(s): This course may be repeated for credit.
This class explores the role of Christian artists in culture. Students will study how great Christian thinkers have thought about culture and art throughout church history and be challenged to understand their vocation as artists and media creators from a biblical perspective. Students will also develop an understanding of how to live out their faith through their work as they seek to affect the culture around them.

NARR 4199 Senior Portfolio Prerequisite(s): NARR 3310 and at least 12 hours of CINE, DIGI, or WRIT courses Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
Working with a faculty member, students complete a professional resume and portfolio featuring their best coursework and personal projects (in preparation for interviews, etc.)


Naval Science (NAVA) Course Descriptions
NAVA 101 Naval Orientation
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Navy ROTC at Rice University.

NAVA 102 Naval Engineering
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Navy ROTC at Rice University. NAVA 201 Naval Weapons-Ships Systems II
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Navy ROTC at Rice University.

NAVA 202 Sea Power and Maritime Affairs
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Navy ROTC at Rice University.

NAVA 301 Navigation I
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Navy ROTC at Rice University.

NAVA 302 Naval Operations/Seamanship
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Navy ROTC at Rice University.

NAVA 401 Leadership Management
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Navy ROTC at Rice University.

NAVA 402 Leadership and Ethics
For course description and prerequisites for this course, please contact the Navy ROTC at Rice University.

Nursing (NURS) Course Descriptions
NURS 3000 Core Nursing Competencies Lab Corequisite(s): NURS 3500
Recommended Concurrent Course(s): NURS 3309 and NURS 3423/NURS 3023 and NURS 3305 or NURS 3316 if not already taken

Fee(s): Nursing Lab fee & Malpractice Insurance Fee
Core Nursing Competencies lab focuses on the introduction to the role of the professional nurse as a provider of patient- centered care with concepts that include instructions and application of nursing psychomotor skills.

NURS 3001 Adult Health I Clinical  Corequisite(s): NURS 3501 
Recommended Concurrent Course(s): NURS 3510 and NURS 3010 and NURS 4405 and NURS 4005 Fee(s): Nursing Lab fee & Malpractice Insurance Fee 
This clinical course accompanies NURS 3501, the didactic course to prepare students to become nurses who provide patient centered care as members of inter-professional teams and advocate for patient safety in acute care environments for adults experiencing acute and chronic medical-surgical health issues. Students apply systematic approaches, evidence-based practice, and therapeutic interventions for providing care to promote and restore health in clients. The course incorporates clinical reasoning and clinical judgment, scope of practice, and standards of nursing care as well as legal and ethical principles. 

NURS 3005 Adult Health II Clinical  Corequisite(s): NURS 3505 
Recommended Concurrent Course(s): NURS 4415 and NURS 4015 and NURS 4407 and NURS 4007 Fee(s): Nursing Lab fee 
This clinical course accompanies NURS 3505, the didactic course to prepare students to become nurses who provide patient centered care as members of inter-professional teams and advocate for patient safety in acute care environments for adults experiencing acute and chronic medical-surgical health issues. Students apply systematic approaches, evidence-based practice and therapeutic interventions for providing care to promote and restore health in clients. The course incorporates clinical reasoning and clinical judgment, scope of practice, and standards of nursing care as well as legal and ethical principles.

NURS 3010 Mental Health Nursing Clinical  Corequisite(s): NURS 3510 
Recommended Concurrent Course(s): NURS 3501 and NURS 3001 and NURS 4405 and NURS 4005 and NURS 3305 if not already taken
Fee(s): Nursing Lab Fee
This clinical course accompanies NURS 3510, the didactic course that prepares students to become nurses who provide patient-centered care as members of inter-professional teams and advocate for patient safety when providing care for persons with mental health problems. Students learn systematic approaches, basic skills, and professional attitudes for providing care and evidence-based therapeutic interventions used to promote mental health in clients. The course incorporates clinical reasoning and clinical judgment, scope of practice, and standards of nursing care as well as legal and ethical principles for mental health nursing practice.

NURS 3023 Health Assessment Lab  Corequisite(s): NURS 3423 
Recommended Concurrent Course(s): NURS 3309 and NURS 3500 and NURS 3000 and NURS 3305 Fee(s): Nursing Lab Fee 
In this laboratory course, students learn and practice the assessment skills and identification of cues of health and well- being and differentiate between normal findings, normal variations and abnormal findings when performing assessments in a variety of settings. This is a lab for an accompanying 4 semester hour course. 

NURS 3181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

NURS 3305 Informatics and Evidence Based Practice Prerequisite(s): NURS 3316
RN to MSN Prerequisite(s): Unencumbered RN license and admission to RN to MSN Program
This course introduces the student to the use of technology used in healthcare for administrative, clinical, and facility needs. Students will learn the principles of nursing research and its relationship to nursing science and evidenced

based practice. Students are expected to critique research and determine its applicability for evidenced-based practice. Additionally, the application of ethics and advocacy for human subjects as essential components of nursing’s role in the process of improving health and healthcare and will be integrated into the course. This course can be taken in the first or second semester of the BSN program.

NURS 3309 Pharmacology 
Traditional BSN Prerequisite(s): BIOL 1414 and BIOL 2304 and BIOL 2314 and CHEM 1404 and PSYC 1313 and PSYC 2301 and PSYC 3313 and at least 27 semester hours of Liberal Arts Core Requirements; admission to the nursing programs or Pre-Nursing Honor’s Student
RN to MSN Prerequisite(s): Unencumbered RN license and admission to RN to MSN Program
Traditional BSN Recommended Course(s): NURS 3500 and NURS 3000 and NURS 3423 and NURS 3023 and NURS 3305 or 3316 if not already taken.
A course designed to assist students in preparing for clinical experiences by applying concepts of assessment, pathophysiology, pharmacology, diagnostic and laboratory testing analysis, and therapeutic interventions to specific clinical situations. The course involves didactic and experiential teaching methods and active learning experiences. In addition to preparing for clinical experiences, the course is designed to promote the development of critical and creative thinking, problem-solving, and time management skills. This course is also designed to assist the student with the math requirement for demonstrating competence in calculating medication dosages as well as providing the opportunity to comprehend pharmacological concepts and to be aware of the clinical applications of drugs in order to ensure optimal care of patients.

NURS 3316 Pathophysiology Prerequisite(s): BIOL 1414 and BIOL 1014 and BIOL 2304 and BIOL 2104 and BIOL 2314 and BIOL 2114 and must be a Pre-Nursing or Nursing student
RN to MSN Prerequisite(s): Unencumbered RN license and admission to RN to MSN Program
Students describe the pathology of health conditions and use concepts of pathophysiology for applying caring and NURS healing practices to designing health care plans for promoting fullness in living across the lifespan. The manifestations of pathology form a basis for health assessment. Synthesis of pathophysiology with levels of health promotion and prevention provides rationale for case management priorities.

NURS 3322 Perspectives of Healthcare 
RN to BSN Prerequisite(s): Unencumbered RN license, formal acceptance into the RN to BSN program
In this course, students examine trends that influence healthcare delivery and methods of healthcare delivery in the United States. Content includes but is not limited to current and potential health policy, nursing education and accreditation, patient-centered care, quality improvement, health promotion, informatics, interprofessional teams, and leadership. 

NURS 3394 Nursing Research Prerequisite(s): NURS 3423 and NURS 3023 and NURS 3400 and NURS 3000 and NURS 3314 and NURS 3014 and
NURS 3410 and NURS 3010
Recommended Concurrent Course(s): NURS 3401 and NURS 3001 and NURS 3405 and NURS 3005 and NURS 3315 Students will learn the principles of nursing research and its relationship to nursing science. Students are expected to develop the ability to critique research and determine its applicability for evidence-based practice. Additionally, the application of ethics and advocacy for human subjects as essential components of nursing’s role in the process of improving health and healthcare will be integrated into the course.

NURS 3414 Pathophysiology for Health Care
RN to BSN Prerequisite(s): Unencumbered RN license and formal acceptance into the RN to BSN program RN to Students explore the pathology of health conditions and use concepts of pathophysiology assessment and planning of person – centered care as members of interprofessional healthcare teams. Synthesis of pathophysiology with levels of health promotion and prevention provides rationale for nursing care management. Four semester hours.

NURS 3423 Health Assessment 
BSN Prerequisite(s): MATH 1313 and BIOL 1414 and BIOL 1014 and BIOL 2304 and BIOL 2104 and BIOL 2314
and BIOL 2114 and CHEM 1404 and CHEM 1004 and PSYC 1313 and PSYC 2301 and PSYC 3313, at least 27 semester hours of Liberal Arts Core Requirements; admission to the nursing programs.

RN to MSN Prerequisite(s): Unencumbered RN license and admission to RN to MSN Program   Corequisite(s): NURS 3023
Recommended concurrent course(s): NURS 3309 and NURS 3500 and NURS 3000 and NURS 3305 or NURS 3316 if not already taken
Assessment of the individual across the lifespan is taught within the context of growth and development. The student should be able to identify cues of health and well-being and differentiate between normal findings, normal variations and abnormal findings when performing assessments in a variety of settings. This is a four-semester hour course with an accompanying lab.

NURS 3500 Core Nursing Competencies Prerequisite(s): BIOL 1414 and BIOL 1014 and BIOL 2304 and BIOL 2104 and BIOL 2314 and BIOL 2114 and
CHEM 1404 and CHEM 1004 and NURS 3316 and PSYC 1313 and PSYC 2301 and PSYC 3313 and at least 27 semester hours of Liberal Arts Core Requirements; admission to the nursing programs
Corequisite(s): NURS 3000
Recommended Concurrent Course(s): NURS 3309 and NURS 3423 and NURS 3023 and NURS 3305 or NURS 3316 if not already taken
Core Nursing Competencies introduces nursing principles that underpin future clinical practice. Students are introduced to the role of the professional nurse as provider of patient-centered care, patient safety advocate, member of an interprofessional team, and member of the profession. Emphasis is on mechanisms of disease and how the nursing process facilitates systematic evidence-based individualized nursing care. Core Nurse Competencies incorporates the concepts of clinical reasoning and judgment, scope of practice, standards of care, patient-teaching, legal and ethical principles, and informatics through the use of the electronic health record. This is a five-semester hour course with an accompanying lab.

NURS 3501 Adult Health I Prerequisite(s): NURS 3316 and NURS 3309 and NURS 3500 and NURS 3000 and NURS 3423 and NURS 3023
Corequisite(s): NURS 3001
Recommended Concurrent Course(s): NURS 3510 and NURS 3010 and NURS 4405 and NURS 4005 and NURS 3305 if not already taken
This course prepares students to become nurses who provide patient-centered care as members of inter-professional teams and advocate for patient safety in acute care environments for adults experiencing acute and chronic medical- surgical health issues. Students apply systematic approaches, evidence-based practice, and therapeutic interventions for providing care to promote and restore health in clients. The course incorporates clinical reasoning and clinical judgment, scope of practice, and standards of nursing care as well as legal and ethical principles. This is a five-semester hour course with an accompanying clinical.

NURS 3505 Adult Health II Prerequisite(s): NURS 3501 and NURS 3001 and NURS 3316 and NURS 3309 and NURS 3500 and NURS 3000 and
NURS 3423 and NURS 3023 and NURS 3305 and NURS 3510 and NURS 3010 and NURS 4405 and NURS 4005
Corequisite(s): NURS 3005
Recommended Concurrent Course(s): NURS 4415 and NURS 4015 and NURS 4407 and NURS 4007
This course builds upon NURS 3501 and NURS 3001 to prepare students to become nurses who provide patient- centered care as members of inter-professional teams and advocate for patient safety in acute care environments for adults experiencing acute and chronic medical-surgical health issues. Students apply systematic approaches, evidence- based practice, and therapeutic interventions for providing care to promote and restore health in clients. The course incorporates clinical reasoning and clinical judgment, scope of practice, and standards of nursing care as well as legal and ethical principles. This is a five semester hour course with an accompanying clinical.

NURS 3510 Mental Health Nursing Prerequisite(s): NURS 3309 and NURS 3316 and NURS 3500 and NURS 3000 and NURS 3423 and NURS 3023
Corequisite(s): NURS 3010
Recommended Concurrent Course(s): NURS 3501 and NURS 3001 and NURS 4405 and NURS 4005 and NURS 3305 if not already taken
This course prepares students to become nurses who provide patient-centered care as members of inter-professional teams and advocate for patient safety when providing care for persons with mental health problems. Students learn systematic approaches, basic skills, and professional attitudes for providing care and evidence-based therapeutic

interventions used to promote mental health in clients. The course incorporates clinical reasoning and clinical judgment, scope of practice, and standards of nursing care as well as legal and ethical principles for mental health nursing practice. This course is a five semester hour course with an accompanying clinical.

NURS 4005 Obstetric Nursing Clinical  Corequisite(s): NURS 4405 
Recommended Concurrent Course(s): NURS 3501 and NURS 3001 and NURS 3510 and NURS 3010 and NURS 3305 if not already taken
Fee(s): Nursing Lab Fee
This clinical course accompanies the didactic course, NURS 4405, to prepare students to become nurses who provide patient- centered care as members of inter-professional teams and advocate for patient safety in healthy and complex childbearing environments. Students analyze the application of systematic approaches, evidence-based practice, and therapeutic interventions for providing care to promote and restore health in child bearing clients and neonates. The course integrates clinical reasoning and clinical judgment, scope of practice, and standards of nursing care as well as legal and ethical principles. This course is a clinical with a corresponding didactic course. 

NURS 4006 Critical Care Across the Lifespan Clinical  Corequisite(s): NURS 4506 
Recommended Concurrent Course(s): NURS 4310 and NURS 4417 and NURS 4017 Fee(s): Nursing Lab Fee & Malpractice Insurance Fee 
This clinical course accompanies the didactic course, NURS 4506, which prepares students to transition to the role of professional nurses who provide patient-centered care as members of inter-professional teams and advocate for patient safety in critical care environments. Students analyze the application of systematic approaches, evidence-based practice, and therapeutic interventions for providing care to promote and restore health in critically ill clients. The course adapts clinical reasoning and clinical judgment, scope of practice, and standards of nursing care as well as legal and ethical principles to the complex, critical or life-threatening needs. This course is a clinical with a corresponding didactic course.

NURS 4007 Pediatric Nursing Clinical  Corequisite(s): NURS 4407 
Recommended Concurrent Course(s): NURS 3505 and NURS 3005 and NURS 4415 and NURS 4015 Fee(s): Nursing Lab Fee & Malpractice Insurance Fee 
This clinical course accompanies the didactic course, NURS 4407, to prepare students to become nurses who provide patient- centered care as members of inter-professional teams and advocate for patient safety in families and their children in acute care environments. Students analyze the application of systematic approaches, evidence-based practice, and therapeutic interventions for providing care to promote and restore health in pediatric clients. The course integrates clinical reasoning and clinical judgement, scope of practice, and standards of nursing care as well as legal and ethical principles. This course is a clinical with a corresponding didactic course. 

NURS 4010 Transition to Practice Clinical Corequisite(s): NURS 4310
Recommended Concurrent Course(s): NURS 4416 and NURS 4016 and 4406 and NURS 4006 Fee(s): Nursing Lab Fee
Students will examine concepts and apply critical understanding and clinical judgment in a variety of healthcare contexts using case scenarios and Simulation technology. This course builds on all content and experiences and to prepare for the transition into licensed practice. The course integrates professional preparedness and career planning. This is a course requiring 60 hours of virtual lab.

NURS 4015 Community Population Health Clinical  Corequisite(s): NURS 4415 
Recommended Concurrent Course(s): NURS 3505 and NURS 3005 and NURS 4407 and NURS 4007 Fee(s): Nursing Lab Fee 
This clinical course accompanies the didactic course, NURS 4415, to prepare students to become nurses who provide population health care as members of inter-professional teams and advocate for safety for diverse populations and communities. Students analyze the application of systematic approaches, evidence-based practice, and therapeutic interventions for providing care to promote and restore health in communities and populations. Students assess the

community to determine healthcare needs and gaps in access to care and propose actions to promote diversity, equity and inclusion. The course integrates clinical reasoning and clinical judgment, scope of practice, and standards of nursing care as well as legal and ethical principles. This is the clinical course accompanying NURS 4415. 

NURS 4017 Nursing Leadership Clinical Corequisite(s): 4417
Recommended Concurrent Course(s): NURS 4310 and NURS 4506 and NURS 4006 Fee(s): Nursing Lab Fee
This course transitions students to become professional nurses who are members of and leaders within inter- professional teams and advocate for patient safety across the lifespan. Emphasis will be placed on the appraising the changing healthcare environment, and factors that influence, the profession, healthcare, and professional nursing practice in relation to diversity, equity, and inclusion in population health. This is the clinical course accompanying NURS 4417.

NURS 4181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

NURS 4281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

NURS 4310 Transition to Practice  Prerequisite(s): NURS 4405 and NURS 4005 and NURS 4407 and NURS 4007 and NURS 4415 and NURS 4015 and NURS 3309 and NURS 3316 and NURS 3500 and NURS 3000 and NURS 3423 and NURS 3023 and NURS 3305
and NURS 3501 and NURS 3001 and NURS 3510 and NURS 3010 and NURS 3505 and NURS 3005
Corequisite(s): NURS 4010
Recommended Concurrent Course(s): NURS 4416 and NURS 4016 and NURS 4406 and NURS 4006  
Students will examine concepts and apply critical understanding and clinical judgment in a variety of healthcare contexts using case scenarios and Simulation technology. This course builds on all content and experiences and to prepare for the transition into licensed practice. The course integrates professional preparedness and career planning. 

NURS 4312 Care of Vulnerable Populations 
RN to BSN Prerequisite(s): Unencumbered RN license and formal acceptance into the RN to BSN program   Students apply concepts of epidemiology to determine the factors that contribute to vulnerability for person centered care. Students will examine (a) health norms for the elder population based on age, gender, ethnicity, and socioeconomic status in order to determine the major health problems and surveillance issues and (b) research methodologies/approaches/models that are employed to improve health outcomes for vulnerable aging populations. Students will be expected to use communication skills and education theory to plan and present health information to promote health of a population. Critical thinking and mathematical skills will be developed in using a statistical approach to assessing and evaluating health outcomes. Concepts of health promotion and disease prevention serve as a basis for analyzing recommendations for health programming. 

NURS 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): Approval of the Department of Nursing and any other nursing courses as advised.
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

NURS 4405 Obstetric Nursing  Prerequisite(s): NURS 3309 and NURS 3316 and NURS 3500 and NURS 3000 and NURS 3423 and NURS 3023 Corequisite(s): NURS 4005 
Recommended Concurrent Course(s): NURS 3501 and NURS 3001 and NURS 3510 and NURS 3010 and NURS 3305 if not already taken
This course prepares students to become nurses who provide patient-centered care as members of interprofessional

teams and advocate for patient safety in healthy and complex childbearing environments. Students analyze the application of systematic approaches, evidence-based practice, and therapeutic interventions for providing care to promote and restore health in childbearing clients and neonates. The course integrates clinical reasoning and clinical judgement, scope of practice, and standards of nursing care as well as legal and ethical principles. This is a four semester course with an accompanying clinical. 

NURS 4407 Pediatric Nursing  Prerequisite(s): NURS 3501 and NURS 3001 NURS 3316 and NURS 3309 and NURS 3500 and NURS 3000 and
NURS 3423 and NURS 3023 and NURS 3305 and NURS 3510 and NURS 3010 and NURS 4405 and NURS 4005
Corequisite(s): NURS 4007 
Recommended Concurrent Course(s): NURS 3505 and NURS 3005 and NURS 4415 and NURS 4015
This course prepares students to become nurses who provide patient-centered care as members of inter-professional teams and advocate for safety in families and their children in acute care environments. Students analyze the application of systematic approaches, evidence-based practice, and therapeutic interventions for providing care to promote and restore health in pediatric clients. The course integrates clinical reasoning and clinical judgment, scope of practice, and standards of nursing care as well as legal and ethical principles. This is a four-semester hour course with an accompanying clinical.  

NURS 4415 Community Population Health  Prerequisite(s): NURS 3501 and NURS 3001 and NURS 3510 and NURS 3010 and NURS 4405 and NURS 4005 and
NURS 3316 and NURS 3309 and NURS 3500 and NURS 3000 and NURS 3423 and NURS 3023 and NURS 3305
Corequisite(s): NURS 4015 
Recommended Concurrent Course(s): NURS 3505 and NURS 3005 and NURS 4407 and NURS 4007 RN to MSN Prerequisite(s): NURS 3305 
This course prepares students to become nurses who provide population health care as members of inter-professional teams and advocate for safety for diverse populations and communities. Students analyze the application of systematic approaches, evidence-based practice, and therapeutic interventions for providing care to promote and restore health in communities and populations. Students assess the community to determine healthcare needs and gaps in access to care and propose actions to promote diversity, equity and inclusion. The course integrates clinical reasoning and clinical judgment, scope of practice, and standards of nursing care as well as legal and ethical principles. This is a four semester hour course with an accompanying clinical.  

NURS 4417 Nursing Leadership Prerequisite(s): NURS 3500 and NURS 3000 and NURS 3505 and NURS 3005 and NURS 3510 and NURS 3010 and
NURS 4405 and NURS 4005 and NURS 4407 and NURS 4007 and NURS 4415 and NURS 4015 and NURS 3309
and NURS 3316 and NURS 3305 and NURS 3501 and NURS 3001 and NURS 3423 and NURS 3023
Corequisite(s): NURS 4017
Recommended Concurrent Course(s): NURS 4310 and NURS 4506 and NURS 4006 RN to MSN Prerequisite(s): NURS 3305 
This course transitions students to become professional nurses on inter-professional teams while advocating for patient safety across the lifespan. Emphasis will be placed on the appraising the changing healthcare environment, and factors that influence, the profession, healthcare, and professional nursing practice in relation to diversity, equity, and inclusion in population health. This is a four semester hour course with an accompanying clinical.

NURS 4424 Nursing in the Community/Nursing the Community 
RN to BSN Prerequisite(s): Unencumbered RN license and formal acceptance into the RN to BSN program   RN to BSN Corequisite(s): None 
Students analyze historical trends and characteristics and factors that have impacted community health nursing and contributed to community health issues. Students compare and contrast the professional nursing roles in the community and apply theories, models, and principles to community health nursing practice. Opportunities are provided to use systematic approaches to identify health needs to groups and populations and promote health in the community. This is a four-semester hour course with an accompanying clinical.

NURS 4506 Critical Care Across the Lifespan Prerequisite(s): NURS 3501 and NURS 3001 and NURS 3505 and NURS 3005 and NURS 3510 and NURS 3010 and
NURS 4405 and NURS 4005 and NURS 4407 and NURS 4007 and NURS 4415 and NURS 4015 and NURS 3309

and NURS 3316 and NURS 3305 and NURS 3501 and NURS 3001 and NURS 3423 and NURS 3023
Corequisite(s): NURS 4006
Recommended Concurrent Course(s): NURS 4310 and NURS 4417 and NURS 4017
This course prepares students to transition to the role of professional nurses who provide patient-centered care as members of inter-professional teams and advocate for patient safety in critical care environments. Students analyze the application of systematic approaches, evidence-based practice, and therapeutic interventions for providing care to promote and restore health in critically ill clients. The course adapts clinical reasoning and clinical judgment, scope of practice, and standards of nursing care as well as legal and ethical principles to the complex, critical or life threatening needs. This is a five semester hour course with an accompanying clinical.

NURS 4564 Healthcare Administration for Nurses 
RN to BSN Prerequisite(s): NURS 3309 and NURS 3322 and NURS 3414 and NURS 3423 and NURS 3023 and NURS 4394 and Unencumbered RN license and formal acceptance into the RN to BSN program 
This course focuses on professional issues in nursing, nursing management and the use of research in clinical practice as well as the study of health administration and leadership from the nurse’s perspective. Students develop an evidence-based practice project. The course is five semester hours, including clinical. This course is 40% didactic and 60% clinical. 

NURS 5000 FNP Adult Health I Clinical   Prerequisite(s): NURS 5306  Corequisite(s): NURS 5500  
Fee(s): Graduate Nursing Lab Fee 
This course is the first of two that explores advanced studies in the diagnosis and management of acute and chronic illnesses in adult patient populations. A grade of “B” or above must be received in this course to progress in the Family Nurse Practitioner program. This course is 40% didactic and 60% clinical, including 135 clinical hours. 

NURS 5001 FNP Adult Health II Clinical   Prerequisite(s): NURS 5306  Corequisite(s): NURS 5501  
Fee(s): Graduate Nursing Lab Fee 
This course is the second in a series of two courses that explores advanced studies in the diagnosis and management of acute and chronic illnesses in adult patient populations. A grade of “B” or above must be received in this course to progress in the Family Nurse Practitioner program. This course is 40% didactic and 60% clinical, including 135 clinical hours. 

NURS 5007 PNP Pediatric Health I Clinical   Prerequisite(s): NURS 5306 
Corequisite(s): NURS 5407   Fee(s): Graduate Nursing Lab Fee 
This course is the first in a series of two that explores advanced studies in the diagnosis and management of pediatric acute and chronic illnesses. A grade of “B” or above must be received in this course to allow progression in the Pediatric Nurse Practitioner program. This course is 40% didactic and 60% clinical, including 108 clinical hours. 

NURS 5008 PNP Pediatric Health II Clinical  Prerequisite(s): NURS 5306
Corequisite(s): NURS 5408   Fee(s): Graduate Nursing Lab Fee 
This course is the second in a series of two that explores advanced studies in the diagnosis and management of pediatric acute and chronic illnesses. A grade of “B” or above must be received in this course to allow progression in the Pediatric Nurse Practitioner program. This course is 40% didactic and 60% clinical, including 108 clinical hours. 

NURS 5023 Growth and Development Across the Lifespan Clinical   Prerequisite(s): NURS 5305
Corequisite(s): NURS 5323   Fee(s): Graduate Nursing Lab Fee 

This course is designed to provide the learner with an in depth knowledge of growth and development, encompassing physical, cognitive, and psychosocial changes that occur from conception through late adulthood. This course will include an advanced studies in human development theories common to all people, as well as ways in which various patient populations differ from others. The learner will gain hands-on experience through precepted direct patient care of individuals within the context of family. Evidence- based practice is interwoven with practical applications to parenting, teaching, healthcare, and public policy. This course will provide didactic and advanced clinical practice with guidelines for health supervision of patients across the lifespan. This course has 81 hours of precepted clinical and is 40% didactic and 60% direct patient care, including 81 clinical hours. 

NURS 5026 Healthcare Operations Immersion Clinical Prerequisite(s): NURS 5300 and NURS 5309 and NURS 5302 and NURS 5308 and NURS 5316 and NURS 5318 and
NURS 5319
Corequisite(s): NURS 5326 Fee(s): Graduate Nursing Lab Fee
This course will explore competencies essential for organizational nursing leadership. Students will work with healthcare operations specialists to examine administrative, financial, legal and quality improvement activities necessary to run healthcare organizations and to support the core functions of treatment and payment.

NURS 5035 FNP Woman’s Health Clinical   Prerequisite(s): NURS 5306 
Corequisite(s): NURS 5335   Fee(s): Graduate Nursing Lab Fee 
This course provides studies in the diagnosis and management of woman’s health for advanced nursing practice. A grade of “B” or above must be received in this course to progress in the Family Nurse Practitioner program. This course is 40% didactic and 60% clinical, including 81 clinical hours. 

NURS 5036 FNP Pediatric Health Clinical   Prerequisite(s): NURS 5306  Corequisite(s): NURS 5336  
Fee(s): Graduate Nursing Lab Fee 
This course provides advanced nursing practice studies in the diagnosis and management of common, acute and chronic illnesses in pediatric patient population. A grade of “B” or above must be received in this course to allow progression in the Family Nurse Practitioner program. This course is 40% didactic and 60% clinical, including 81 clinical hours. 

NURS 5229 Advanced Role Prerequisite(s): (NURS 5501 and NURS 5001 and NURS 5335 and NURS 5035 and NURS 5336 and NURS 5036)
or (NURS 5407 and NURS 5007 and NURS 5408 and NURS 5008)
The purpose of this course is to provide a conceptual basis for advanced practice nursing to provide patient-centered as primary care providers and members of interprofessional teams. Students examine nurse practitioner competencies with emphasis on acquiring knowledge and skills to assume leadership roles in healthcare delivery, health policy, and complex healthcare systems. Research and quality improvement mechanisms to allow progression in the Nurse Practitioner program.
(Students in the FNP Program will take NURS 5501 and NURS 5001 and NURS 5335 and NURS 5035 and NURS 5336 and NURS 5036 as prerequisites. Students in the PNP Program will take NURS 5407 and NURS 5007 and NURS 5408 and NURS 5008 as prerequisites.)

NURS 5300 Theory Integration   Prerequisite(s): Admission to MSN Program 
This course explores and analyzes theories and propositions from social, psychological, medical, nursing, and interpersonal relations as a foundation for advanced nursing science and research, practice, and scholarship. A grade of “B” or above must be received in this course to allow progression in the Nurse Practitioner program. 

NURS 5302 Leadership for Quality, Safety and Health Policy   Prerequisite(s): Admission to MSN Program 

The principles and theories germane to leadership will be examined in relation to complex organizations and the development of leadership styles and policy making to transform those healthcare systems to promote diversity, equity and inclusion in healthcare. Course content will include quality improvement models, processes, and tools to measure outcomes in a healthcare facility. Emphasis will be placed on the political, demographic, and economic forces that influence health policy and professional nursing practice. Ethical and legal dimensions of nursing practice and interprofessional relationships at advanced level will be explored. A grade of “B” or above must be received in this course to allow progression in the Nurse Practitioner program. 

NURS 5303 Advanced Pathophysiology   Prerequisite(s): Admission to MSN Program 
This course focuses on pathophysiological processes across the lifespan and the development of advanced clinical reasoning and clinical judgment skills that distinguish the relationships between normal physiology and specific system alterations produced by injury and disease. Particular attention will be given to etiology, pathogenesis, developmental and environmental influences, and clinical manifestations of major health problems. A grade of “B” or above must be received in this course to allow progression in the Nurse Practitioner program. 

NURS 5304 Advanced Pharmacology   Prerequisite(s): Admission to MSN Program 
This course provides the opportunity to acquire advanced knowledge and skills in the therapeutic use of pharmacologic agents. The pharmacologic treatment of major health problems will be explored. Principles of pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics and pharmacogenomics will be examined. The effects of culture, ethnicity, age, pregnancy, gender and funding on pharmacologic therapy will be emphasized. Legal aspects of prescribing will be fully addressed. A grade of “B” or above must be received in this course to allow progression in the Nurse Practitioner program. 

NURS 5305 Advanced Health Assessment   Prerequisite(s): Admission to MSN Program  Fee(s): MSN Malpractice Insurance Fee 
This course will build upon health assessment skills developed in the professional nurse’s basic educational program. The theoretical and clinical basis for assessment in advanced nursing practice will be developed. The process whereby the advanced practitioner utilizes comprehensive physical, psychosocial, and cultural assessment across the lifespan to gather specific data relevant to common health problems is demonstrated. Faculty and preceptors facilitate laboratory and clinical experiences, which focus on assessment of clients and presentation of findings in a variety of settings. This course will require 40 hours of precepted patient care practice across the lifespan. A grade of “B” or above must be received in this course to allow progression in the Nurse Practitioner program. 

NURS 5306 Advanced Diagnostics and Skills Prerequisite(s): NURS 5305
Focus is on managing complex healthcare problems through the development of evidence-based diagnostic and clinical decision- making skills. Participants evaluate the use of advanced diagnostic techniques in terms of best evidence, client values/beliefs, available resources, and clinical expertise. This course will also provide hands-on practice with the advanced skills needed in primary care. This class requires 20 simulation/lab hours on campus or alternative location. This course is 85% didactic and 15% simulation/lab.

NURS 5307 Advanced Healthcare Informatics  Prerequisite(s): Nurse Leader program: NURS 5300 and NURS 5309 and NURS 5302 and NURS 5308 and NURS 5316 and NURS 5318 and NURS 5322 and NURS 5321 and NURS 5021
Prerequisite(s) Nurse Educator program: NURS 5300 and NURS 5303 and NURS 5309 and NURS 5304 and NURS 5302 and NURS 5305 and NURS 5311 and NURS 5325
In this course, students will explore core concepts, skills, tools that define the informatics field, including the examination of health information technologies to promote safety, improve quality, and foster consumer-centered care and efficiency. This course requires 90 hours of clinical experiences.

NURS 5308 Advanced Patho-Pharmacology  Prerequisite(s): Admission to MSN Program or approval by department  
In this course, students will explore physiological, pathophysiological, and pharmacologic processes to prepare nurses for roles in leadership and education. 

NURS 5309 Research Integration Prerequisite(s): NURS 5300
Students will learn to integrate appropriate research to assist in resolving clinical issues based on nursing science. Evidence-based practice will give consideration to patient preferences and values as well as clinical expertise while integrating research data.

NURS 5311 Curriculum Development   Prerequisite(s): NURS 5309 and NURS 5305 and NURS 5300 and NURS 5303 and NURS 5302 and NURS 5304 and NURS 5312 and NURS 5313
This course examines various classical and modern curriculum theorists as they apply to nursing curriculum development. Emphasis is placed on congruence between institutional mission, philosophy, and goals; professional standards; and needs and expectations of a program’s communities of interest. Students design a curriculum to meet the needs of a stated nursing role and setting. This course requires 90 hours of clinical experiences.

NURS 5312 Effective Teaching Strategies   Prerequisite(s): NURS 5309 and NURS 5305 and NURS 5300 and NURS 5303 and NURS 5302 and NURS 5304 This course will incorporate a learner-centered approach to course development and instructional delivery. Assessment tools and strategies used to evaluate student learning will be emphasized. Students will demonstrate instructional techniques and strategies in the teaching of didactic competencies and clinical proficiencies based upon evidence- based teaching practices. This course requires 47.5 hours of clinical experiences.

NURS 5313 Evaluation of Learning   Prerequisite(s): NURS 5309 and NURS 5305 and NURS 5300 and NURS 5303 and NURS 5302 and NURS 5304 This course examines a variety of assessment models and techniques used to evaluate student classroom performance and clinical performance, instructor performance, and effectiveness of education programs. Students will design and execute assessment and evaluation plans, interpret assessment data and develop closing the loop activities. This course requires 47.5 hours of clinical experiences.

NURS 5316 Leadership Roles & Operations  Prerequisite(s): NURS 5300 and NURS 5309 and NURS 5302 and NURS 5308
This course will provide an introduction to the leadership role and operations in nursing service organizations. Included will be the study of leadership roles, styles, and their implications for the nurse leader. This course requires 40 hours of clinical experiences.

NURS 5318 Healthcare Finance   Prerequisite(s): NURS 5300 and NURS 5309 and NURS 5302 and NURS 5308
This course will introduce students to the fundamental concepts and skills necessary to be successful managers in the competitive healthcare environment. The course covers principles of healthcare economics, third party reimbursement, costing, budgets and budgeting, variance, economic evaluation methods, and healthcare trends. This course requires 10 hours of clinical experiences.

NURS 5321 Healthcare Operations Immersion Prerequisite(s): NURS 5300 and NURS 5309 and NURS 5302 and NURS 5308 and NURS 5316 and NURS 5318 and
NURS 5319
Corequisite(s): NURS 5021
This course will explore competencies essential for organizational nursing leadership. Students will work with healthcare operations specialists to examine administrative, financial, legal and quality improvement activities necessary to run healthcare organizations and to support the core functions of treatment and payment.

NURS 5322 Advanced Health Assessment and Leadership for Population Health  Prerequisite(s): NURS 5300 and NURS 5309 and NURS 5302 and NURS 5308 and NURS 5318 and NURS 5316   This course will focus on health assessment of patient populations, including studies in epidemiology and vulnerable populations. Leadership skills will be developed for quality and safety management, disaster management and pandemic management. This course requires 45 hours of clinical experiences. 

NURS 5323 Growth and Development Across the Lifespan   Prerequisite(s): NURS 5305
Corequisite(s): NURS 5023 
Fee(s): MSN Malpractice Insurance Fee 
This course is designed to provide the learner with an in-depth knowledge of growth and development, encompassing physical, cognitive, and psychosocial changes that occur from conception through late adulthood. This course will include advanced studies in human development theories common to all people, as well as ways in which various patient populations differ from others. The learner will gain hands-on experience through precepted direct patient care of individuals within the context of family. Evidence-based practice is interwoven with practical applications to parenting, teaching, healthcare, and public policy. This course will provide didactic and advanced clinical practice with guidelines for health supervision of patients across the lifespan. This course has 81 hours of precepted clinical and is 40% didactic and 60% direct patient care, including 81 clinical hours. 

NURS 5324 Residency  Prerequisite(s): NURS 5300 and NURS 5309 and NURS 5302 and NURS 5303 and NURS 5305 and NURS 5304 and
NURS 5311 and NURS 5312 and NURS 5313 and NURS 5325
This capstone course will provide the opportunity for the learner to integrate and practice the content from previous courses in various healthcare systems and/or academic settings. This course requires 135 hours of clinical experiences. 

NURS 5325 Role of the Educator Prerequisite(s): NURS 5300 and NURS 5303 and NURS 5309 and NURS 5305 and NURS 5302 and NURS 5304 This course will investigate the essential skills needed for the roles and responsibilities of the nurse educator, including facilitate learning and learner development and socialization. Students will explore mechanisms for functioning within the educational movement. This course requires 90 hours of educator role experience.

NURS 5326 Healthcare Operations Immersion Prerequisite(s): NURS 5300 and NURS 5309 and NURS 5302 and NURS 5308 and NURS 5316 and NURS 5318 and
NURS 5319 Prerequisite: None
Corequisite(s): NURS 5026
This course will explore competencies essential for organizational nursing leadership. Students will work with healthcare operations specialists to examine administrative, financial, legal and quality improvement activities necessary to run healthcare organizations and to support the core functions of treatment and payment.

NURS 5335 FNP Woman’s Health   Prerequisite(s): NURS 5306  Corequisite(s): NURS 5035 
This course provides studies in the diagnosis and management of women’s health issues for advanced nursing practice. A grade of “B” or above must be received in this course to allow progression in the Family Nurse Practitioner program. This course is 40% didactic and 60% clinical, including 81 clinical hours.  

NURS 5336 FNP Pediatric Health   Prerequisite(s): NURS 5306  Corequisite(s): NURS 5036 
This course provides advanced nursing practice in the diagnosis and management of common, acute and chronic illness in the pediatric patient population. A grade of “B” or above must be received in this course to allow progression in the Family Nurse Practitioner program. This course is 40% didactic and 60% clinical, including 81 clinical hours. 

NURS 5381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

NURS 5400 Organizational Theory and Culture  Prerequisite(s): NURS 5302 and NURS 5300 and NURS 5309 and NURS 5308 and NURS 5316 and NURS 5318 and NURS 5322 and NURS 5321 and NURS 5021

This course will provide an introduction to organizational theory, culture, and principles of practice in the administration of nursing services and patient care. This course requires 90 hours of clinical experiences.

NURS 5401 Residency Prerequisite(s): NURS 5300 and NURS 5309 and NURS 5302 and NURS 5308 and NURS 5318 and NURS 5316 and
NURS 5322 and NURS 5321 and NURS 5021 and NURS 5307 and NURS 5400
This capstone course will provide the opportunity for the learner to integrate and practice the content from previous courses in various healthcare systems. This course requires 180 hours of clinical experience.

NURS 5407 PNP Pediatric Health I   Prerequisite(s): 5306  Corequisite(s): NURS 5007 
Recommended Concurrent Course(s): NURS 5408 and NURS 5008
This course is the first in a series of two that explores advanced studies in the diagnosis and management of pediatric acute and chronic illnesses. A grade of “B” or above must be received in this course to allow progression in the Pediatric Nurse Practitioner program. This course is 40% didactic and 60% clinical, including 108 clinical hours. 

NURS 5408 PNP Pediatric Health II   Prerequisite(s): NURS 5306 Corequisite(s): NURS 5008 
Recommended Concurrent Course(s): NURS 5407 and NURS 5007
This course is the second in a series of two that explores advanced studies in the diagnosis and management of pediatric acute and chronic illness. A grade of “B” or above must be received in this course to allow progression in the Nurse Practitioner program. This course is 40% didactic and 60% clinical, including 108 clinical hours. 

NURS 5420 Advanced Practicum Prerequisite(s): NURS 5501 and NURS 5001 OR NURS 5408 and NURS 5008
Restriction(s): A grade of “B” or above must be received in this course to allow progression in the Pediatric Nurse Practitioner program.
Students will provide advanced evidence-based care in primary care clinic and other approved outpatient settings under the supervision of a preceptor. Students will be expected to integrate knowledge and skills gained in previous courses. This course is a precepted clinical of 180 hours. (Students in the FNP Program will take NURS 5501 and NURS 5001 as prerequisites. Students in the PNP Program will take NURS 5408 and NURS 5008 as prerequisites.)

NURS 5500 FNP Adult Health I   Prerequisite(s): NURS 5306  Corequisite(s): NURS 5000 
This course is the first of two that explores advanced studies in the diagnosis and management of acute and chronic illnesses in adult patient populations. A grade of "B" or above must be received in this course to progress in the Family Nurse Practitioner program. This course is 40% didactic and 60% clinical, including 135 clinical hours. 

NURS 5501 FNP Adult Health II   Prerequisite(s): NURS 5306 and NURS 5500 and NURS 5000 Corequisite(s): NURS 5001 
This course is the second in a series of two courses that explores advanced studies in the diagnosis and management of acute and chronic illnesses in adult patient populations. A grade of “B” or above must be received in this course to progression in the Family Nurse Practitioner program. This course is 40% didactic and 60% clinical, including 135 clinical hours. 


Online (ONLN) Course Descriptions
ONLN 1300 Introduction to Online Learning Prerequisite(s): None
This course provides the resources needed to prepare students for learning in an online environment at Houston Christian University. The course provides strategies for being a successful online learner and provides an overview of

the tools used as an online student - from the learning management system (Blackboard), to support services available to online learners. This course features quick tutorials and assignments geared towards assessing and building skills needed in an online learning environment.


Philosophy (PHIL) Course Descriptions
PHIL 1300 Introduction to Philosophical Dialogue Prerequisite(s): None
This course introduces students to principles of philosophical discourse by means of Socratic dialogue, basic epistemology seminars, scholarly cultural analysis, and study of philosophical texts. Students are taught to recognize and avoid informal fallacies in discussion, and to strive for intellectual precision and logical soundness as they search for truth.

PHIL 1305 Logic and Quantitative Reasoning Prerequisite(s): None
This course introduces students to practical problem solving through logical deduction and induction, probability, and proofs of validity in formal systems. This course may include existential quantifiers, sets, and functions. In addition, this course trains students to evaluate argument salience through informal logic and consider critical thinking values such as objectivity and truth.

PHIL 1310 Logic Prerequisite(s): None
Logic has long been part of the core of a liberal arts education. In this course, students will learn to become better thinkers and communicators; mastering skills in symbolic logic, fallacy identification, and the philosophy of language. Topics in the history of philosophy and other disciplines will be studied to illustrate the role of logic in the liberal arts and to provide an opportunity for students to use their skills in diverse contexts.

PHIL 1313 Introduction to Philosophy Prerequisite(s): None
A foundational course designed to familiarize the student with the meaning and relevance of philosophy through a study of its main problems and the principal theories that have been proposed as solutions to them.

PHIL 3320 Business Ethics Prerequisite(s): None
The goal of PHIL 3320 is to prepare students for success in global business by teaching ethics from a Christian perspective. Students will be instructed in major approaches to business ethics and will be given opportunities to develop their character in constructive ways via case study participation. Special attention will be devoted to character formation in the context of a Christian worldview. Course topics may include: philosophical and cultural foundations of Business Ethics, the application of ethical principles in the marketplace, the development of constructive decisions and character amid the challenges of global business, the setup of a business ethics program within an organization. Human resources issues of diversity, whistle blowing, recruiting and hiring, and compensation will also be discussed as part of the course's application phase.

PHIL 3323 Ancient and Medieval Philosophy Prerequisite(s): None
A study of the historical development of Western philosophy from its early beginnings in Greece to the end of the Middle Ages.

PHIL 3334 Apologetics-Philosophical Foundations for a Christian Worldview Prerequisite(s): PHIL 1313
An in-depth study of the philosophical foundations for Christian belief and practice, including engaging philosophical criticisms of basic Christian beliefs and teaching.

PHIL 3344 Modern/Contemporary Philosophy Prerequisite(s): None

A continuation of PHIL 3323, beginning with the Renaissance and ending with the more important philosophers of recent times.

PHIL 3350 Philosophy of Tragedy Prerequisite(s): None
An analysis and evaluation of the tragic worldview as expressed in classic literature and philosophies of life. Topics considered could include the role of fate, free will, luck, and providence in moral responsibility, virtue, and happiness. Works considered could include the philosophies of Aristotle, Hegel, Schopenhauer, Kierkegaard, and Nietzsche, alongside the dramas of Sophocles and Shakespeare. Special attention will be paid to the problem of evil and the question of whether tragedy is compatible with the Christian worldview.

PHIL 3360 Medical Humanities Prerequisite(s): None
A course designed to introduce students to medical humanities. The course is an interdisciplinary approach to looking at medical ethics and culture that will focus on the humanities and especially philosophy. Subjects to be covered may include the concept of personhood at the beginning and end of life, the arts and medicine, the historical development of medicine, theology of medicine, and the philosophy of science and medicine.

PHIL 3365 Medical Ethics Prerequisite(s): None
This course will look at debates in medical ethics. Topics may include abortion, euthanasia, medical testing and research, scarcity and distribution of health care, genetics, privacy, and reproductive technology.

PHIL 4160 Explorations in Philosophy Prerequisite(s): None
A course exploring an unusual or specialized topic within the field of philosophy. Example topics may include philosophy of time, existence of abstract objects, subject/object division, applied ethics, or pop-culture studies.

PHIL 4181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

PHIL 4323 Ethics Prerequisite(s): None
A course in which the major ethical systems and their theories of value and conduct are studied critically and evaluated from a Christian point of view.

PHIL 4333 Aesthetics Prerequisite(s): PHIL 1313
Examination of texts from the history of philosophy focusing on the questions of beauty, appropriateness, and value of both art and nature.

PHIL 4334 Metaphysics Prerequisite(s): PHIL 1313
Metaphysics is the study of the nature of reality. Topics to be discussed may include freedom of the will, causation, being, the nature of universals, possibility and necessity, space and time, philosophical anthropology and some philosophical theology. This class will provide a survey of these topics as it surveys views of the nature of reality over many different philosophical genres.

PHIL 4335 Epistemology Prerequisite(s): PHIL 1313
Considers questions such as the following: Can I have knowledge of anything outside my own mind - for example, physical objects or other minds? Or is the skeptic's attack on my commonplace claims to know unanswerable? What is knowledge?

PHIL 4336 Philosophy of Science Prerequisite(s): PHIL 1313
Examination of the philosophical foundations for the natural sciences, as well as conceptual issues surrounding the nature and extent of scientific inquiry.

PHIL 4358 Analytic Philosophy Prerequisite(s): PHIL 1313
Readings from post-Idealist Anglo-American philosophers who pursue clarity, precision, and formalized logical argument as the best means to engage recurring philosophical questions.

PHIL 4359 Political Philosophy Prerequisite(s): PHIL 1313
Examination of texts from the history of philosophy focusing on the relationship between the individual and collective neighbor. In this course, the great philosophers guide us as we wrestle with questions concerning the polis, state, just and unjust government, and the law.

PHIL 4363 Philosophy of Religion Prerequisite(s): None
A critical examination of the nature and validity of religious experience and the place of religion in human life. Consideration is given to religious problems such as the existence and nature of God, the source of religious knowledge, the nature of man, the origin and nature of evil. (Offered also as CHRI 4363.)

PHIL 4365 Philosophy of Mind Prerequisite(s): None
A course exploring the nature of the mind and its relation to the body, consciousness, and thought. Topics may include personal identity, dualism, other minds, artificial intelligence, intention, and will.

PHIL 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): PHIL 1313
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

PHIL 4390 Great Philosophers and Their Works Prerequisite(s): PHIL 1313
This course will closely study one or more philosophical texts from an important philosophical thinker. Examples include a study of Kierkegaard, a seminar on the Critique of Pure Reason, a close look at The Republic and the secondary literature surrounding it, and the writings of Al Plantinga.

PHIL 5160 Explorations in Philosophy Prerequisite(s): None
A course exploring an unusual or specialized topic within the field of philosophy. Example topics may include philosophy of time, existence of abstract objects, subject/object division, applied ethics, or pop-culture studies.

PHIL 5181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

PHIL 5199 Thesis Continuation Prerequisite(s): PHIL 6380 (taken twice)
This course continues research, writing, and defense of a thesis project began in PHIL 6380. This course earns one credit hour and may be taken twice. Credit hours earned in this course may not be applied toward any course or credit hour requirements in the Master of Arts in Philosophy degree.

PHIL 5281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisites: None

Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

PHIL 5300 Fundamentals of Apologetics Prerequisite(s): None
This course will cover the fundamentals of classic Christian apologetics. Topics such as arguments for God's existence, the problem of evil, and the epistemology of religious belief will be covered.

PHIL 5310 Logic Prerequisite(s): None
This course will cover basic logic, including traditional logic, but focusing on modern symbolic logic. In addition to sentence logic and predicate logic, it will include probability and basic modal logic.

PHIL 5320 Philosophy of Religion: Faith and Reason Prerequisite(s): None
This course will deal with basic issues in philosophy of religion, such as arguments, the problem of evil, the relationship between faith and reason, miracles, and life after death. (Offered also as APOL 5320.)

PHIL 5325 Philosophy and Worldview Studies for Psychology & Counseling Prerequisite(s): None
This course explores the methodological and epistemological foundations of contemporary clinical psychology and counseling as well as other philosophical topics relevant to Christian therapeutic practice. These topics may include rationality, free will, clinical relationships, ethics, and philosophy of science. In addition, the way worldview impacts the history and future of clinical practice will be explored and emphasized. Texts assigned may include works by Plato, Aristotle, Epictetus, Augustine, Kierkegaard, James, Freud, Skinner, Piaget, and Kohlberg.

PHIL 5330 Metaphysics Prerequisite(s): None
This course will examine fundamental issues such as the nature of ultimate reality or being, the mind body problem, and the nature of freedom and its relationship to determinism. Particular attention will be given to the role of God in metaphysics and to the difference his existence makes for various issues.

PHIL 5340 Epistemology Prerequisite(s): None
This course will examine and assess different accounts of warranted belief and grounds for claims to knowledge. It will give attention to religious epistemology and the impact of theistic belief on epistemic theory.

PHIL 5350 Ethics Prerequisite(s): None
This course will focus on the nature of the good and the right, and various accounts of these fundamental aspects of moral philosophy, both classical and contemporary. Attention will be given to theistic and Christian accounts of morality, such as natural law theory and divine command theory.

PHIL 5360 History of Philosophy: Ancient and Medieval Prerequisite(s): None
This course will survey major figures, issues and ideas in the history of philosophy from the period of the pre-Socratic philosophers through the middle ages. Particular attention will be given to development of Christian thought in these time periods.

PHIL 5370 History of Philosophy: Modern Prerequisite(s): None
This course will survey major figures, issues, movements, and developments from Descartes in the beginning of the modern period to the early twentieth century. Particular attention will be given to the period of the "enlightenment" and other movements that have affected Christianity, either positively or negatively.

PHIL 5381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

PHIL 6310 Aesthetics Prerequisite(s): None
This course will analyze and assess theories of beauty, value and the nature and meaning of art. Particular attention will be given to the role that belief in God has in the creative process and the meaning and motivation for artistic creation.

PHIL 6320 Science and Faith Prerequisite(s): None
This course will explore the history of the relationship between science and religion, including the alleged hostility between the two. It will examine various accounts of the compatibility between the two and ways they can be understood as mutually enriching. Other topics in the philosophy of science and how they interact with theism may be considered. (Offered also as APOL 6320.)

PHIL 6330 Philosophy of C. S. Lewis Prerequisite(s): None
This course will critically examine the main philosophical and religious writings of C. S. Lewis. It will assess the value and ongoing significance of his work for Christian philosophy and apologetics.

PHIL 6340 Church and State Prerequisite(s): None
This course is a survey of some of the different views of church-state relations that have been developed in western philosophy and in the Christian tradition over the last two thousand years. Its focus is on contemporary thinkers and also on the political philosophies of the major philosophers in the cannon. It includes studies of monarchy, two- kingdom theory, religious toleration, distributive justice, democracy, establishment and disestablishment, and citizenship, among other topics. Upon completion of the course, students will be familiar with the major theories of the relationship between church and state, and will be able to articulate and defend their own views of church-state interaction.

PHIL 6350 The Problem of Evil Prerequisite(s): None
This course will examine the problem of evil as a challenge to theistic and Christian belief, and explore different responses to the challenge, both classic and contemporary.

PHIL 6360 Philosophy of History Prerequisite(s): None
This course explores topics in both substantive and critical philosophy of history. These topics may include the nature of historical explanation and narrative, the relation of history to other disciplines, and the way in which scholars have viewed historical progress. Of interest will be the way in which the Philosophy of History can inform our theological beliefs, and in particular, our understanding of the life of Christ.

PHIL 6380 Thesis Research Prerequisite(s): None
This is a course for students writing a Master's thesis. Requirements and readings will be set by consultations with a student's advisor and the Director of Graduate Studies.

PHIL 6381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

Physics (PHYS) Course Descriptions

PHYS 1003 Physics of Sound Laboratory Prerequisite(s): MATH 1313
Corequisite(s): PHYS 1403
This is the laboratory portion of PHYS 1403, Physics of Sound.

PHYS 1011 Astronomy and the Universe Laboratory Prerequisite(s): MATH 1313
Corequisite(s): PHYS 1411
This is the laboratory portion of PHYS 1411, Astronomy and the Universe.

PHYS 1016 General Physics I Laboratory Prerequisite(s): MATH 1434 or MATH 1451 or a satisfactory score on a departmental placement exam Corequisite(s): PHYS 1416
This is the laboratory portion for PHYS 1416, General Physics I.

PHYS 1017 General Physics II Laboratory Prerequisite(s): PHYS 1416
Corequisite(s): PHYS 1417
This is the laboratory portion of PHYS 1417, General Physics II.

PHYS 1403 Physics of Sound Prerequisite(s): MATH 1313 (Basic knowledge of musical notation is recommended.)
Restriction(s): The course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory experiments. This course does not count towards a physics major.
This course is an introduction to the physical principles behind sound and music. Topics include the fundamental theory of vibration, sound waves and propagation, diffraction and interference, free, coupled and driven oscillations, resonance and oscillation modes. The anatomy and psychophysics of the ear are also covered as well as musical scales, and the nature of sound from the musical instruments.

PHYS 1411 Astronomy and the Universe Prerequisite(s): MATH 1313
Restriction(s): This course does not count towards a physics major.
Designed for non-science majors, this course is an overview of the solar system, astronomical instruments, the origin and evolution of stars, galaxies, black holes, quasars, cosmology, and the structure and origin of the universe. Concepts and critical thinking are strongly emphasized. The course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory investigations consisting of computer work and observation sessions.

PHYS 1416 General Physics I Prerequisite(s): MATH 1434 or MATH 1451 or a satisfactory score on a departmental placement exam
Restriction(s): This course may not be counted as part of the physics, chemistry, or biochemistry/molecular biology major.
A precalculus-based introduction to Newton's laws of motion, gravitation, fluids, and sound. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions.

PHYS 1417 General Physics II Prerequisite(s): PHYS 1416
Restriction(s): This course may not be counted as part of the physics, chemistry, or biochemistry/molecular biology major.
A precalculus-based introduction to the general principles of thermodynamics, electricity, magnetism, and geometric wave optics. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions.

PHYS 2013 Principles of Physics I Laboratory Prerequisite(s): MATH 1451
Corequisite(s): PHYS 2413

This is the laboratory portion of PHYS 2413, Principles of Physics I.

PHYS 2023 Principles of Physics II Laboratory Prerequisite(s): PHYS 2413
Corequisite(s): PHYS 2423
This is the laboratory portion of PHYS 2423, Principles of Physics II.

PHYS 2181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

PHYS 2281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

PHYS 2343 Introductory Theoretical Physics Prerequisite(s): PHYS 2423 or concurrent enrollment in MATH 1452
Designed as an introduction to mathematical methods used in classical mechanics, electromagnetism and quantum mechanics. Topics include separation of variables and solving Laplace's equation, special functions, differential and integral vector calculus.

PHYS 2381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

PHYS 2413 Principles of Physics I Prerequisite(s): MATH 1451
An introduction to Newton's laws of motion, gravitation, fluids, and sound. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions.

PHYS 2423 Principles of Physics II Prerequisite(s): PHYS 2413
An introduction to the physical principles of thermodynamics, kinetic theory, electricity, magnetism, simple AC and DC circuits, and geometric wave optics. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions.

PHYS 2481 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

PHYS 3013 Modern Physics I Laboratory Prerequisite(s): PHYS 2343 or consent of the instructor Corequisite(s): PHYS 3413
This is the laboratory portion of PHYS 3413, Modern Physics I.

PHYS 3023 Modern Physics II Laboratory Prerequisite(s): PHYS 3413
Corequisite(s): PHYS 3423
This is the laboratory portion of PHYS 3423, Modern Physics II.

PHYS 3033 The Art of Electronics Laboratory Prerequisite(s): PHYS 2423 or 3413
Corequisite(s): PHYS 3433

This is the laboratory portion of PHYS 3433, The Art of Electronics.

PHYS 3043 Computational Physics Laboratory Prerequisite(s): PHYS 3313 or 3413 or 3323 (or concurrent enrollment) Corequisite(s): PHYS 3443
This is the laboratory portion of PHYS 3443, Computational Physics.

PHYS 3181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

PHYS 3281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

PHYS 3313 Mechanics Prerequisite(s): PHYS 2343 and MATH 1452
Topics include single-particle Newtonian mechanics, oscillations, gravitation, calculus of variations, Lagrangian and Hamiltonian dynamics, central-force motion and dynamics of system of particles.

PHYS 3323 Electricity and Magnetism Prerequisite(s): PHYS 2343 and MATH 1452
Topics include solving Laplace's and Poisson's equations, the method of images, multi-pole expansion, electrostatics and magnetostatics in the presence of matter, Maxwell's equations, electromagnetic waves and radiation.

PHYS 3381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

PHYS 3383 Mathematical Methods for Science and Engineering Prerequisite(s): Completion of or concurrent enrollment in MATH 3333 or MATH 3414
Advanced techniques in applied mathematics for students of science and engineering, with topics chosen from partial differential equations, Laplace transforms, Fourier series, complex analysis and vector analysis. Fourier series. (Offered also as MATH 3383.)

PHYS 3413 Modern Physics I Prerequisite(s): PHYS 2343
An introduction to special relativity, pre-quantum physics and basic concepts of quantum mechanics and atomic structure. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions designed as investigations of optical phenomena and fundamental constants.

PHYS 3423 Modern Physics II Prerequisite(s): PHYS 3413
A continuation of PHYS 3413. Topics include many-electron atoms, molecules, solid state, nuclear structure, and elementary particles. This course includes one semester hour credit for laboratory sessions.

PHYS 3433 The Art of Electronics Prerequisite(s): PHYS 2423 and PHYS 3413
The Art of Electronics consists of basic electronics and solid state physics theories and experiments. Topics include the fundamentals of direct and alternating current circuits involving applications of Ohm's Law and Kirchhoff's Laws. Students learn semiconductor physics to understand the operation of diodes, transistors and op amps. In the laboratory section, students build and test circuits while developing skills in the operation of power supplies, function generators, oscilloscopes and spectrum analyzers.

PHYS 3443 Computational Physics Prerequisite(s): PHYS 3313 and PHYS 3413 and completion of or concurrent enrollment in PHYS 3323
Students learn computational techniques useful for solving problems in advanced dynamics, electromagnetism and quantum mechanics. Advanced dynamics topics include the study of deterministic chaos solving systems of ordinary differential equations. Students apply finite element method electromagnetic modeling to calculate static electric and magnetic fields, solve time dependent magnetic problems, and calculate current flow. Quantum dynamics problems are analyzed by solving the time dependent Schrodinger equation. In the laboratory, students gain hands-on experience using mathematical software to solve problems in advanced dynamics, electromagnetism, and quantum mechanics.

PHYS 3481 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

PHYS 4181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

PHYS 4221 Undergraduate Research Experience in Physics I Prerequisite(s): At least 29 hours of Physics completed
Senior physics majors will investigate a topic of current research interest with physics faculty. The course will involve problem identification, literature search, and start of research (building the necessary background or setting up the necessary experiment(s) to solve the research problem, development of the solution of the problem). All students will meet with faculty twice a week for instruction, guidance and exploration of the topic.

PHYS 4222 Undergraduate Research Experience in Physics II Prerequisite(s): PHYS 4221
This course is a continuation of PHYS 4221. The course will involve the further development of the solution of the research problem; finding applications; acquisition of new results; completion of research; writing of research paper; preparation and delivery of oral presentation; application, preparation and presentation at the annual HCU Celebration of Scholarship Symposium. All students will meet with faculty twice a week for instruction, guidance and exploration of the topic.

PHYS 4281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

PHYS 4323 Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics Prerequisite(s): PHYS 2343
Energy in Thermal Physics, The Second Law of Thermodynamics, Thermal Interactions.

PHYS 4343 Introduction to Quantum Mechanics I Prerequisite(s): PHYS 2343 and PHYS 3413 and MATH 1452
Foundations of quantum mechanics, Schroedinger's equation with applications such as the square well, harmonic oscillator, hydrogen atom, and electron spin.

PHYS 4344 Introduction to Quantum Mechanics II Prerequisite(s): PHYS 4343
Continuation of PHYS 4343 covering quantum mechanics of identical particles, time-independent perturbation theory, the variational principle, WKB approximation, and time-dependent perturbation theory.

PHYS 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None

Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

PHYS 4481 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.


Psychology (PSYC) Course Descriptions

PSYC 1313 General Psychology Prerequisite(s): None
An introductory course dealing with the major content areas in psychology. Topics may include heredity and environment, emotions and motivation, perception, learning, personality, and intelligence. This course may be taken to meet Smith College requirements and as an elective by non-psychology majors. It is required for psychology majors.

PSYC 2181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

PSYC 2301 Introductory Statistics for the Behavioral Sciences Prerequisite: MATH 1305 or higher
The course provides an introduction to descriptive and inferential statistics, correlation, probability, and regression- with applications in behavioral sciences. (Offered also as SOCI 2301.)

PSYC 2302 Introduction to Christian Counseling Prerequisite(s): None
This course will review the similarities/differences among Christian Counseling, Biblical Counseling, and Pastoral Counseling theories. The philosophical bases of the major counseling theories as well as the need to replace those philosophies with a Christian worldview will be discussed. The student will review their personal worldview in light of scripture. The student will develop a spiritual development/discipline plan and report on their progress each week.

PSYC 2323 Crisis Intervention: Stress Management and Trauma Prerequisite(s): None
This course is a survey of crisis intervention theories, assessments, and models. Stress management techniques that can be generally applied to all levels of stress will be discussed.

PSYC 2324 Addiction and Substance Abuse Disorder Prerequisite(s): None
This class will provide a survey of the tools and methods to assess addicted personalities. Contemporary use of legal and illegal addictive drugs will be surveyed and how addiction destroys relationships will be covered. Common co- morbid diagnoses will be discussed and the extra difficulty for treatment of these clients. This class will survey treatment methods for addiction.

PSYC 2325 Dating and Intimate Relationships Prerequisite(s): None
This is an introductory course understanding close relationships. It will cover the research on relationships from dating through family formation. This course will survey the scientific research about how people are attracted to each other and the processes of establishing and maintaining a dating relationship. The effects of cohabiting will be examined and its relationship on children. How this intimacy develops into a healthy marital relationship and how the stresses of marriage can threaten this intimacy is covered. The causes of divorce and the special challenges of single-parenting and intimacy are addressed.

PSYC 2330 Human Sexuality Prerequisite(s): None
This is an introductory course about human sexuality. It will survey a variety of topics from biological to psychological to social aspects of human sexuality. This course will provide a scientific understanding of the historical, biological, psychological and social/cultural influences on human sexuality and its expression. Information about human sexuality across the lifespan will be included. This course provides information about sexual identity, orientation, and how changing sexual attitudes are influencing the culture. This course also provides information about the prevention and treatment of sexually transmitted infections. Information about the biological and psychological causes of sexual dysfunction and their treatments will also be covered.

PSYC 2340 Health Psychology Prerequisite(s): None
Health Psychology is an introductory course dealing with the major content areas of health psychology. Topics include: an overview of the field of health psychology, major body systems, important theoretical models for explaining, promoting, and changing health behaviors, and moderators for stress and coping. The psychosocial aspects of pain, coronary heart disease, hypertension, stroke, diabetes, and other chronic health conditions will also be introduced. (Offered also as KINE 2340)

PSYC 2364 Abnormal Psychology Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1313
A study of normal and abnormal psychological functioning, psychological disorders, behavioral disorders, psychosomatic illnesses, and substance abuses. May be taken by non-psychology majors as an elective. Recommended for majors in nursing, education, and areas which deal with problems of persons.

PSYC 2381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

PSYC 3305 Psychology of Personality Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1313
This course reviews the major theories of personality as they relate to explanations of human behavior, mental processes, and development. Issues of formal theory development and evaluation of formal theories are addressed. May be used as an advanced elective by psychology majors.

PSYC 3313 Human Growth and Development Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1313
An upper level psychology elective, this course is designed to emphasize the continuity of human development throughout the life span. The interrelationships among physical, cognitive and psychosocial development will be emphasized.

PSYC 3315 Group Dynamics and Processes Prerequisite(s): None
This course focuses on the assessment and understanding of the interactions of families. How the dynamics of the family produces positive and negative interactions will be analyzed. In particular systems theories applied to family interactions will be covered.

PSYC 3316 Case Management: Intervention, Recovery, and Relapse Prevention Prerequisite(s): None
An introduction to interviewing, assessing, and treating addicted clients. Understanding the family and environmental influences on addicted behavior will be studied. Note taking, reporting, and institutional requirements of the counselor will be covered. Maintaining recovery and relapse prevention techniques will be surveyed.

PSYC 3317 Suicide: Prevention, Assessment, Intervention, and Recovery Prerequisite(s): None
This course will provide a survey of the most likely reasons people commit suicide. Students will examine the DSM 5 for the most common diagnoses that tend to commit suicide. Understanding the different models that assess for

suicide and evaluating their effectiveness will be examined. Suicide intervention counseling techniques will be studied and practiced. Copycat suicides, including the increase of suicides in states that have assisted suicide laws, will be covered. Interventions for schools and businesses that have had a suicide will be explained. Support groups for family members who have lost a loved one to suicide will be covered.

PSYC 3332 Life Transitions Prerequisite(s): None
A study of the joys and stresses of post-retirement life. The financial and psychological stresses on the family to take care of aging parents will be covered. The frustration of dealing with declining mental and physical health and the high suicide rate of seniors will be reviewed. Intervention programs commonly used for later life challenges will be explored.

PSYC 3381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisites: None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

PSYC 3410 Experimental Psychology Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1313 and (PSYC 2301 or SOCI 2301)
Experimental psychology is an applied research course for psychology majors. Basic research methods and terminology will be presented and practiced in the classroom and these principles then applied in a computer lab. Research design for experiments, correlational studies, and more complex research projects will be critically reviewed. Students will be expected to participate in the early stages of designing a quantitative research study to include a critical review of the literature, formulating testable hypotheses, choosing an appropriate research design and outlining the methods and analyses. Applied statistical analyses will be reviewed and then practiced with SPSS software in the lab.

PSYC 3481 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included. Laboratory may or may not be included.

PSYC 4181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

PSYC 4281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

PSYC 4310 History and Theoretical Systems in Psychology Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1313 and at least 64 credit hours
This course surveys current systems of thought in psychology and reviews the major philosophical and historical underpinnings of the discipline. Relevant material from scientific research, including the biological and physical sciences, will be included.

PSYC 4316 Child Psychopathology Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1313
This course will focus on major forms of atypical development in childhood and adolescence. Course material will include disorders of behavior, disorders of emotion, developmental and learning problems, and problems related to mental health. Child and adolescent disorders will be discussed in terms of defining characteristics, associated features, possible causes, theoretical formulations, research evidence, and current approaches to intervention and prevention. The possible developmental course of each disorder will be presented to show how biological, psychological and socio-cultural factors interact with the child's environment to determine the expression of atypical development.

PSYC 4321 Integration of Psychology and Theology Prerequisite(s): None
This course will evaluate the overlap of psychological counseling, Biblical knowledge and theology. The student will read and study contemporary psychologists who have written on the field of the integration of Bible, theology, faith development and psychology.

PSYC 4322 Cognitive Psychology Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1313 and at least 64 credit hours and (BASC 1414 or any BIOL Science Lab with a grade of 'C' or better)
Cognitive psychology is the study of the mind, how we perceive the world, remember, reason, think, and learn. This course will present an overview of cognitive psychology, its findings, theories, and approach. Topics covered will include pattern recognition, attention, memory, imagery, concepts and categorization, and problem solving.

PSYC 4323 Theories of Counseling and Psychotherapy Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1313
Comprehensive and intensive study of major theoretical orientations in counseling and psychotherapy, stressing implications for research and practice. Includes experiences in micro-counseling and other simulations to develop counseling skills.

PSYC 4324 Advanced Theory and Practice with Addiction and Substance Abuse Prerequisite(s): None
The requirements for licensure as a Licensed Chemical Dependency counselor in the state of Texas will be covered. The professor will assign the student to interview or shadow an LCDC or equivalent and report on the work place challenges and rewards of the field. Theories covered in other cognate classes will be compared/contrasted based on what the student has learned from practical settings.

PSYC 4326 Psychology of Dying, Bereavement, and Counseling Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1313
A course dealing with the process of dying and grief of the survivors. The psychological adjustments of the individual, family, and professional are examined. How to facilitate grief as well as therapeutic issues are discussed.

PSYC 4328 Marriage and Family Counseling Prerequisite(s): None
A survey of marriage counseling models with emphasis on the ones that have the strongest research efficacy. Students will also survey the major family counseling theories and the techniques used by those theories.

PSYC 4329 Contemporary Issues in Christian Counseling Prerequisite(s): None
This course will survey ethical issues for Christian counselors. The requirements for licensure as a counselor will be covered. The differences between licensed and unlicensed Christian counselors and the limitations of practice will be covered. Legal requirements for all licensed and unlicensed will be surveyed. How to protect oneself from liability and how to evaluate one’s attitude to avoid judgment will be covered. How the American Counseling Association is infringing on the field of Christian counseling will be discussed and how that may impact one’s ability to practice in the future.

PSYC 4330 Psychology of Learning Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1313
A course stressing the contributions of major learning theories to understanding behavior. Particular attention is paid to human learning and the applicability of learning theory to the educational process as well as to goal attainments. (Offered also as EDEC 4330 and CYEN 4371.)

PSYC 4332 Social Psychology Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1313
Contemporary approaches to social behavior are considered. Cultural influences, prejudice, persuasion, conformity, attribution theories, and social cognitions are some of the topics addressed.

PSYC 4334 Psychology of Religion Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1313
The insights of psychology as a science are used to inspect and evaluate the religious dimensions of life. How religion effects religious development, health, experience, and relationships in the church, family, and marriage will be covered.

PSYC 4340 Art Therapy with Children Prerequisite(s): None
This course is designed to provide students with a basic understanding and practical approaches to the assessment and treatment of infants, young children, and adolescents. Students will develop clinical skills in the areas of observation, assessment, diagnosis, intervention, treatment planning and referral to community resources. Students will be provided with "hands-on" experience in the use of art therapy techniques used in assessing and treating children. Students will become familiar with the documentation and the professional language used in communicating with agencies that provide children's services. Cultural diversity will be included in discussions of children and adolescents and its impact on assessments and treatment planning.

PSYC 4341 Pre-Professional Art Therapy Capstone Course Prerequisite(s): PSYC 3320 and PSYC 4340
Supervised internship in the practice of art therapy counseling with individuals, groups and/or families. The internship seminar is designed to help students develop their techniques of practice in art therapy and counseling and their application of art therapy to various populations and settings, including ethical and legal issues of art therapy practice. Students complete internship hours at predetermined site(s) off campus, participate in seminars as scheduled, and individual supervision.

PSYC 4342 Parenting and Family Systems Prerequisite(s): None
A survey of parenting models/programs, with special emphasis placed upon challenges of adults to become effective parents. Modern family dynamics will be covered as well as family of origin parenting models. How the family functions as a system will be explored and how parenting stress can affect the entire family. Models of counseling intervention that address issues not amenable to the effects of parenting education will be covered. The student will analyze their own family of origin parenting system.

PSYC 4353 Physiological Psychology Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1313 at least 64 credit hours and (BASC 1414 or any BIOL Science Lab with a grade of 'C' or better)
A study of the physiological bases of behavior, with emphasis on learning the relationships between the functioning of the brain and nervous system with observable behavior. Neurodevelopment, the effects of drugs, and the biological basis of psychopathology will be some of the topics covered.

PSYC 4357 Methods and Strategies of Christian Counseling Prerequisite(s): None
In this course, a different Christian mindfulness technique will be introduced and practiced each week. Biblical counseling techniques will be surveyed and practiced. The use of non-judgmental techniques and the importance of cognitive behavioral techniques to practice will be emphasized.

PSYC 4360 Cultural Psychology Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1313 and at least 64 credit hours
The course will introduce counseling relationships and processes. Included in the study are theories of multicultural counseling, dimensions of worldviews, racial/cultural identity development, counseling ethnic minorities, bicultural/biracial minorities, women, and sexual minorities. The main focus of the course will be gaining practical knowledge and skills necessary to work effectively with ethnically and culturally diverse clients in North America.

PSYC 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a

minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

PSYC 4390 Psychology Capstone Course Prerequisite(s): PSYC 3410 and Senior standing
This course is the culminating experience for the psychology major. Students will incorporate the essential core concepts of psychology into one of two domains. Domain I will focus on an in-depth original research project written according to American Psychological Association guidelines. Domain II will focus on an internship at an approved site.

PSYC 5181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

PSYC 5281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

PSYC 5300 General Psychology Prerequisite(s): None
An introductory course dealing with the major content areas in psychology. Topics may include heredity and environment, emotions and motivation, perception, learning, personality, and intelligence. An examination of how introductory principles are applied in licensure programs is addressed. This course is taken by students fulfilling the leveling requirement for a master's degree in psychology or counseling.

PSYC 5301 Introductory Statistics for the Behavioral Sciences Prerequisite(s): None
This course provides an intermediate level introduction to descriptive and inferential statistics, correlation, probability, and regression with applications in behavioral sciences. This course is taken by students fulfilling the leveling requirement for a Master's degree in psychology or counseling.

PSYC 5302 Abnormal Psychology Prerequisite(s): None
A study of normal and abnormal psychological functioning, psychological disorders, psychosomatic illnesses, and substance abuses. May be taken by non-psychology majors as an elective. This course is taken by students fulfilling the leveling requirement for a Master's degree in psychology or counseling.

PSYC 5309 Ethics in School Psychology Prerequisite(s): None
This course is designed to explore the ethical and legal guidelines pertinent to delivery of psychological services in a school setting. Planning and establishing a professional identity for career development; understanding legalities, ethics, and standards of practice for school psychology; and, working effectively with special populations and problems in school settings.

PSYC 5310 Ethical and Professional Issues in Psychology and Counseling Prerequisite(s): None
A seminar format will provide the student with opportunities to study ethical standards and applications in mental health fields.

PSYC 5312 Marriage, Couple, and Family Counseling Theories Prerequisite(s): None
This course is an introduction to the field of couples and family therapy. It will feature theory and practice in the treatment of dyadic relationships, marriages, and families (including families with children). Students will develop an understanding of the prominent theories, including emphasis on systems theories that form the basis of relevant therapy approaches. (Offered also as COUN 5312.)

PSYC 5313 Methods and Techniques in Counseling Prerequisite(s): None
This course will introduce the student to those nondirective counseling skills which communicate the qualities of empathy, genuineness, and unconditional positive regard, and which facilitate building the foundation of the therapeutic working alliance. The course will include extensive skills-practice, role-playing, and videotaped exercises. Intake skills and additional counseling techniques will be introduced didactically and practices in class. This course will also focus on development of other affective interventions that are evidence-based. Course is offered only residential format. (Offered also as COUN 5313.)

PSYC 5316 Child Psychopathology Prerequisite(s): None
This course will focus on major forms of atypical development in childhood and adolescence. Course material will include disorders of behavior, disorders of emotion, developmental and learning problems, and problems related to mental health. Child and adolescent disorders will be discussed in terms of defining characteristics, associated features, possible causes, theoretical formulations, research evidence, and current approaches to intervention and prevention. The possible developmental course of each disorder will be presented to show how biological, psychological and socio-cultural factors interact with the child's environment to determine the expression of atypical development.

PSYC 5317 Christian Psychology and Counseling Theory Prerequisite(s): None
Christian psychology and counseling is rooted in biblical revelation, and relevant Christian theological and philosophical, as well as the pastoral and spiritual formation practices of the Christian traditions. This class summarizes those influences, while engaging with contemporary psychology to develop a therapeutic framework that is grounded in a Christian worldview, as well as informed by the best contemporary research and theory. The history of Christian and modern psychology will be explored.

PSYC 5318 Biblical & Theological Foundations for Psychology & Counseling Prerequisite(s): None
This class explores the therapeutic value of the main teachings of the Christian faith, including the nature of God; the metanarrative of human life; the nature of human beings, including their created goodness, as well as the main aspects of human psychopathology; the role of Jesus Christ in the reparation of the human condition; the mental health value of the local church; redemptive differentiation and integration; and the Christian future as a source of hope. The application of these teachings in clinical work will be discussed.

PSYC 5321 Form Psychology Prerequisite(s): None
The psychological form is a configuration of the whole human. Humans have developed many ways to view this form, including personality architecture, personality signature, the self-representation, personal agent, character, narrative, and the imago Dei. The significance of each of these forms for clinical work will be explored from a Christian standpoint.

PSYC 5322 Learned Bases of Behavior Prerequisite(s): None
This course examines the underlying dynamics that shape human behavior, including learning, thinking, memory, intelligence, motivation, and emotion. Consideration will also be given to how these processes are integrated in the personality.

PSYC 5323 Theories of Counseling and Psychotherapy Prerequisite(s): None
Comprehensive and intensive study of major theoretical orientations in counseling and psychotherapy, stressing implications for research and practice. Includes experiences in micro-counseling and other simulations to develop counseling skills. Course is offered only in residential format. A minimum grade of B is required for this course. (Offered also EPSY 5323. Offered also as COUN 5320 for residential courses.)

PSYC 5330 Psychology of Learning Prerequisite(s): None
A course stressing the contributions of major learning theories to understanding behavior. Particular attention is paid to human learning and the applicability of learning theory to the educational process as well as to goal attainments.

PSYC 5332 Social Psychology Prerequisite(s): None
Contemporary approaches to social behavior are considered. Cultural influences, prejudice, persuasion, conformity, attribution theories, and social cognitions are some of the topics addressed.

PSYC 5334 Psychology of Religion Prerequisite(s): None
The insights of psychology as a science are used to inspect and evaluate the religious dimensions of life. How religion effects religious development, health, experience, and relationships in the church, family, and marriage will be covered.

PSYC 5335 Christian Spiritual Formation for Therapists Prerequisite(s): None
An investigation of the history, traditions, and process of spiritual formation. Emphasis is on the knowledge and practice of the spiritual disciplines, such as prayer, meditation, study, solitude, fasting, and so on. Consideration will be given to their application to Christian psychotherapy, counseling, and spiritual direction.

PSYC 5336 Christian Spiritual Direction Prerequisite(s): None
This course is an extensive study of the field of spiritual direction with attention given to various traditions, strategies, and methods for helping others to move Godward. Emphasis is given to the role of spiritual direction in Christian psychology and a distinctively Christian formational paradigm. Topics such as the strategic use of prayer, holy listening, watchfulness, conferencing, confession, and more are addressed.

PSYC 5340 Orientation and Consultation in School Psychology Prerequisite(s): None
This course addresses the history of school psychology as well as paradigms for service delivery. The varied roles of the specialist in school psychology are explored. Professional issues such as Praxis, licensure, and memberships in professional organizations are discussed. Following best practices as described by the National Association of School Psychologists, students will be exposed to various methods and techniques of consultation in the schools. Additionally, systemic intervention and crisis procedures will be addressed.

PSYC 5342 Teaching in Psychology Prerequisite(s): None
A study of pedagogical theories, styles, and strategies as they apply to college-level teaching of psychology. Students will explore various techniques for teaching psychology courses in both residential and online courses, including presentation of course material, learning assessment tools, test construction, feedback, and grading. A minimum grade of B is required for this course.

PSYC 5353 Physiological Psychology Prerequisite(s): None
A study of physiological bases of behavior with an emphasis on mental disorders, behaviors, and emotions. Psychopharmacological medications are addressed in depth.

PSYC 5360 Cultural Psychology Prerequisite(s): None
This course is designed to strengthen diversity and multicultural awareness among counselors and other mental health providers. The course will strengthen counseling relationships and processes. Included in the study are theories of multicultural counseling, dimensions of worldviews, racial/cultural identity development, counseling ethnic minorities, bicultural/biracial minorities, women, and sexual minorities. The main focus of the course will be on gaining practical knowledge and skills necessary to work effectively with ethnically and culturally diverse clients in North America.

PSYC 5381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

PSYC 6101 Licensed Specialist in School Psychology Internship Prerequisite(s): None
This course is designed for students in the Masters of Arts in Psychology-LSSP and LSSP with Re-specialization programs. The internship experience is a minimum of 1200 contact hours, of which 600 must be in a public school supervised by an individual qualified in accordance with state requirements. A licensed psychologist must supervise the non-school experience. The student must complete the internship in less than two years and in no more than two sites. The student must have direct, systematic supervision with experiences that include assessment, intervention, behavior management, and consultation for children representing a range of ages, populations, and needs. This course meets on campus.

PSYC 6102 Licensed Specialist in School Psychology Internship Prerequisite(s): None
This course is designed for students in the Masters of Arts in Psychology-LSSP and LSSP with Re-specialization programs. The internship experience is a minimum of 1200 contact hours, of which 600 must be in a public school supervised by an individual qualified in accordance with state requirements. A licensed psychologist must supervise the non-school experience. The student must complete the internship in less than two years and in no more than two sites. The student must have direct, systematic supervision with experiences that include assessment, intervention, behavior management, and consultation for children representing a range of ages, populations, and needs. This course meets on campus.

PSYC 6103 Licensed Specialist in School Psychology Internship Prerequisite(s): None
This course is designed for students in the Masters of Arts in Psychology-LSSP and LSSP with Re-specialization programs. The internship experience is a minimum of 1200 contact hours, of which 600 must be in a public school supervised by an individual qualified in accordance with state requirements. A licensed psychologist must supervise the non-school experience. The student must complete the internship in less than two years and in no more than two sites. The student must have direct, systematic supervision with experiences that include assessment, intervention, behavior management, and consultation for children representing a range of ages, populations, and needs. This course meets on campus.

PSYC 6104 Licensed Specialist in School Psychology Internship Prerequisite(s): None
This course is designed for students in the Masters of Arts in Psychology-LSSP and LSSP with Re-specialization programs. The internship experience is a minimum of 1200 contact hours, of which 600 must be in a public school supervised by an individual qualified in accordance with state requirements. A licensed psychologist must supervise the non-school experience. The student must complete the internship in less than two years and in no more than two sites. The student must have direct, systematic supervision with experiences that include assessment, intervention, behavior management, and consultation for children representing a range of ages, populations, and needs. This course meets on campus.

PSYC 6105 Licensed Specialist in School Psychology Internship Prerequisite(s): None
This course is designed for students in the Masters of Arts in Psychology-LSSP and LSSP with Re-specialization programs. The internship experience is a minimum of 1200 contact hours, of which 600 must be in a public school supervised by an individual qualified in accordance with state requirements. A licensed psychologist must supervise the non-school experience. The student must complete the internship in less than two years and in no more than two sites. The student must have direct, systematic supervision with experiences that include assessment, intervention, behavior management, and consultation for children representing a range of ages, populations, and needs. This course meets on campus.

PSYC 6106 Licensed Specialist in School Psychology Internship Prerequisite(s): None
This course is designed for students in the Masters of Arts in Psychology-LSSP and LSSP with Re-specialization programs. The internship experience is a minimum of 1200 contact hours, of which 600 must be in a public school supervised by an individual qualified in accordance with state requirements. A licensed psychologist must supervise the non-school experience. The student must complete the internship in less than two years and in no more than two sites. The student must have direct, systematic supervision with experiences that include assessment, intervention, behavior management, and consultation for children representing a range of ages, populations, and needs. This course meets on campus.

PSYC 6111 Practicum in School Psychology I Prerequisite(s): EDSP 6344 and PSYC 5310 and PSYC 5316 and PSYC 5323 and PSYC 5330 and PSYC 5340 and
PSYC 5360 and PSYC 6301 and PSYC 6305 and PSYC 6320
Corequisite(s): None
This course is designed for students in the Master of Arts in Psychology-Specialist in School Psychology (MAP-SSP) program. The MAP-SSP program requires 450-hour practicum experience. Practicum experience affords the students the opportunity to put their classroom knowledge into practice in a clinical environment, to gain real world experience in delivering psychological services, to learn about the intricacies of working in a professional group setting, and to be mentored and evaluated by professionals in their field of study. The practicum includes two main features: delivery of services and supervision. Students will also have administrative duties, including but not limited to, maintaining client records and maintaining personal records of hours involved in practicum duties.

PSYC 6112 Practicum in School Psychology II Prerequisite(s): EDSP 6344 and PSYC 5310 and PSYC 5316 and PSYC 5323 and PSYC 5330 and PSYC 5340 and
PSYC 5360 and PSYC 6301 and PSYC 6305 and PSYC 6320
This course is designed for students in the Master of Arts in Psychology-Specialist in School Psychology (MAP-SSP) program. The MAP-SSP program requires 450-hour practicum experience. Practicum experience affords the students the opportunity to put their classroom knowledge into practice in a clinical environment, to gain real world experience in delivering psychological services, to learn about the intricacies of working in a professional group setting, and to be mentored and evaluated by professionals in their field of study. The practicum includes two main features: delivery of services and supervision. Students will also have administrative duties, including but not limited to, maintaining client records and maintaining personal records of hours involved in practicum duties.

PSYC 6161 Independent Comprehensive Study Prerequisite(s): PSYC 5310 and PSYC 5312 and PSYC 5313 and PSYC 5323 and PSYC 5360 and PSYC 6301 and PSYC 6302 and PSYC 6306 and PSYC 6308 and PSYC 6310 and PSYC 6320 and overall GPA 3.0 or higher
This course is designed to facilitate students' successful completion of the Oral Comprehensive Exam. Students register for this course if they have completed all other coursework but have not yet met the Oral Exam completion requirement for graduation. In the first half of the semester, the class will focus on time management, study strategies, and self-care/coping strategies. In the latter portion of the semester, this course will focus on application of knowledge to career and post-graduation planning. Throughout the semester, students and instructor will plan and co-monitor their progress toward degree completion.

PSYC 6181 Special Topics Prerequisite(s): See course description
This course is for students in the Applied, Teaching, and Thesis Tracks of the Master of Arts in Psychology (MAP) program. The courses offer the students the opportunity to put their classroom knowledge into practice in a supportive environment, to gain real world experience in delivering skills learned in the classroom, to learn about the intricacies of working in a professional setting, and research. A minimum grade of a B is required for this course.
Applied Project Track Prerequisite(s): PSYC 5323 and PSYC 5332
This track will provide students the opportunity to put their classroom knowledge into practice in a clinical environment and gain experience in delivering and observing psychological services.
Teaching Track
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 5332 and PSYC 5342
This track will provide students the opportunity to put their classroom knowledge into practice in a higher education

teaching environment and gain experience in syllabi preparation, lecture development, evaluation of student assignments, and classroom lecture.
Thesis Track
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 6324 and (PSYC 6302 or PSYC 6392)
This course is for students in the MAP-General program who have successfully completed the research project requirement for PSYC 6324. Students will select an advisory committee to prepare for formal manuscript preparation and the oral defense of the thesis.

PSYC 6191 Counseling Practicum Prerequisite(s): None
Supervised laboratory experiences in individual and group counseling with emphasis upon methods and techniques. Competence in counseling with varied types of human concerns is developed. All practicum students must be involved in counseling activities and must exhibit skills in evaluation as well. This course meets on campus when the student is involved in an off-campus practicum assignment.

PSYC 6192 Practicum in Psychology Prerequisite(s): None
Supervised laboratory experiences in individual and group counseling with emphasis upon methods and techniques. Competence in counseling with varied types of human concerns is developed. All practicum students must be involved in counseling activities and must exhibit skills in evaluation as well. This course meets on campus when the student is involved in an off-campus practicum assignment.

PSYC 6193 Counseling Practicum Prerequisite(s): None
Supervised laboratory experiences in individual and group counseling with emphasis upon methods and techniques. Competence in counseling with varied types of human concerns is developed. All practicum students must be involved in counseling activities and must exhibit skills in evaluation as well. This course meets on campus when the student is involved in an off-campus practicum assignment.

PSYC 6281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

PSYC 6301 Principles of Human Development Prerequisite(s): None
Intensive study and examination of literature and theory in developmental psychology as it relates to persons through the lifespan from infancy through adulthood. Social and personality development, intellectual development, language acquisition, and developmental expectations are emphasized. The unique concerns of the exceptional child are studied as well as in-depth, case-study skill development. (Offered also as EPSY 6301.)

PSYC 6302 Measurement and Appraisal Prerequisite(s): None
Principles and techniques of psychological measurement are emphasized. Major instruments are surveyed, exclusive of projective measures and individual intellectual measures. The knowledge and skills covered can apply in a variety of settings; agencies, clinics, schools, and businesses. Uses and critical evaluation of achievement, aptitude, interest, and non-projective personality tests are included, as are experiences in administering and scoring of tests, and ethical standards for uses of tests. (Offered also as EPSY 6302.)

PSYC 6305 Individual Psychological Evaluation Prerequisite(s): PSYC 5309
The purpose of this course is to attain knowledge of cognitive functioning and develop skills in the cognitive assessment of children and adolescents. This course integrates the skills of administration, scoring, and interpretation of major cognitive assessment instruments (e.g., KABC-II, WISC-V, and WJ-IV COG) in the context of recent cognitive theories and research. The Cattell-Horn-Carroll (CHC) Theory of Cognitive Abilities will be the primary underlying framework for interpreting test data. Also, an emphasis will be placed on a dual discrepancy model when

utilizing the CHC theory of cognitive abilities. Issues of assessing culturally and linguistically diverse children and adolescents are integrated throughout the course in addition to specified lectures. (Offered also as EDSP 6305 and EPSY 6305)

PSYC 6306 Career Information and Career Counseling Prerequisite(s): EPSY 6302 or PSYC 6302
This course is focused on the methods and processes of collecting, organizing, evaluating, and interpreting educational, occupational, and personal-social information for the purpose of helping others to engage in meaningful, satisfying vocations. The major theories of career development are emphasized. (Offered also as COUN 6306.)

PSYC 6308 Methods of Group Process Prerequisite(s): PSYC 5313 and PSYC 5323
This is a course in learning how to lead out-patient psychotherapy/counseling groups. The dynamics of group process are described and theories of psychotherapy are applied to groups. Students design a psychoeducational group manual. Groups are conducted and led by students for at least 10 hours of class time, which allows students opportunities to practice group leadership. Feedback is provided by classmates and the professor. Course is only offered in residential format. (Offered also as EPSY 6308 and COUN 6308.)

PSYC 6309 Applied Behavioral Analysis Prerequisite(s): None
This course is designed to provide knowledge and skills in functional behavioral assessment and intervention.

PSYC 6310 Clinical Psychopathology Prerequisite(s): 18 graduate semester hours in psychology; 3.0 GPA
A course that examines the etiology, symptoms, diagnosis, prognosis and therapeutic methods applicable to the major psychological disorders. Emphasis is placed on being able to differentiate one disorder from the other. A minimum grade of B is required for this course.

PSYC 6320 Research Techniques and Procedures Prerequisite(s): None
A study of a spectrum of research methods related to psychological and educational research. The course is designed to develop research knowledge and skills. Included are theory, techniques, designs, evaluation of research, and integration of findings into professional decision-making. A minimum grade of B is required. (Offered also as EDUC 6320 and EDAD 6310.)

PSYC 6343 Personality Assessment Prerequisite(s): (PSYC 6305 or EPSY 6305) and (PSYC 6310 or PSYC 5316) and EDSP 5319
This course is an introduction to projective and objective psychological testing techniques used in the evaluation of people exhibiting mental, emotional, and/or behavioral disturbances. This course will also focus on the assessment and development of social skills and adaptive interventions. Report writing skills are addressed.

PSYC 6344 Educational Appraisal of Individuals with Exceptionalities Prerequisite(s): PSYC 6305 or EPSY 6305
This course is an introduction to appraisal techniques and instruments used to identify the presence or absence of a specific disability. Administration, scoring, interpretation, preparation of written reports, the development of IEP’s, and evidence-based interventions in psychology and education designed to promote academic skills will be taught in this course. Students must be computer literate. (Offered also as EDSP 6344 and EPSY 6344)

PSYC 6360 Advanced Clinical Psychopathology Prerequisite(s): PSYC 6310
This course reviews the etiology, symptoms, diagnosis, prognosis, and therapeutic methods applicable to the major psychological disorders. The course also focuses on issues of multicultural competence and a general model of understanding mental health. Emphasis is on dual/multiple diagnoses, application of diagnostics to clinical practice, knowledge of current psychopharmacological treatments, understanding and practicing empirically supported treatments, and becoming familiar with treatment planning.

PSYC 6381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

PSYC 6389 Practicum in School Psychology Prerequisite(s): 30 hours of sequential academic coursework as outlined for the Specialist in School Psychology Program
This course requires placement in a school setting for direct field experience where students will be using skills from academic/psychoeducational testing in practice. Experience will emphasize learning and applying interventions specific to needs of students with learning and academic difficulties.

PSYC 6392 Program Evaluation and Statistics Prerequisite(s): None
This course will include the application of statistical methods for the purpose of program evaluation at the individual, group, and systems levels.
PSYC 6395 Supervised Practicum Prerequisite(s): None
Supervised laboratory experiences in individual and group counseling with emphasis upon methods and techniques. Competence in counseling with varied types of human concerns is developed. All practicum students must be involved in counseling activities and must exhibit skills in evaluation as well. This course meets on campus when the student is involved in an off-campus practicum assignment.

PSYC 6396 Supervised Internship and Consultation Prerequisite(s): None
Supervised laboratory experiences in individual and group counseling with emphasis upon methods and techniques. Competence in counseling with varied types of human concerns is developed. All practicum students must be involved in counseling activities and must exhibit skills in evaluation as well. This course meets on campus when the student is involved in an off-campus practicum assignment.


Sociology (SOCI) Course Descriptions
SOCI 1313 Principles of Sociology Prerequisite(s): None
A study of the nature of social relations, social institutions, and social processes, and of the products of these relationships. The nature of culture, communications, socialization, mobility, social control and other sociological concepts are considered. It is strongly recommended that this course be taken prior to all other sociology courses.

SOCI 2301 Introductory Statistics for the Behavioral Sciences Prerequisite(s): MATH 1305 and MATH 1313 or equivalent
The course provides an introduction to descriptive and inferential statistics, correlation, probability, and regression- with applications in behavioral sciences. (Offered also as PSYC 2301.)

SOCI 3303 Research Methods Prerequisite(s): SOCI 1313 and SOCI 2301
Research Methods is designed to introduce students to basic research techniques, methods and field experiences in the social and behavioral sciences. The course emphasizes how researchers collect and analyze information from the conception of a scientific question to the analysis and interpretation of data. Students will gain practical exposure to current literature, field observation techniques, interview and survey strategies. The approach of this course is designed to provide students with analytical skills and experiences with both qualitative and quantitative orientations to research.

SOCI 3320 Social Change Prerequisite(s): None

This course critically examines the most contemporary social issues related to the practice of medicine, educational reform, and social structures such as mass media, religion, and the political process within a framework of historical change. This course is designed to develop an awareness, appreciation and critical evaluation of cultural transformations influencing the social world.

SOCI 3323 History of Sociological Thought Prerequisite(s): None
A study of the development of social thought, including a critical analysis of theories of leading social thinkers.

SOCI 3327 Criminology Prerequisite(s): None
This course critically examines contemporary social issues related to social norms, norm violations, and social sanctions. Specifically, the content of the course will address crime and violence, juvenile delinquency, and the criminal justice system.

SOCI 3374 Urban Sociology Prerequisite(s): None
A social systems approach to the analysis of the emerging problems of urban-suburban areas, with special consideration of the development of alternative solutions for these problems and strategies of intervention.

SOCI 3393 Sociology of Childhood and Adolescence Prerequisite(s): None
Analysis of social class, ethnic influences and sex-role socialization on childhood and adolescence; the socializing agents in these age groups will be examined.

SOCI 4181 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

SOCI 4281 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

SOCI 4332 Social Psychology Prerequisite(s): None
Contemporary approaches to social behavior are considered. Language development, cultural influences, prejudice, persuasion, conformity, and attraction are some of the topics addressed. (Offered also as PSYC 4332.)

SOCI 4345 Sociology of Aging Prerequisite(s): None
Analysis of sociological and social psychological approaches to the study of middle age and aging; the emergence of aging as a problem in industrial societies; consideration of specific problems and programs related to aging.

SOCI 4373 The American Family Prerequisite(s): None
An in-depth examination of current research related to the family as a dynamic component of American culture. Recent trends reflected in research data will be carefully examined within the context of sociological theory. Selected concepts and theories of the institutions of marriage and the family and factors and forces of society which impact on self- understanding, relationships, human development, life cycles, mate selection, alternative life styles, feminine and masculine roles, marital adjustments, parenting, and family crises will be addressed.

SOCI 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None

Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

SOCI 6310 Culture and Context Prerequisite(s): None
This course provides students with the background knowledge necessary to understand major world civilizations within their historical and social context. Historical transformation will be examined as well as the emergence of the new social order due to rapid technological development. Students will read primary sources from across the world and from non-Christian writers. Content in the course will address major social categories of family, politics, race/ethnicity, gender, and religion. The larger objective is to enable students to use the content from this course to develop skills related to communication and collaboration in the global Christian mission and ministry.


Spanish (SPAN) Course Descriptions
SPAN 1314 Elementary Spanish I Prerequisite(s): None
Restriction(s): Not open to students with more than two years of high school Spanish or with proficiency level above Novice.
Focus is on achieving beginning proficiency in Spanish, developing the skills of listening, speaking, reading, writing, viewing, and showing in the interpersonal, interpretive and presentational modes. Students learn to use and understand the language necessary for expressing basic needs, wants, and courtesies. Vocabulary and structures for meeting immediate survival needs are practiced. Students begin to gain insights into Hispanic cultural values and patterns of daily life.

SPAN 1324 Elementary Spanish II Prerequisite(s): SPAN 1314
The focus of this course is on elementary proficiency in Spanish, continuing to develop the skills of listening, speaking, reading, writing, viewing, and showing in the interpersonal, interpretive and presentational modes. Students learn to use and understand the language necessary for expressing basic needs, wants, and courtesies. Vocabulary and structures for meeting immediate survival needs are practiced. Students begin to gain insights into Hispanic cultural values and patterns of daily life.

SPAN 2314 Intermediate Spanish I Prerequisite(s): SPAN 1324
The focus of this course is on intermediate proficiency in Spanish using the skills of listening, speaking, reading, writing, viewing, and showing in the interpersonal, interpretive and presentational modes. Students ask and answer questions on everyday topics, initiate and respond to simple statements, and maintain basic conversations. Students learn to comprehend utterances in areas of immediate need and in situations where context aids understanding. Students gain insights into culture and civilization through interactive activities and through discussions and readings in the language.

SPAN 2324 Intermediate Spanish II Prerequisite(s): SPAN 2314
The focus of this course is on advanced proficiency in Spanish using the skills of listening, speaking, reading, writing, viewing, and showing in the interpersonal, interpretive and presentational modes. Students ask and answer questions on everyday topics, initiate and respond to simple statements, and maintain basic conversations. Students learn to comprehend utterances in areas of immediate need and in situations where context aids understanding. Students gain insights into culture and civilization through interactive activities and through discussions and readings in the language.

SPAN 2381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

SPAN 3305 Individualized Spanish Proficiency Prerequisite(s): SPAN 1314 and SPAN 1324
Restriction(s): Not open to students with proficiency above Intermediate.
Focus is on increasing proficiency in Spanish using the skills of listening, speaking, reading, writing, viewing, and showing in the interpersonal, interpretive and presentational modes and on acquiring a more comprehensive knowledge and understanding of the cultures of the Spanish speaking world. Students develop individual language proficiencies while using Spanish to complete a series of projects where they make connections with other subject areas and participate in Spanish speaking communities.

SPAN 3306 Individualized Spanish Proficiency Prerequisite(s): SPAN 1314 and SPAN 1324
Restriction(s): Not open to students with proficiency above Intermediate.
Focus is on increasing proficiency in Spanish using the skills of listening, speaking, reading, writing, viewing, and showing in the interpersonal, interpretive and presentational modes and on acquiring a more comprehensive knowledge and understanding of the cultures of the Spanish speaking world. Students develop individual language proficiencies while using Spanish to complete a series of projects where they make connections with other subject areas and participate in Spanish speaking communities.

SPAN 3307 Individualized Spanish Proficiency Prerequisite(s): SPAN 1314 and SPAN 1324
Restriction(s): Not open to students with proficiency above Intermediate.
Focus is on increasing proficiency in Spanish using the skills of listening, speaking, reading, writing, viewing, and showing in the interpersonal, interpretive and presentational modes and on acquiring a more comprehensive knowledge and understanding of the cultures of the Spanish speaking world. Students develop individual language proficiencies while using Spanish to complete a series of projects where they make connections with other subject areas and participate in Spanish speaking communities.

SPAN 3308 Business Spanish Prerequisite(s): SPAN 1314 and SPAN 1324 and SPAN 2314 and SPAN 2324 (or the equivalent--an intermediate knowledge of written and spoken Spanish)
Students develop the communication skills needed to succeed in a business environment where Spanish is spoken by studying the various forms of business communications, including Spanish-language business publications, letters, memos, reports, and resumes. They practice the interpersonal skills of negotiating, persuading, defending, and hypothesizing. They study the effects of culture and experience on perception. They increase their knowledge about the countries where Spanish is spoken.

SPAN 3314 Advanced Grammar Prerequisite(s): SPAN 2314 and SPAN 2324 or the equivalent
Focus is on increasing proficiency in Spanish using the skills of listening, speaking, reading, writing, viewing, and showing in the interpersonal, interpretive and presentational modes and on increasing knowledge of the cultures of Spain and the Spanish speaking world. Topics which may be included are literature, the arts, history, and work and leisure activities. Students review the grammar of Spanish as needed to increase proficiency.
SPAN 3321 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

SPAN 3324 Introduction to Hispanic Literature Prerequisite(s): SPAN 2314 and SPAN 2324 or the equivalent
Focus is on increasing proficiency in Spanish using the skills of listening, speaking, reading, writing, viewing, and showing in the interpersonal, interpretive and presentational modes and on developing cultural knowledge. Students increase their expertise in the analysis and interpretation of the literature of Spain and the Spanish speaking world.

SPAN 3335 Spanish Writing Workshop Prerequisite(s): None

This course provides students with strategies to write fluently in Spanish. Techniques emphasize the steps of the writing process. Students use self-editing and peer collaboration to produce a portfolio of their work. (Offered also as EDBI 3335.)

SPAN 3336 Advanced Spanish Writing Prerequisite(s): EDBI 3335 or SPAN 3335
An introduction to the writing of personal history. Students write their personal histories through memories elicited by things they see, songs, dreams, overheard conversations, collections, books, quotes, as well as reflections. Their project will involve a compilation of entries with a focus on composing, revising, editing, and publishing a "memoir book". (Offered also as EDBI 3336.)

SPAN 3345 Peninsular Literature Prerequisite(s): None
Discussions, readings, and writing practices center on major historical periods and canonical authors from Spain, with a deep view toward preparation for the Spanish majors and minors. The course may include readings from classical texts such as Cervante's Don Quixote and the selected poetry of Gustavo Adolfo Becker.

SPAN 3346 Latin-American Literature Prerequisite(s): None
This course centers on the deep analysis of masterpieces of the literature of Latin America. The course may include selected texts from Nobel Prize literature laureates Gabriel Garcia Marquez, Mario Vargas Llosa and Pablo Neruda, among other authors. The learning activities will highlight the significance of the Latin-American literary movement and the ongoing influence of these authors.

SPAN 3347 The Art of Translation Prerequisite(s): None
The art of Translation is centered on discussions of the history and theory of literary translation and other written text; provides the student with the specific vocabulary and cultural insight to effectively interpret the message intended in translating Spanish/English or English/Spanish. Emphasis is on the practice of translating and the acquisition of specialized knowledge in translation.

SPAN 3348 Medical Spanish I: Communication and Culture Prerequisite(s): SPAN 2324 or equivalent
This course is designed to provide the student with the specific vocabulary, structure, and cultural awareness to effectively communicate with the growing Spanish-speaking patients in an international medical setting. The knowledge and skills developed in this course will benefit future health care majors and minors by preparing them to adequately convey, produce, evaluate and mediate oral and written health messages in Spanish.

SPAN 3350 Spanish for Health Care Professionals Prerequisite(s): None
This online course is a focused Spanish language and culture course designed to enhance effective communication between patients and their healthcare professional as related to their daily activities. The course emphasizes vocabulary with a focus on the healthcare environment. The course will highlight building the patient-practitioner relationship, understanding patient's symptoms, taking medical history, giving vital instructions, collecting medical information, etc. Oral proficiency is the primary goal of this course.

SPAN 3360 Spain in the Americas Prerequisite(s): SPAN 3314 or SPAN 3324
This course presents historical and cultural information about the three dominant cultures in South America at the time of the first encounter with Spain-the Mayas, Aztecs, and Incas-and the events and perspectives of that initial encounter between two worlds, as recorded by eyewitnesses. The course is taught in Spanish.

SPAN 3365 Don Quixote Prerequisite(s): None
This course will cover the classic and first contemporary novel of the Spanish language, Don Quixote, by Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra. The course will facilitate the literary analysis and close reading of Don Quixote, selected plays

and exemplary novels written by Cervantes. The course will highlight the relevance of Don Quixote and the artistic and cultural impact that Don Quixote continues to have in modern times.

SPAN 3370 Hispanic Literature Prerequisite(s): ENGL 1313 and ENGL 1323
Restriction(s): The course may be used to fulfill Smith College humanities/literature requirements but not to fulfill requirements for the Spanish/English major.
The study of major periods and masterworks of Hispanic literature, read and discussed in English. Introduces literary/cultural figures of medieval and early modern Spain (El Cid, Don Quixote, Don Juan); and includes major 20th-century writers, as well as literary movements that were propagated from Latin America to the rest of the literary world (e.g., magical realism). (Offered also as ENGL 3370.)

SPAN 3372 Spanish Film Studies Prerequisite(s): SPAN 1314 and SPAN 1324 and SPAN 2314 and SPAN 2324 (or the equivalent--an intermediate knowledge of written and spoken Spanish)
Students view important films in Spanish from one or more major periods of Spanish speaking countries, study the role of the movie directors and actors, consider how the multi-media aspects of film affects them as viewers, and study the films as a record of cultural values and cultural change. Further development of language proficiency in understanding, speaking, reading, and writing is emphasized. Theme or topic may vary as determined by instructor and student interest.

SPAN 3374 Hispanic Popular Music Prerequisite(s): None
Students study the text of lyrics to important Hispanic popular music. They analyze the structure and various levels of meaning and learn to recognize the literary complexity. Students are introduced to the music that accompanies the lyrics. Vocabulary acquisition is emphasized. Class discussions and all written work will be in Spanish. At the end of the semester the students will be able to comprehend and appreciate the Spanish language in lyrics and have knowledge of the major musical trends and cultural traditions in Latin-American countries.

SPAN 3376 Hispanic Women Writers Prerequisite(s): None
Students study significant literature by women writers in the form of narrative and poetry and explore the issues facing contemporary women. Discussions, readings, and writing practice center on major historical periods and authors, with a view toward preparation for the Spanish majors. Further development of language proficiency in understanding, speaking, reading, and writing is emphasized.

SPAN 3378 Hispanic Fantastic Literature Prerequisite(s): SPAN 1314 and SPAN 1324 and SPAN 2314 and SPAN 2324 and SPAN 3314 and SPAN 3324 (or the equivalent)
Discussions, readings and writing practices center on masterpieces of the narrative of fantastic literature from Spain and Latin America. Students explore the emergence of magical realism in Latin America and the use of fantastic and supernatural elements. They also study the history, politics and culture of Hispanic countries to analyze the use of the fantastic elements in the text and compare societal conflicts of the present with those expressed in the readings. Further development of language proficiency in understanding, speaking, reading and writing is emphasized.

SPAN 3380 Contemporary Drama Prerequisite(s): SPAN 1314 and SPAN 1324 and SPAN 2314 and SPAN 2324 and SPAN 3314 and SPAN 3324 (or the equivalent)
This course focuses on masterpieces of twentieth century dramatic texts from Spain and Latin American. The students dramatize the texts in class and interchange characters to do readings in a role-playing format. Deep literary analysis is an integral part of the course. Students learn to interpret the dramatic texts and understand the culture, history and politics of the time. The students compare societal conflicts embedded in the dramatic text with modern day troubles. The students will be exposed to audio and video of live theater performances. At the end of the class the students give a live theater performance of one of the plays.

SPAN 3381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

SPAN 3394 Let’s Talk: Spanish Conversation, Language, and Culture through Film Prerequisite(s): SPAN 2324 or appropriate placement score.
Using relevant feature films from Spain and Latin America, this course takes students through a cultural discovery path of the different linguistic variants in the Hispanic world. The course promotes the learning and refinement of oral language skills and the fostering of critical thinking through class discussion, interpretation of filmic text, and creative writing.

SPAN 3395 Spanish for Bilinguals I Prerequisite(s): SPAN 2324 or appropriate placement score. Credit for SPAN 2314, SPAN 2324 and three (3) upper- division hours may be applied toward a Spanish minor or major.
This course is designed for Spanish-speaking bilingual students and other students who exhibit understanding of the Spanish language and want to expand their vocabulary, reading, and writing skills while developing a critical understanding of Latin American history and culture. The course capitalizes upon students' existing language skills. Course components include orthography, vocabulary activities, grammar practices, cultural critical analysis, and in- class discussions of films.

SPAN 4305 Masterworks of Hispanic Literature and Culture Prerequisite(s): None
Discussions, readings, and writing practices center on major historical periods and authors, with a view toward preparation for the Senior Seminars. Further development of language proficiency in understanding, speaking, reading, and writing is emphasized. Theme or topic may vary as determined by instructor and student interest. Don Quixote or Latin American short story are examples of possible topics.

SPAN 4306 Masterworks of Hispanic Literature and Culture Prerequisite(s): None
Discussions, readings, and writing practices center on major historical periods and authors, with a view toward preparation for the Senior Seminars. Further development of language proficiency in understanding, speaking, reading, and writing is emphasized. Theme or topic may vary as determined by instructor and student interest. Don Quixote or Latin American short story are examples of possible topics.

SPAN 4307 Masterworks of Hispanic Literature and Culture Prerequisite(s): None
Discussions, readings, and writing practices center on major historical periods and authors, with a view toward preparation for the Senior Seminars. Further development of language proficiency in understanding, speaking, reading, and writing is emphasized. Theme or topic may vary as determined by instructor and student interest. Don Quixote or Latin American short story are examples of possible topics.

SPAN 4313 Literature of the Siglo de Oro Prerequisite(s): SPAN 3324
Intensive study of the masterpieces of the Golden Age, Cervantes, Lope de Vega, Calderon de la Barca, and Quevedo as principal authors.

SPAN 4324 Contemporary Spanish-American Literature Prerequisite(s): None
A study of the selected works of the foremost contemporary Spanish-American writers.

SPAN 4343 Hispanic Cultural Perspectives Prerequisite(s): None
Restriction(s): Not open to students with language proficiency below Intermediate High.
A study of the major cultural aspects of Spanish speaking countries, with a special emphasis on literature, art, history, geography, and cultural patterns.

SPAN 4344 Hispanic Cultural Perspectives Prerequisite(s): None
Restriction(s): Not open to students with language proficiency below Intermediate High.
A study of the major cultural aspects of Spanish speaking countries, with a special emphasis on literature, art, history, geography and cultural patterns.

SPAN 4381 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

SPAN 4385 Work Internship in Spanish Prerequisite(s): SPAN 3314 or the equivalent
Students use their oral and written proficiency in a supervised setting in (a) business or consulates, (b) health care, or
(c) education or church work. To be eligible, students must be classified as a junior or senior, must be working towards a major in Spanish at Houston Christian University, and must have at least a 3.0 QPA in Spanish. Interested students must take an oral proficiency test with a member of the Spanish faculty and receive a score of Intermediate High or higher. Students must also submit an application to the Intern Selection Committee at least one quarter in advance of the scheduled internship. If accepted by the committee, the applicant must also be interviewed and accepted by the supervisor in the internship setting.

SPAN 4386 Work Internship in Spanish Prerequisite(s): SPAN 3314 or the equivalent
Students use their oral and written proficiency in a supervised setting in (a) business or consulates, (b) health care, or
(c) education or church work. To be eligible, students must be classified as a junior or senior, must be working towards a major in Spanish at Houston Christian University, and must have at least a 3.0 QPA in Spanish. Interested students must take an oral proficiency test with a member of the Spanish faculty and receive a score of Intermediate High or higher. Students must also submit an application to the Intern Selection Committee at least one quarter in advance of the scheduled internship. If accepted by the committee, the applicant must also be interviewed and accepted by the supervisor in the internship setting.

SPAN 4387 Work Internship in Spanish Prerequisite(s): SPAN 3314 or the equivalent
Students use their oral and written proficiency in a supervised setting in (a) business or consulates, (b) health care, or
(c) education or church work. To be eligible, students must be classified as a junior or senior, must be working towards a major in Spanish at Houston Christian University, and must have at least a 3.0 QPA in Spanish. Interested students must take an oral proficiency test with a member of the Spanish faculty and receive a score of Intermediate High or higher. Students must also submit an application to the Intern Selection Committee at least one quarter in advance of the scheduled internship. If accepted by the committee, the applicant must also be interviewed and accepted by the supervisor in the internship setting.

SPAN 4395 Introduction to U.S. Hispanic Linguistics Prerequisite(s): SPAN 2324 or appropriate placement.
This is an advanced language and culture course that aims to offer students an initial approach to the study of Spanish linguistics in the United States through an assortment of lenses. The course includes social and political factors surrounding the use of Spanish in society. Topics may include the history of Spanish in the U.S., phenomena that occur when Spanish and English speakers are in contact, and demographic overview of the varieties of Spanish spoken in the United States. The course may also cover how words are formed, how sentences are constructed, and how language is used in context.

SPAN 4396 Spanish Topics for the Professions Prerequisite(s): SPAN 2324 or appropriate placement.
This is an advanced course emphasizing Spanish language skills needed in specific career fields or for general public use. Specific books and other materials are used to develop specific vocabulary, speaking, reading, and writing skills needed in professional settings.

Professional Writing (WRIT) Course Descriptions
WRIT 2100 Storytelling in Creative Writing Prerequisite(s): NARR 1300
Corequisite(s): NARR 2200
Provides students opportunities to apply the principles developed in Art of Storytelling to specific creative writing projects.

WRIT 3121 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

WRIT 3180 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): Will vary depending on the specific topic Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
Restriction(s): This course may be repeated for credit.
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not give, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

WRIT 3221 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

WRIT 3280 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): Will vary depending on the specific topic Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
Restriction(s): This course may be repeated for credit.
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not give, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

WRIT 3321 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisites: None
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

WRIT 3331 Creative Writing: Poetry Prerequisite(s): None
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
An introduction to poetry writing, accomplishes through the study and analysis of reputable literary models, followed by production of original poems and discussion of those poems in a workshop format.

WRIT 3341 Creative Writing: Fiction Prerequisite(s): None
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
An introduction to fiction writing, accomplished through the study and analysis of reputable literary models, followed by production of original short stories and discussion of those stories in a workshop format.

WRIT 3351 Creative Writing: Non-Fiction Prerequisite(s): None
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
This course explores non-fiction prose and its rhetorical elements. Students both read and write creative non-fiction, compiling a reading journal and a writing portfolio of their own essays.

WRIT 3371 Professional & Technical Writing Prerequisite(s): None
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
This course trains students to write effectively in the modern workplace. Students study audience analysis, document design, graphics and web design. They apply what they have learned by creating a variety of written documents, including email messages, memos, letter, resumes, and reports. Some group work is required as students need to practice collaborative writing and peer review.

WRIT 3380 Special Topics/Independent Study Prerequisite(s): None
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
Restriction(s): This course may be repeated for credit.
Topics are selected on basis of student need and academic qualifications of staff. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

WRIT 4160 Advanced Practicum Prerequisite(s): Permission of the Instructor
Restriction(s): This course may be repeated for credit.
Programmed with specific topics each semester, this practicum provides students the opportunity to hone their craft through specific projects or apprenticeships overseen by a faculty member. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

WRIT 4194 Junior Portfolio Prerequisite(s): NARR 3310 Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
Working with a faculty member, students prepare a resume and portfolio in order to secure a professional internship. WRIT 4194 is the prerequisite to WRIT 4195/4295/4395 – Internship.

WRIT 4195 Internship Prerequisite(s): WRIT 4194
Restriction(s): This course may be repeated for credit.
Credit is awarded for approved professional internships, secured as part of WRIT 4194 Junior Portfolio. A minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

WRIT 4199 Senior Portfolio Prerequisite(s): WRIT 4194 Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
Working with a faculty member, students complete a professional resume and portfolio featuring their best coursework and personal projects (in preparation for interviews, etc.)

WRIT 4260 Advanced Practicum Prerequisite(s): Permission of the Instructor
Restriction(s): This course may be repeated for credit.
Programmed with specific topics each semester, this practicum provides students the opportunity to hone their craft through specific projects or apprenticeships overseen by a faculty member. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

WRIT 4295 Internship Prerequisite(s): WRIT 4194
Restriction(s): This course may be repeated for credit.
Credit is awarded for approved professional internships, secured as part of WRIT 4194 Junior Portfolio. A minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

WRIT 4331 Advanced Poetry Writing Prerequisite(s): WRIT 3331
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities

This advanced poetry writing course is designed to build upon the groundwork established in WRIT 3331. Class time is spent in the analysis of models – works from the tradition and more recent works in experimental veins – and intensive discussion of student poems.

WRIT 4341 Advanced Fiction Writing Prerequisite(s): WRIT 3341
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
This advanced fiction writing course is designed to build upon the groundwork established in WRIT 3341. Class time is spent in the analysis of models – works from tradition and more recent work in experimental veins – and intensive discussion of student short stories or chapters from novels or novellas.

WRIT 4351 Advanced Non-Fiction Writing Prerequisite(s): WRIT 3351
Fee(s): Narrative Arts Facilities
This advanced non-fiction writing course is designed to build upon the groundwork established in WRIT 3351. Class time is spent in the analysis of models – works from tradition and more recent work in experimental veins – and intensive discussion of student writing.

WRIT 4360 Advanced Practicum Prerequisite(s): Permission of the Instructor
Restriction(s): This course may be repeated for credit.
Programmed with specific topics each semester, this practicum provides students the opportunity to hone their craft through specific projects or apprenticeships overseen by a faculty member. If regular lectures are not given, a minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

WRIT 4395 Internship Prerequisite(s): WRIT 4194
Restriction(s): This course may be repeated for credit.
Credit is awarded for approved professional internships, secured as part of WRIT 4194 Junior Portfolio. A minimum of 30 hours of work for each hour credit must be included.

WRIT 6310 Faith, Culture, & the Arts Prerequisite(s): None
Restriction(s): This course may be repeated for credit.
This course explores the role of the Christian artist in culture. Students will study how great Christian thinkers have thought about culture and art throughout church history and be challenged to understand their vocation as writers from a biblical perspective. Students will also develop an understanding of how to live out their faith through their work as they seek to affect the culture around them.

WRIT 6320 Topics & Genres: Writers on Writing Prerequisite(s): None
Restriction(s): This course may be repeated for credit.
An in-depth study of great works of writing from a writer’s perspective. Unique topics or genres are selected each semester. Students will acquire skills to read like writers and learn craft from these great works. Students will also acquire the skills to articulate what makes a well-crafted work of literature compelling.

WRIT 6330 Poetic Techniques Prerequisite(s): None
A study of the techniques available to the writer of poetry. Students will examine the various uses of form, metaphor, symbolism, meter, and narrative in poems. Poetry students must take WRIT 6330.

WRIT 6331 Creative Writing Workshop: Poetry. Prerequisite(s): None
A writing workshop in which students will create and revise original works of poetry. Over the course of the semester students will learn to critically assess their own work as well as the work of their peers. WRIT 6331 is an introduction to the writing workshop.

WRIT 6340 Fiction Techniques Prerequisite(s): None
A study of the techniques available to the fiction writer. Students will examine the various uses of person, character, voice, dialogue, detail, and plot in works of fiction. Fiction students must take WRIT 6340.

WRIT 6341 Creative Writing Workshop: Fiction Prerequisite(s): None
A writing workshop in which students will create and revise original works of fiction. Over the course of the semester students will learn to critically assess their own work as well as the work of their peers. WRIT 6341 is an introduction to the writing workshop.

WRIT 6351 Creative Writing Workshop: Non-Fiction Prerequisite(s): None
A writing workshop in which students will create and revise original works of literary non-fiction. Over the course of the semester students will learn to critically assess their own work as well as the work of their peers. WRIT 6351 is an introduction to the writing workshop.

WRIT 6356 Memoir & Personal Narrative Prerequisite(s): None
A writing workshop in which students will create and revise original works of memoir and personal narrative. Over the course of the semester students will learn to critically assess their own work as well as the work of their peers.

WRIT 6357 Criticism & Reviews Prerequisite(s): None
A writing workshop in which students will learn the craft of criticism and review writing. Over the course of the semester students will learn to critically assess their own work as well as the work of their peers.

WRIT 6380 Special Topics in Creative Writing Prerequisite(s): None
Restriction(s): This course may be repeated for credit
A writing workshop whose emphasis will be chosen by the professors based on their personal expertise and the desires and needs of students.

WRIT 6390 Master Class Prerequisite(s): 27 hours of WRIT Courses
This course is a capstone experience for students. In this course, students will reflect upon what they have learned in all previous courses. WRIT 6390 will also prepare students to begin their thesis. Master Class should be taken the semester before students begin their thesis.

WRIT 6391 Thesis I Prerequisite(s): WRIT 6390
Under the direction of a faculty mentor, students will write and defend a faculty-approved creative writing thesis.

WRIT 6392 Thesis II Prerequisite(s): WRIT 6390
Under the direction of a faculty mentor, students will write and defend a faculty-approved creative writing thesis.

