Accounting (ACCT)
ACCT-2110 Principles of Accounting I–Fa, Sp
3 hours
An introduction to accounting for business organizations
with an emphasis on financial statement preparation and
interpretation. Topics include the accounting cycle, present value,
and accounting for stock and debt instruments. Prerequisite:
Sophomore status.
ACCT-2120 Principles of Accounting II–Fa, Sp
3 hours
A continuation of accounting for business organizations. Topics
include cash flow statements, investments, and managerial
accounting concepts. Prerequisite: ACCT-2110 Principles of
Accounting I.
ACCT-3110 Intermediate Financial Accounting I–Fa
3 hours
Theoretical concepts and accounting standards that form the
basis for accounting practices, financial statement preparation,
and analysis. Topics include financial statement formats, present
value, and accounting for receivables and inventory. Prerequisite:
ACCT-2120 Principles of Accounting II.
ACCT-3120 Intermediate Financial Accounting II–Sp
3 hours
Continuation of theoretical concepts and accounting standards
that form the basis for accounting practices and financial
statement preparation and analysis. Topics include: accounting for
fixed assets, intangible assets, current liabilities, long-term debt,
and stockholders’ equity. Prerequisite: ACCT-3110 Intermediate
Financial Accounting I.
ACCT-3150 Accounting Information Systems–Fa
3 hours
A study of the flow of information through the accounting
system, emphasizing systems analysis and design, internal
controls, and computer applications in the business environment.
Prerequisites: ACCT-2120 Principles of Accounting II; Junior
status.
ACCT-3170 Managerial Accounting–Fa
3 hours
Principles of industrial and distribution cost accounting, job
order and process cost systems, and standard costs. Prerequisite:
ACCT-2120 Principles of Accounting II.
ACCT-3410 Topics in Accounting–Fa, Sp, Su
1–3 hours
A variety of topics are covered under this heading on an
experimental basis. This allows the department to meet the
changing needs of the students without formally adding or
dropping courses.
ACCT-4110 Federal Income Taxes–Fa
3 hours
Examines the computation of federal income tax liabilities
for individuals and sole proprietorships. Typical course content
includes income, exclusions, exemptions, deductions, credits,
property transactions, and tax accounting methods. Introduces
basic principles of tax research and planning Prerequisite: ACCT-
2120 Principles of Accounting II.
ACCT-4120 Auditing–Sp
3 hours
A study of auditing standards and related auditing procedures.
Topics include evaluation of audit evidence, professional
responsibilities, and auditors’ reports and opinions. Prerequisite:
ACCT-3110 Intermediate Financial Accounting I.
ACCT-4130 Advanced Financial Accounting–Sp
3 hours
A study of consolidated financial statements, foreign exchange,
estates and trusts, branch accounting, and related problems.
Prerequisite: ACCT-3110 Intermediate Financial Accounting I.
ACCT-4150
3 hours
Government and Nonprofit Accounting–Fa
Accounting and reporting principles, standards, and procedures
applicable to nonprofit organizations. Prerequisite: ACCT-3120
Intermediate Financial Accounting II or permission of instructor.
ACCT-4170 Advanced Managerial Accounting–Sp
3 hours
Advanced topics in accounting for manufacturing companies
and the use of the computer in cost accounting applications.
Prerequisite: ACCT-3170 Managerial Accounting.
ACCT-4210 Taxation of Business Entities–Sp
3 hours
An examination of the tax provisions governing C Corps, S
Corps, partnerships, and estates. Analyzes international and multi-
state taxation of corporations. Prerequisite: ACCT-4110 Federal
Income Taxes.
ACCT-4220 International Accounting–Upon Demand
3 hours
This course offers information about global accounting diversity
and the reasons for it. International Financial Reporting Standards
(IFRS) are discussed along with the history of international
standard development. Foreign currency exchange rates,
transactions, and hedging are covered. Students also do research
into accounting in multinational corporations. Prerequisites:
ACCT-2110 Principles of Accounting I; ACCT-2120 Principles of
Accounting II.
ACCT-4810 Seminar in Accounting–Sp
1 hour
A forum for discussion of contemporary topics and issues in
accounting. Current issues will be chosen from topics in financial
and managerial accounting, auditing, tax, and governmental
and nonprofit accounting. Prerequisites: ACCT-3170 Managerial
Accounting; ACCT-4110 Federal Income Taxes; ACCT-4120
Auditing.
Air Force ROTC (AES)
Air Force ROTC courses are offered through Cedarville
University in collaboration with the Air Force ROTC detachment
located at Wright State University. While Air Force ROTC courses
are included in the Cedarville University course schedule for
registration purposes, leadership laboratories and classes are
usually conducted on the campus of Wright State University.
Cedarville University provides transportation for off-site classes.
AES-1210,1220
1 hour/sem
Foundations of the United States Force I (Fa) and II (Sp)
(AS 100), These courses are survey courses designed to
introduce students to the United States Air Force and provides an
overview of the basic characteristics, missions, and organization
of the Air Force.
AES-1211/1221
0 hours
General Military Course (GMC) Leadership

Laboratory–Fa, Sp
This lab provides an opportunity for students to apply Air Force
procedures, techniques, and knowledge. Students will learn the Air
Force organizational structure as well as customs and courtesies.
GMC cadets will also develop their followership and teamwork
skills in a cadet-led, cadre-supervised lab environment. Taken
concurrently with 1000-level AES courses. Credit/no credit.
AES-2210,2220
1 hour/sem
Evolution of USAF Air and Space Power I (Fa)
and II (Sp)
(AS 200) These courses feature topics on Air Force heritage
and leaders; introduction to air power through examination
of the Air Force Core Functions; and continued application of
communication skills. Its purpose is to instill an appreciation of
the development and employment of air power and to motivate
sophomore students to transition from  AFROTC
officer candidate.
AES-2211/2221
0 hours
Field Training Preparation Leadership Lab (FTP)–Fa, Sp
This lab further develops skills and concepts introduced in the
GMC Leadership Laboratory. Students are prepared mentally
and physically for the demanding requirements of the upcoming
Field Training summer program. Training is cadet-led, where the
students will display their ability to apply Air Force concepts and
procedures. Taken concurrently with 2000-level AES courses.
Credit/no credit.
AES-2500 Extended GMC Leadership Laboratory
0 hours
This course is for cadets who have met the requirements of
GMC but have not yet completed field training.


ACCT-2110 – AES-2500
AES-3310,3320
3 hours/sem
United States Air( Force Leadership Studies I (Fa) and II (Sp)
(AS 300) These courses teach cadets advanced skills and
knowledge in management and leadership. Special emphasis is
placed on enhancing leadership skills. Cadets have an opportunity
to try out these leadership and management techniques in a
supervised environment as juniors and seniors.
AES-3311/3321
[0-9] hours
Intermediate Cadet Leadership Laboratory (ICL)–Fa, Sp
The (ICL) lab builds the foundation of leadership skills required
as an Air Force Officer. Cadets apply leadership/management
concepts learned in Field Training and previous aerospace studies
classes and labs to assist in training the GMC cadets. Taken
concurrently with 3000-level AES courses. Credit/no credit.
AES-4310,4320
3 hours/sem
National Security Affairs/Preparation for Active Duty I (Fa)

and II (Sp)
(AS 400) These courses are designed for college seniors and
gives them the foundation to understand their role as military
officers in American society. It is an overview of the complex social
and political issues facing the military profession and requires a
measure of sophistication commensurate with the senior college
level.
AES-4311/4321
0 hours
Senior Cadet Leadership (SCL) Laboratory–Fa, Sp
This lab prepares students for progression into active duty life.
As in the ICL lab, students take leadership roles in execution of
leadership labs for the cadet wing. Students hone leadership
fundamentals learned in previous courses and labs to a level
commensurate to entry into the active duty Air Force. Taken
concurrently with 4000-level AES courses. Credit/no credit.
AES-4500 Extended POC Leadership Laboratory
0 hours
This course is for cadets who have met all requirements for
Air Force ROTC but have not yet completed their baccalaureate
degree.
Physical Training sessions are twice a week, see instructor for
details. Physical training is not an official class and registration is
not necessary; however participation is required.
Allied Health (ALHL)
ALHL-1000
1 hour
Introduction to the Allied Health Professions–Fa
Introductory course for students planning career involvement
in health and healt[A-Z] [A-z]elated professions. The students will be
introduced to health careers by providing descriptions of jobs, the
educational and legal requirements, the work environment, and
additional information about specific fields.
ALHL-2000 Medical Terminology–Fa, Sp
3 hours
An online course designed to familiarize students with the
terminology of the health professions, including anatomy and
physiology terms, medical diagnoses, procedures, and therapies.
Prerequisite: GBIO-2010 Human Anatomy and Physiology I; or
BIO-3450 Human Structure and Function I.
ALHL-3940 Professional Development–Sp
2 hour
This course is designed to assist students in acquiring an
in-depth understanding of requirements for entry-level graduate
programs in their chosen discipline, and the credentialing process
for their chosen profession. Students will be introduced to the
central application procedures and requirements for CASPA,
PTCAS, and OTCAS.
ALHL-4960 Senior Seminar–Fa,Sp
1 hour
This course is designed to guide students in the finalization
of their capstone project and its presentation before peers
and faculty. Students are also encouraged to collaborate with
practicing health professionals in their intended profession to seek
their advice and counsel. Prerequisite: EXSC-4600 Research
Methods. (Fee: $25)
Anthropology (ANTH)
ANTH-1800 Cultural Anthropology–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Analysis of the concept and its importance for the study of man;
an examination of various cultures of the world as they relate to
technological, economic, social, political, and religious aspects of
these cultures.
ANTH-4940
1–3 hours
Independent Study in Anthropology
Provides the means whereby gifted and interested students
may explore, in a more in-depth and intensive manner, general
information acquired in the major courses. Further, independent
study provides a logical way to complete required hours not
obtained in normal sequencing. Prerequisite: Permission of the
instructor.
Arabic Language (ARBC)
ARBC-1400
3 hours
Introduction to Arabic Language and Culture
Introduction of the Arabic script and basic vocabulary used for
greetings and other everyday situations. Introduction to various
aspects of Arab culture, including history, religion, literature,
politics, and daily life. This course is intended for non-native
speakers with no previous Arabic study. This course satisfies the
global awareness course requirement.
ARBC-1410 Elementary Arabic I–Fa
4 hours
Development of basic skills in reading, writing, speaking, and
listening in Arabic, along with an introduction to Arabic culture.
ARBC-1420 Elementary Arabic II–Sp
4 hours
Development of basic skills in reading, writing, speaking, and
listening in Arabic, along with an introduction to Arabic culture.
Prerequisites: ARBC-1410 Elementary Arabic I, instructor’s
approval, or placement by exam.
ARBC-2410 Intermediate Arabic I–Fa
4 hours
Development of all four language skills through grammar review,
composition, conversation, and readings in Arabic literature and
culture. Prerequisites: ARBC-1410 Elementary Arabic I and ARBC-
1420 Elementary Arabic II, instructor’s approval, or placement by
exam.
ARBC-2420 Intermediate Arabic II–Sp
3 hours
Development of all four language skills through grammar review,
composition, conversation, and readings in Arabic literature and
culture. Prerequisites: ARBC-1410 Elementary Arabic I, ARBC-
1420 Elementary Arabic II, ARBC-2410 Intermediate Arabic I,
instructor’s approval, or placement by exam.
ARBC-3500
1–3 hours
Independent Study in Arabic Language and Culture–Fa, Sp
This course gives opportunity for independent study in a
particular area of Arabic language and culture for students who
demonstrate special interests and ability.
Art (ART)
ART-1100 Introduction to Art–Fa
[0-9] hours
Introduction to visual vocabulary and the understanding of
visual communication: form, line, space, color, texture, and
movement. Development of visual awareness and analytical
thinking in response to works of art, use of media, and techniques
and the application of design principles.
ART-1110 Drawing Foundations–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Investigation of the visual language used in drawing. Students
work with concepts of point, line, and plane definition to develop
an awareness of the elements used to indicate form in a variety of
media. (Fee: $100)
ART-1230 Two Dimensional Design–Fa, Sp
3 hours
An exploration of the visual elements and concepts of design
utilizing a variety of media. Prerequisites: ART-1100 Introduction to
Art; ART-1110 Drawing Foundations (can be taken concurrently).
(Fee: $75)




AES-3310 – ART-1230
ART-2110 Intermediate Drawing–Sp
3 hours
Further exploration of form, space, and mark making through
a variety of drawing media. Particular attention will be given
to the figure, as well as observing and rendering perspective.
Prerequisites: ART-1110 Drawing Foundations; ART-1230 Two-
Dimensional Design. (Fee: $100)
ART-2130 Painting Foundations–Fa
3 hours
An introduction to oil painting, emphasizing the perception and
use of light and color in accurately representing form and space.
Prerequisites: ART-1110 Drawing Foundations; ART-1230 Two-
Dimensional Design. (Fee: $150)
ART-2140 Ceramics Foundations–Fa, Sp
3 hours
This course will provide students with an introduction to clay
from  finished fired pieces. Students will build forms
using basic hand-building techniques and the potter’s wheel.
Surface decoration will be emphasized using color, texture, and
glazes. Prerequisite: ART-1100 Introduction to Art. (Fee: $175)
ART-2160 Sculpture Foundations–Sp
3 hours
An introduction to traditional and nontraditional processes
of sculpture while accumulating in-depth techniques and skills
in a variety of sculpture materials and practices. This class will
emphasize creative effort, development of individual expression,
and the utilization of technical processes. Prerequisites: ART-1230
Two-Dimensional Design; ART-2230 Three-Dimensional Design.
(Fee: $300)
ART-2170 Printmaking Foundations–Fa
3 hours
An introduction to intaglio and relief printmaking processes.
Prerequisite: ART-1230 Two-Dimensional Design. (Fee: $250)
ART-2230 Three Dimensional Design–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Application of principles of design and visual organization
with emphasis on volume, mass, and rendering forms in space.
Prerequisites: ART-1100 Introduction to Art, ART-1110 Drawing
Foundations; ART-1230 Two-Dimensional Design. (Fee: $175)
ART-2250 Creative Photography–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Students will learn and apply technical knowledge and
compositional techniques necessary to produce creative, quality
digital photographs. Additionally, students will gain historical and
contemporary knowledge, skills, and appreciation of photography
as a medium for artistic expression visual communication.
Students must provide a digital point-n-shoot camera or DSLR
camera. A tripod is recommended. (Fee: $50)
ART-3110 Advanced Drawing–Sp
3 hours
This course allows the studio art major an opportunity to
explore a particular studio discipline or may be a continuation of
work completed in previous studio courses, allowing the student
a concentration in that particular discipline. Prerequisites: ART-
1110 Drawing Foundtions; ART-1230 Two-Dimensional Design;
ART-2110 Intermediate Drawing. Repeatable up to two times. (Fee:
$100)
ART-3130 Intermediate Painting–Sp
3 hours
Study of the principles of composition, value, pattern, tone,
mood, and color theories. Emphasis is placed on the creative
process from  finished art. Imaginative and individual
responses of the student increase throughout the course.
Prerequisite: ART-2130 Painting Foundations. (Fee: $150)
ART-3140 Intermediate Ceramics–Fa, Sp
3 hours
In this course students will expand and refine existing hand-
building and/or wheel-throwing techniques. In addition to
developing a deeper and broader set of technical skills, students
will develop their ideas and learn to articulate them through clay.
Students will demonstrate comfort and proficiency in the operation
of the ceramics studio equipment and in the physical processes of
building, glazing and firing clay. Prerequisites: ART-2140 Ceramics
Foundations. (Fee: $175).
ART-3160 Intermediate Sculpture–Fa
3 hours
This course will further expand on the materials and techniques
learned in Sculpture Foundations. Students will define techniques
and understanding of materials they have previously used with
emphasis on developing a personal artistic voice. Student and
professor may define new materials and techniques that will be
introduced through class or individual projects based on student
ability and interest. Prerequisite: ART-2160 Sculpture Foundations.
(Fee: $300)
ART-3170 Intermediate Printmaking–Fa
3 hours
Building upon the relief and intaglio processes, the student
will add the processes of serigraphy (screen printing) and
lithography. Subsequently, the student will concentrate on one of
the four printing processes. The upper-level printmaking student
is encouraged to combine printing techniques and create images
of greater size with an emphasis on artistic statement. The proper
matting and presentation of the print is included in this course.
Instruction will consist of demonstrations, audio-visual lectures,
and group and individual critiques. Prerequisites: ART-2110
Intermediate Drawing; ART-2170 Printmaking Foundations. (Fee:
$250)
ART-3230 Watercolor–Sp
3 hours
A location painting watercolor course for students who have
had drawing instruction and who have a basic understanding of
composition and color theory. Prerequisites: ART-1110 Drawing
Foundations; ART-1230 Two-Dimensional Design; or by portfolio.
(Fee: $180)
ART-3250 Studio Photography–Fa
3 hours
Students will learn to control and manipulate various aspects
and qualities of light in a photographic studio environment to
create and implement lighting solutions for various commercial,
fine art, and creative digital photography projects. Additional
expenses for materials and services beyond the course fee are
required for successful completion of this course — students
should plan and budget accordingly. Prerequisites: ART-2250
Creative Photography or permission of instructor. (Fee: $200)
ART-3310 Art History I–Fa
3 hours
Survey of the development of western art and architecture from
the ancient world through the early renaissance.
ART-3320 Art History II–Sp
3 hours
Survey of the development of western painting, architecture,
sculpture, and the graphic arts from the early renaissance through
impressionism at the end of the 19th century. Prerequisite: ART-
3310 Art History I.
ART-4130 Advanced Painting–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Building upon Painting Foundations and Intermediate Painting,
Advanced Painting allows for further exploration and focus as
students develop a mature, exhibitable body of work. Student and
professor will define course projects based on abilities and interest
of the student. Prerequisites: ART-2130 Painting Foundations; ART-
3130 Intermediate Painting. Repeatable up to two times.
ART-4140 Advanced Ceramics–Sp
3 hours
In this course, students will develop expertise in ceramic
methods of hand-building and/or wheel-throwing, with an
emphasis on perfecting the skill sets already developed.
Additionally, students will establish personal artistic statements
manifested through a conceptually unified body of work expressed
in clay. Prerequisites: ART-2140 Ceramics Foundations; ART-3140
Intermediate Ceramics. Repeatable up to two times. (Fee:$175)
ART-4160 Advanced Sculpture–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Building on Sculpture Foundations and Intermediate Sculpture,
Advanced Sculpture allows for further exploration and focus as
students develop a mature, quality body of work. The professor
will define course projects based on abilities and interest of the
student. Prerequisite: ART-3160 Intermediate Sculpture. (Fee:
$300) Repeatable up to two times.


ART-2110 – ART-4160
ART-4170 Advanced Printmaking–Fa, Sp
3 hours
This printmaking course is for the advanced student who
is completing a concentration in printmaking. By allowing the
student to specialize in a particular technical process, this
course focuses on presenting a unified body of prints reflecting a
personal style and deeper thinking in preparation for the student’s
senior exhibition. This course encourages experimentation with
the synthesis of analog digital technologies while maintaining
traditional value for achieving the consistent multiple image.
Prerequisites: ART-2170 Printmaking Foundations; ART-3170
Intermediate Printmaking. Repeatable up to two times (Fee: $300)
ART-4300 Art Exhibition–Sp
3 hours
Designed to provide the student a hands-on experience in
mounting an art exhibition. Topics include archival matting and
framing, lighting, and hanging techniques, as well as publicity and
signage. Studio work is a requirement to balance a portfolio of
work for a senior exhibition. Capstone course. Prerequisite: Senior
studio art major status. (Fee: $50)
ART-4400 20th Century Art–Sp
3 hours
Investigation of the development of 20th century art history
from  the
underlying worldviews and changes in media. Classroom lectures
are supplemented with student research, critique, and museum
studies. (odd years)
ART-4440 Installation Art–Fa
3 hours
Survey of Installation Art, culminating in student directed
projects, executed on and off campus. Prerequisite: ART-4400 20th
Century Art recommended. (Fee: $125) (even years)
ART-4900 Studio Art Internship–Fa, Sp, Su
0–6 hours
The studio art internship will give the student an opportunity
to gain hands-on, experiential learning with professionals in the
studio art field. This experience will provide students firsthand
exposure and insights into professional and practical work,
industry attitudes and approaches, and career path options within
the field. Students will learn from and work with experienced
artists, participate in art-related settings, and gain insights for
establishing goals for an artistic career. Credit/no credit.
ART-4980 Special Topics in Art–Fa, Sp, Su
1–3 hours
This is a workshop for students who are interested in a
collaborative studio learning experience in applied art. Applied
areas offered include painting (watercolor, oil, acrylic), pottery,
or photography. Rotation of course content will be determined
by faculty schedules. In instances where Cedarville University
faculty are acting as instructors in professional workshops held
off-campus, Cedarville University students who participate and
pay Cedarville tuition can earn elective credit. Actual contact
hours would determine amount of credit granted. Prerequisite:
Permission of the instructor. (Fee: $75).
ART-4990 Independent Study in Art–Fa, Sp, Su
1–3 hours
Independent and intensive study in a particular area of art for
individual students who demonstrate special interests and ability.
(Fee: $60 per credit hour)
Athletic Training (ATRN)
ATRN-1300 Emergency Care–Fa
3 hours
The American Red Cross Emergency Preparedness certificate
may be granted at the end of this course. (Fee: $100)
ATRN-1500 Introduction to Athletic Training–Fa, Sp
1 hour
This course will introduce the basic concepts of the profession
of athletic training. Emphasis will be placed on the history of the
profession as well as the core domains of athletic training.
ATRN-3500 Principles of Sport Medicine
3 hours
An overview of the allied health profession known as athletic
training. This course focuses on the principles of prevention,
recognition, management and basic rehabilitation of sport-related
injuries. Relevant topics include physical conditioning, evaluation
and injury cycle.
Students will be broken up into teams. Content will be organized
into weekly modules, in which students will complete their reading,
take team quizzes in class, participate in group projects, and
demonstrate competency in basic athletic training skills during
LABs through practical assignments. Prerequisites: ATRN-1500
Introduction to Athletic Training; ATRN-1300 Emergency Care.
(Fee: $25)
ATRN-4500 Senior Sport Medicine Capstone
2 hours
Designed for the student to demonstrate the ability to integrate
the knowledge, skills and attitudes developed throughout their
course of study in a final project (such as a research project and
presentation) or experience (such as an internship of at least 80
clock hours). The student’s academic advisor and the dean of
the school must approve the project or experience based on a
written proposal developed and submitted by the student prior to
registering for the course. (Details for what must be included in
the proposal are available in the course syllabus). Prerequisite:
permission of the dean.
Biology (BIO)
BIO-1110 Introduction to Biology–Fa
4 hours
Structure and function of plant and animal cells with emphasis
in central concepts. This is the first biology course for majors, open
to others with high school biology and chemistry backgrounds.
Three lectures and one 2-hour laboratory per week. (Fee: $100)
BIO-1115 Biology I: Cell Biology–Fa, Sp
4 hours
The first of a two-semester sequence that prepares students
for advanced biology courses and related fields. Includes an
introduction to the nature of science, cellular chemistry, cellular
structure and function, energy and metabolism, and genetics.
(Fee:$100)
BIO-1120 Biology II: Zoology–Sp
4 hours
The second of a two-semester sequence that prepares
students for advanced biology courses and related fields. Includes
an integrative study of the diversity of organisms that make up
the animal kingdom, an introduction to the protista kingdom,
and natural selection. Morphology, physiology, and ecology
of the major phyla will be integrated with the continuities and
discountinuities among animal taxa. Prerequisite: BIO-1115
Biology I: Cell Biology. (Fee: $100)
BIO-2210 Microbiology–Sp
4 hours
A study of the characteristics, culture, and control of bacteria,
viruses, and fungi. A major emphasis is placed on microorganisms
and disease, with some coverage of industrial and environmental
topics. Laboratory techniques are emphasized. Three lectures and
two 80-minute laboratories per week. Prerequisite: CHEM-1000
Principles of Chemistry, or CHEM-1050 Chemistry for Engineers,
or CHEM-1110 General Chemistry I. (Fee: $100)
BIO-2500 General Botany–Fa
4 hours
A survey of the phyla of the plant kingdom and autotrophic
prokaryotes and protists. Laboratory experiences will focus upon
field botany, plant communities, and opportunities to investigate
plant processes. Special emphasis will be upon the growth
and development and the anatomy and physiology of flowering
plants. Three lectures and one three-hour laboratory per week.
Prerequisite: BIO-1115 Biology I: Cell Biology. (Fee: $100)
BIO-2600 General Ecology–Sp
4 hours
A study of the relationships among organisms and with
their physical environment. Basic principles of ecological and
evolutionary theory will provide insights about organismal
adaptation, spatiotemporal scaling of systems, biogeochemistry,
and biogeography. Environmental ethics and biblical stewardship
principles will be evaluated as we encounter and consider
environmental challenges (e.g. water, disease, climate change,
and biodiversity loss). Prerequisites: BIO-2500 General Botany;
two semesters of biology, or permission of the instructor (Fee:
$100)




ART-4170 – BIO-2600
BIO-3200 Advanced Ecology–Fa
3 hours
An advanced study of fundamental concepts of ecology across
the organizational hierarchy from  globe. Emphasis
will be placed on the topics of biodiversity, biogeography,
biogeochemistry, evolution, and conservation with respect to
a biblical environmental stewardship ethic in the face of global
environmental change. Two hours lecture and one two-hour
lab per week. Course includes a travel study experience to the
Indiana Dunes National Lakeshore. Crosslist with ENVS-3200.
Prerequisites: BIO-2600 General Ecology or permission of the
instructor. (Fee: $100)
BIO-3300 Genetics–Fa
4 hours
This is an integrative course of the areas of classical and
molecular genetics. Focus on the principles of heredity in
prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms, which includes the
understanding of transmission genetics on a molecular level. The
molecular nature of genes, including gene expression, mutations,
and manipulation of DNA will be emphasized. Three lectures
and one three-hour laboratory per week. Prerequisite: BIO-1115
Biology I: Cell Biology. (Fee: $100)
BIO-3410 Parasitology and Invertebrate Zoology–Fa
3 hours
This course provides an overview of the invertebrate parasites
commonly found in domestic animals, wildlife and humans. Also
included in the course is the role of invertebrates in ecological
monitoring. An integrative approach to invertebrate taxonomy,
ecology, morphology and physiology is presented. Field collecting
is used to learn the principles of classification and to study local
biodiversity. Prerequisite: BIO-1120 Biology II: Zoology. (Fee:
$100) (even years)
BIO-3420
4 hours
Comparative Vertebrate Anatomy and Physiology–Sp
This course provides an investigation of the diversity among the
vertebrate classes with an emphasis on mammals. The anatomy
and physiology of the vertebrate body systems are examined to
understand the continuity and discontinuity present within and
among the groups. Three lectures and on three-hour laboratory
per week. Prerequisite: BIO-1120 Biology II: Zoology. (Fee: $100)
BIO-3430
3 hours
Conservation Biology for Wildlife and Zoos–Fa
This course will engage in an exploration of the theories
and practices of conservation biology for wildlife and zoos. The
class will address stewardship through the study of population
dynamics, public policy, ethics of conservation, spatial distribution
and analysis, habitat, biodiversity, and other current issues in the
field. Students will also learn to identify birds and amphibians.
Prerequisites: BIO-1120 Biology II: Zoology; BIO-2500 General
Botany, BIO-2600 General Ecology. (even years) (Fee: $100)
BIO-3450 Human Structure and Function I–Fa
4 hours
Study of the structure and function of the human body with an
emphasis on body systems. Includes human tissues, skeletal,
muscular, nervous, and endocrine systems. Three lectures and
one three-hour laboratory per week. Prerequisite: BIO-1115
Biology I: Cell Biology. (Fee: $100)
BIO-3460 Human Structure and Function II–Sp
4 hours
Study of the structure and function of the human body systems,
including cardiovascular, respiratory, gastrointestinal, and renal
systems. Laboratory focuses on physiological phenomena. Three
lectures and one three-hour lab per week. Prerequisite: BIO-3450
Human Structure and Function I. (Fee: $100)
BIO-3510 Plant Physiology–Sp
3 hours
A study of the physiological aspects of vascular plants with
emphasis upon plant-soil water relationships, mineral nutrition,
photosynthesis, and plant growth and development. Two lectures
and one 3-hour laboratory per week. Prerequisite: BIO-2500
General Botany. (Fee: $100) (odd years)
BIO-3520 Plant Taxonomy–Sp
3 hours
A study of the naming and classification of common vascular
plants with emphasis upon field identification in the context
of plant community and taxonomic family, plant collecting and
herbarium techniques, and the importance of plants in global
stewardship and missions. Two lectures and one three-hour
laboratory per week. Includes a travel study opportunity during
spring break. Prerequisite: BIO-2500 General Botany. (Fee: $100)
(even years)
BIO-3530 Agricultural Science–Sp
3 hours
A study of soil, plant, and animal systems in modern agricultural
production and management. Emphasis will be placed on genetic
improvement, nutrition, growth and development, resource
management, and agricultural products in the global marketplace.
Prerequisites: BIO-1120 Biology II: Zoology; BIO-2500 General
Botany; BIO-2600 General Ecology. (Fee:$100) (odd years)
BIO-3600 Environmental Ethics–Sp
[0-9] hours
An introductory study of ethical systems that addresses
the relationship and responsibility of humankind toward the
natural world. Emphasis will be upon the biblical environmental
stewardship ethic and its application to contemporary
environmental issues. Three lectures per week. Prerequisites: One
semester of biology; junior status; permission of instructor. (odd
years)
BIOA-3600 Topics in Environmental Biology–Sp, Su
4 hours
Enrollment in this course signifies that the student has
chosen to enroll in two or more Au Sable Institute courses in an
upcoming term taught by faculty of various evangelical Christian
colleges and universities.  of the more than
20 Cedarville-approved Au Sable courses are available in the Au
Sable Institute Bulletin available from the department Au Sable
representative or at the Au Sable website. Enrollment begins
when the student contacts the University Au Sable representative.
Appropriate course titles will appear on the student’s transcript
with letter grades when the studies are completed. More
information on Au Sable Institute is available under Travel Studies
Opportunities or at ausable.org. Prerequisite: acceptance to
attend Au Sable Institute.
BIO-3610 Ecophysiology–Fa
3 hours
A study of the physiological characteristics of organisms that
permit them to be successful in various environmental conditions.
This course includes both field and laboratory studies focusing
on both warm and cold environments, and covers material from
cells to ecosystems. Two lectures and one three-hour laboratory
per week. Prerequisites: BIO-1120 Biology II: Zoology; BIO-2500
General Botany, BIO-2600 General Ecology. (odd years) (Fee:
$100)
BIO-3710 Biochemistry–Sp
4 hours
A study of the chemical and physical properties of
macromolecules such as proteins, carbohydrates, lipids, and
nucleic acids, and the metabolic pathways, enzyme kinetics, and
thermodynamics associated with these molecules. Three lectures
and one lab per week. Prerequisites: BIO-1115 Biology I: Cell
Biology; CHEM-3510 Organic Chemistry I. (Fee: $150)
BIO-3800 Biological Research–Fa, Sp
2 hours
Student participate in an inquiry-based research project under
the direction of a faculty mentor. The project stresses methods
of science including literature reviews, experimental design, data
collection, data analysis, and interpretation and communication of
the results. The research project may be geared toward completion
of the senior seminar capstone experience. Prerequisites:
Sophomore status; permission of instructor. (Fee: $150)


BIO-3200 – BIO-3800
BIO-3810 Biological Research Internship–Fa
1–2 hours
Student will participate in an 8–10 week summer undergraduate
research program of their choosing at an accredited university
or medical facility. Prior to participation in the research program,
the student must have the program approved by the biology
faculty member in charge of the course. In addition, the student
will receive a progress report form which will be filled out by the
student and signed by the student’s research advisor. To receive
credit for the course, the student must turn in the progress report
along with a copy of their laboratory notebook or research log,
submit a 5–10 page research summary, and meet with the faculty
member in charge of the course. Prerequisite: Sophomore status.
BIO-4350 Immunology–Fa
4 hours
Study of the human immune system, including descriptions
of basic immunological phenomena, biochemistry of antibodies
and antigens, the cellular and genetic components of the
immune response, and immunopathology. Students will also
learn immunological techniques commonly used in clinical and
research applications. Three lectures, one two-hour lab per week.
Prerequisite or Corequisite: BIO-3300 Genetics. (Fee: $100)
BIO-4360 Infectious Diseases–Sp
3 hours
This course will cover key concepts that relate to the
emergence, the spread, and the control of infectious disease
epidemics, including history of infectious diseases, basic concepts
of microbial biology, taxonomy, antimicrobials, introduction to
infection and immunity, bacterial/viral/fungal/parasitic pathogens
and associated diseases, and diagnosis/treatment/control of
infectious diseases. The future of infectious diseases including
evolution of virulence, emergence of drug resistance, and
eradication of diseases will also be addressed. Prerequisites:
BIO-3300 Genetics; or GBIO-3350 Principles of Immunology. (odd
years)
BIO-4450
2 hours
Introduction to Human Gross Anatomy–Fa, Sp
This course will prepare students for the first–year medical
school gross anatomy course. The course is laboratory–based and
will introduce students to various surgical/dissection techniques
and enhance student’s understanding of human anatomy through
a systems based approach. Areas of focus include the muscular,
nervous, cardiovascular, digestive, and respiratory systems.
Prerequisite: BIO-3460 Human Structure and Function II; and
permission of instructor. (Fee: $200)
BIO-4800 Senior Seminar–Biology–Fa, Sp
1 hour
In this capstone course required of all senior biology majors,
students compile data from laboratory, field study, or extensive
literature research and give an oral presentation. Approval of
the topic must be given by the student’s academic advisor. The
student must also attend a minimum of 10 seminars during the
senior year. Prerequisites: Senior status; attendance of a minimum
of 10 seminars prior to the senior year.
BIO-4880 Topics in Biology
1–3 hours
Topics of special interest by the biology faculty from the areas
of modern biology. Prerequisites: Junior status; permission of
instructor.
BIO-4900 Independent Study: Biology–Fa, Sp
1–3 hours
Supervised independent study of a particular biological
phenomenon. Submission and approval of a research proposal
must precede registration. Prerequisites: Major in biology;
permission of advisor.
BIO-4910 Environmental Biology Internship–Fa, Sp 3–4 hours
An opportunity to participate in an internship experience
involving research projects with field biologists, ecologists,
environmental health scientists, or environmental educators,
depending upon the student’s vocational preference. Involves
department faculty or faculty in conjunction with local or state
agencies or private institutions. Provides practical experience
in field biology and ecology techniques related to habitat
characterization, monitoring, management, and restoration.
Prerequisites: BIO-1120 Biology II: Zoology; BIO-2500 General
Botany, BIO-2600 General Ecology; permission of instructor. (Fee:
$25)
Broadcasting, Digital Media, and Journalism (BRDM)
BRDM-1110 Introduction to Broadcasting
and Digital Media–Fa
3 hours
A survey of electronic media, including history and
development, types, audience research, regulations, and
globalization.
BRDM-1120 Audio Production–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Students receive instruction and training in the operation of
software and hardware used in audio media. The course focuses
on gaining knowledge and experience with Pro Tools software
and audio hardware including microphones, control surfaces and
interfaces, signal processors, audio monitors, etc. Students in the
course will use these tools to produce several audio projects. (Fee:
$75)
BRDM-2110 Video Production–Sp
3 hours
This course provides hands-on training for digital video
production, including camera, lighting, audio, and editing. The
student will learn basic production and post-production skills and
terms. (Fee: $75)
BRDM-2130 Writing for Digital Media–Fa
3 hours
This course covers the form and style of writing for radio,
television, film, and interactive media. Students will learn the
basics of narrative structure for these media as well as basic
formatting and style guidelines.
BRDM-2210 Media Performance–Sp
3 hours
Examines announcing for a variety of applications including:
commercial, audio book, interviewing, news, sports, and music
radio. The emphasis is on the application of key principles
through assignments that focus on use of the voice as a tool for
communication of ideas on a one-to-one basis. (Fee: $45 ) (even
years)
BRDM-2220 Sound Design–Sp
3 hours
This course is designed to prepare the media production
student to create sound designs for radio, television, film and other
audio media by studying the nature of sound, psychoacoustics,
the power of the voice, sound effects, and music and how they can
be used in combination with visual image to influence listeners/
viewers. Students will create and execute a variety of sound
designs for radio, television, and other audio media. Prerequisite:
BRDM-1120 Audio Production. (Fee: $75)
BRDM-2320
3 hours
Preproduction and Planning for Video and Film–Fa, Sp
This course examines the framework for preparation for video
and film production in fiction and nonfiction programming. The
duties of the producer and director are covered as they relate to
scripting, budgets, legalities, scheduling, site surveys and other
related preproduction duties for studio and field productions. (Fee:
$75)
BRDM-2350
3 hours
Introduction to Motion Design–Fa
An introduction to the creation of graphics for television and
film. Topics covered include motion graphic principles, network
package graphic creation, and training in Adobe After Effects.
(Fee: $45).




BIO-3810 – BRDM-2350
BRDM-2606
2 hours
Introduction to Computer Animation–Fa
An introduction to the use of 3D animation software. The course
focuses on learning the basics of Autodesk Maya and general
principles and workflow for 3D computer graphics in production
work. (Fee: $75)
BRDM-2650 Introduction to Web Analytics and SEO–Fa 1 hour
The course is a survey of methods for gathering and
interpreting online tracking and usage data. The survey will focus
on the Google Analytics platform but also cover basics of SEO for
websites, apps, and online media content.
BRDM-2810 Sophomore Seminar–Fa
1 hour
The sophomore seminar in Broadcasting, Digital Media, and
Journalism is designed to acquaint students with current trends
in the electronic media and to aid students in understanding key
concepts for building a successful career including networking,
professional development, résumé and portfolio development,
and strategies for career entry in the electronic media field.
Prerequisite: BRDM-1110 Introduction to Broadcasting and Digital
Media.
BRDM-3150 Media Ethics–Fa
3 hours
Development of an applied theistic ethic for media practitioners.
Topics for ethical examination include media content, business
practices, advertising, journalism, privacy, and intellectual property
rights. Crosslisted with JOUR-3150. Prerequisite: Junior or Senior
status.
BRDM-3210 Digital Audio Post Production–Fa
3 hours
This course is designed to teach the theories, principles, and
practices of multi-track studio production. Students will produce a
number of audio projects for radio, television, and film in the Pro
Tools HD production environment. Prerequisite: BRDM-1120 Audio
Production. (Fee: $75)
BRDM-3215 Live Sound–Fa
3 hours
This course will prepare the student for work in live sound for
churches and other venues. Through a series of lectures and
labs, students will learn how to set up and operate a PA systems,
operate mixers/consoles/control surfaces, trouble shoot problems
in audio set-up, mix live sound, complete stage set-up, and the
selection of microphones, amps, mixers, speakers and monitors.
Prerequisite: BRDM-1120 Audio Production. (Fee: $45)
BRDM-3216 Audio for Video and Film–Sp
3 hours
Audio for video/film will expose the student to the theories and
the practical challenges of gathering audio in the field as a part
of a video/film project. The course will also focus on working with
sound in the studio during post-production and will include areas
such as automatic dialogue replacement and Foley sound effects.
Students will record and produce all of the sounds for a major film
project. Prerequisites: BRDM-1120 Audio Production and BRDM-
3210 Digital Audio Post Production. (Fee: $45) (odd years).
BRDM-3310 Digital Film Production–Fa
3 hours
Taught from the producer’s perspective, this course offers
hands-on training for students in creating short narrative films and
overseeing the pre-production, production, and post-production
stages. Prerequisite: BRDM-2110 Video Production. (Fee: $45)
BRDM-3330 Screenwriting–Sp
4 hours
In this advanced writing course, students will learn the formal
construction involved in writing a professional screenplay, with
emphasis on narrative structure, dramatic writing, and strong
character development. Prerequisite: BRDM-2130 Writing for
Digital Media or approval from the instructor. (Fee: $45) (even
years)
BRDM-3350 Documentary Film–Sp
3 hours
An overview of the origins, development, and current trends
in the production of documentary films. Emphasis is given to the
viewing and analysis of selected documentary programs. (Fee:
$75) (even years)
BRDM-3355 VFX and Compositing for TV and Film–Fa
3 hours
This course deals with the creation of computer-generated
visual effects and the process for compositing those effects into
live action footage. Topics include VFX creation, image matching
and manipulation and compositing techniques using industry
standard software. Prerequisite: BRDM-2350 Introduction to
Motion Design. (Fee: $75)
BRDM-3370 Documentary Film-Style Production–Sp
3 hours
Further study of the framework for non-fiction film-style
production. Emphasis is placed on cinematography, interviewing,
paper editing, directing, post-production, and distribution unique
to documentary programming. Prerequisite: BRDM-2110 Video
Production. (Fee: $75) (odd years)
BRDM-3390 Editing Theory and Practice–Fa
3 hours
In this course, students will learn terminology and techniques
related to video editing and post-production, including assembly,
file organization, and aesthetic approaches to how visual
storytelling in film and video extends to the editing process.
Prerequisite: BRDM-2110 Video Production (Fee: $75)
BRDM-3410 Broadcasting and Media Sales–Sp
3 hours
The course focuses on developing an understanding of
the theory and practice of the sale of advertising for a variety
of electronic media. Students will study and apply client and
product research, advertising strategies, sales technique, and
presentational methods. Sales executives work with the class to
develop the knowledge and skills described above and to help
them select and work with a media client to develop an advertising
campaign.
BRDM-3420 Media Management–Fa
3 hours
This course is designed to acquaint the student with the
concerns facing the management of a media company including
legal requirements of the FCC, personnel management,
implementation of programming, and station acquisition.
BRDM-3605
3 hours
Writing and Design for Web and Mobile Media–Sp
The purpose of this course is to introduce students to the
special design and writing necessary for emerging new media,
including the web, mobile media, and social networking sites and
services. (Fee: $50)
BRDM-3611 Web Analytics–Fa
3 hours
The study of methods for gathering and interpreting Web
tracking and usage data. The approach taken is a consumer-
centric strategic analysis called Key Insights Analysis which has
as its goal delivery of actionable insights and matrices for website
developers. (Fee: $15)
BRDM-3630 Principles of Computer Animation–Sp
3 hours
Application of the principles of traditional cell-based animation
to computer animation, as well as the effective use of animation
for communication. Prerequisite: BRDM-2606 Introduction to
Computer Animation or approval from the instructor. (Fee: $50)
BRDM-3650 Networked Audience–Fa
3 hours
Students will develop a framework for understanding the
audience by looking at the intersection of a wide variety of factors
that shape the media environment. The students will then project
current trends to anticipate where the audience will be in the next
five years. Crosslisted with JOUR. Prerequisite: Junior or Senior
status. (Fee: $10)
BRDM-3720 Audio Production Practicum–Fa, Sp
1 hour
The practicum is designed to place the student in a variety
of professional settings on and off campus, with the purpose of
allowing the student to practice audio skills acquired in earlier
courses. The course is repeatable for a total of two hours.
Prerequisites: BRDM-1110 Introduction to Broadcasting and
Digital Media; BRDM-1120 Audio Production. (Fee: $45)


BRDM-2606 – BRDM-3720
BRDM-4710 Independent Study: Digital Media
1–3 hours
Taken to allow the student to study an area beyond what is
provided through regular course offerings. The student must make
a proposal of what is to be studied for the term when applying to
a faculty mentor. The student will then follow a schedule approved
by the faculty mentor for studying the topic and submitting
a report. Repeatable to a total of 6 credit hours in the field.
Prerequisite: Approval of proposal by faculty mentor.
BRDM-4810 Senior Seminar–Fa, Sp
1 hour
The course is designed to help the student transition from
the college to professional world. Students will interact with
professionals to network and to focus on developing résumés and
portfolios, interviewing skills, and an understanding of business
etiquette. Prerequisite: Senior status as broadcasting, digital
media, and journalism major. (Fee: $45)
BRDM-4920 Senior Project
3 hours
The student selects one of two options: 1) a paper reporting
on the student’s original research that investigated a topic in
electronic media or 2) a media production. A proposal detailing
the student’s plan for the senior project must be submitted and
approved by the faculty mentor prior to registration for the course.
Capstone course. Prerequisites: GPA of 3.0 in major courses;
Senior status; permission of BRDM faculty. (Fee: $35)
BRDM-4930 Internship
3–12 hours
Students are placed with media companies to gain experience
in actual career situations. The work must be done under the
supervision of an employee of the company approved by the
faculty mentor. Students should discuss this option with their
advisors at least one semester prior to the internship. Internship
agreements must be signed by the student, job supervisor, and
faculty mentor for the experience. Internships depend upon
availability and approval by the media faculty. Capstone course.
Prerequisites: GPA of 3.0 in major courses; Junior or Senior
status; approval by the electronic media faculty.
Bible and Theology: Applied Theology (BTAT)
BTAT-2350 Theological Foundations of Ministry–Fa
3 hours
An examination of theological issues critical for the formation
of a biblical philosophy of ministry, as well as a critical survey of
historical developments in Christian educational ministries in light
of those theological discussions.
BTAT-2400 Introduction to Evangelism–Fa, Sp
3 hours
An introductory study of the biblical concepts for evangelism:.
The course will survey a brief overview of the biblical Gospel;
explore historic and current methods in evangelism; introduce
the cultural, personal, or theological issues that could inhibit
evangelism; and encourage personal witnessing encounters.
BTAT-2420 History of Mission–Fa
3 hours
Survey of the history of the expansion of the church from
apostolic times to World War II with attention to differing
conceptions of the mission task and the strategies and lessons
that may be learned for mission today. (odd years)
BTAT-3200
3 hours
Introduction to Missions: Theology and History–Fa, Sp
An introduction to the biblical warrant for and theology of
Christian missions. This course will also sketch the history
of missions efforts from  mid-20th century.
Primarily the history will be told through the efforts of churches,
representative missionaries, and missions boards and agencies.
(dual-listed with BTAT-6200 Introduction to Missions: Theology and
History)
BRDM-3733 Sports Production Practicum–Fa, Sp
1 hour
Production on a video crew in sports production as assigned
by the instructor. The course is repeatable for a total of six hours.
(Fee: $75)
BRDM-3735 Film/Video Practicum–Fa, Sp
1 hour
This practicum provides students opportunities to work on
video projects throughout the semester, either for themselves
or for clients. Students are responsible for selecting the projects
they work on for practicum hours, which will be monitored and
approved by the instructor. Prerequisite: BRDM-2110 Video
Production. (Fee: $75)
BRDM-3741 Sales and Management Practicum–Fa, Sp 1 hour
The practicum is designed to place the student in a variety
of professional settings on and off campus, with the purpose
of allowing the student to observe and practice sales and
management skills acquired in earlier courses. The course is
repeatable for a total of three hours. Prerequisites: BRDM-3410
Electronic Media Sales; BRDM-3420 Media Management; Junior
or Senior status; permission of the instructor.
BRDM-3765 Animation Practicum–Fa, Sp
1 hour
The student will develop an animation project individually or
with a team, working under the supervision of a faculty mentor.
Repeatable for a total of 2 credit hours. Prerequisite: BRDM-
2606 Introduction to Computer Animation or approval from the
instructor. (Fee: $25)
BRDM-4110 Digital Media Law and Regulation–Fa
3 hours
A study of the legal protections and requirements placed upon
the electronic media. Emphasis is placed upon court decisions
that help to define First Amendment freedoms for those in the
media, as well as regulations placed upon the electronic media.
Prerequsite: Junior or Senior status.
BRDM-4310
3 hours
Cinematography Theory and Practice–Sp
Taught from the director’s perspective, this course teaches
advanced visual storytelling techniques for film and video
production involving camera, lighting, and post-production
techniques such as color grading. Prerequisite: BRDM-3310
Digital Film Production. (Fee: $75)
BRDM-4320 Directing the Narrative Film–Sp
3 hours
Building on techniques of video production and direction that
have been introduced in previous courses, students will spend the
semester creating and directing a narrative short film and seeing
it through the various stages of production. Prerequisites: BRDM-
3310 Digital Film Production; or approval from the instructor;
Junior or Senior status. (even years) (Fee: $75)
BRDM-4650
3 hours
Designing Solutions for New Audiences–Sp
Because of the ongoing changes in the communication system,
media companies and businesses are in constant reinvention
of the ways in which they meet the needs of their audiences by
innovations in programming, products and services. In this course
students will be presented with a current problem in the use of
new and emerging media to connect a client with its audience.
Teams will then design a solution to meet the needs of both
client and audience. Prerequisite: BRDM/JOUR-3650 Networked
Audience.
BRDM-4700 Special Topics in Electronic Media–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Available to advanced students who desire intense study in
special areas of electronic media. Prerequisites: Junior or Senior
status as an broadcasting and digital media major; permission of
the faculty mentor.


BRDM-3733 – BTAT-3200
BTAT-3250 Church Planting–Fa
3 hours
This course will expose students to the various stages of church
planting including vision casting, planning, implementation, and
reproduction. Likewise, it will present multiple approaches to
church planting and church structure, culminating in a student
project wherein students will create and present strategic two-year
church planting plans targeting a specific location.
BTAT-3400 Biblical Care and Counseling–Fa, Sp
3 hours
An introduction to the historical context and theological
foundations for counseling ministry. This course covers methods
of change and basic counseling skills. It examines case studies,
practices basic counseling skills in a discipleship relationship, and
considers various ministry contexts. The course format includes
lecture, video, and discussion. (dual-listed with BTAT-6110 Biblical
Care and Counseling)
BTAT-3410 Discipleship–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Study of personal discipleship within a biblical framework,
utilizing a variety of resources and practical experience. The
model developed will be applicable in multiple contexts. (dual-
listed with BTAT-6410 Discipleship)
BTAT-3420 Introduction to Pastoral Ministry–Sp
2 hours
This course provides broad overview of pastoral duties including
presiding over weddings, funerals, and church services. In
addition, such issues as the pastoral call, candidating, ordination,
leadership, and family issues are also addressed. (odd years)
BTAT-3430 Interpersonal and Crisis Counseling–Sp
3 hours
Building upon a biblical and theological foundation for
biblical care, discipleship, and counseling, this course
provides intermediate and advanced principles and practices
of interpersonal and crisis counseling. A biblical approach to
common counseling problems involving both sin and suffering is
addressed within Christian ministry. It also discusses the role of
counseling in encouraging and cultivating spiritual growth through
discipleship relationships and providing biblical life wisdom.
Prerequisites/Corequisites: BTAT-3400 Biblical and Counseling or
permission of instructor. (dual-listed with BTAT-6130 Interpersonal
and Crisis Counseling)
BTAT-3450 Contemporary World Missions–Sp
3 hours
Study of the development, methods, and problems of Christian
missions since World War II.
BTAT-3470 Cross-Cultural Ministry–Sp
3 hours
Understanding culture, basic methods in researching
culture, becoming competent in another culture, cross-culture
communication, relevant to a mission ministry, and the practice of
ministry contextualization.
BTAT-3480 Women’s Communication for Ministry–Fa
3 hours
A course designed to help women refine communication
skills that will help them to articulate their beliefs effectively and
further develop communication platforms in the areas of giving
a testimony, leading a discussion, and expositing Scripture for
various age groups. Prerequisite: BTGE-1725 The Bible and the
Gospel. (dual-listed with BTAT-6480 Women’s Communication for
Ministry)
BTAT-3500 Text-Driven Preaching 1–Sp
3 hours
Introductory course on the nature of preparing and delivering
sermons shaped by Scripture’s textual meaning. Emphasis is
placed on moving from  a
contemporary audience. Prerequisites: BTGE-1725 The Bible and
the Gospel; BTGE- 2730 Old Testament Literature; BTGE-2740
New Testament Literature; or permission of the instructor. (dual-
listed with BTAT-6500 Text-Driven Preaching 1)
BTAT-3510 Introduction to Urban Missiology–Fa
3 hours
An introductory understanding of urban culture, basic methods
in researching urban culture, becoming competent in living in an
urban culture for the preparation of missions in an urban context.
Attention will be given to ministry guided by biblical theology and
acclimated to the sociological, anthropological, and multicultural
factors in the urban environment in global cities.. (Fee: $35)
BTAT-3560 Counseling and Mentoring Men–Sp
3 hours
In this course, the distinctive theological foundations and
skills of biblical counseling will be examined and applied
specifically to the ministry of mentoring and counseling men.
Study will focus on the mandate and skills of leading men toward
comprehensive maturity and counseling as it pertains to common
life challenges for men in contemporary society. Crosslisted with
BTCM. Prerequisite: BTAT-3400 Biblical Care and Counseling; or
permission of the instructor.
BTAT-3730 Theology of Worship–Sp
3 hours
This course explores the theology, history, and practice of
Christian worship, with particular attention to how worship
practices both reflect and shape theological commitments. Various
elements of Christian worship will be examined in light of diverse
cultural contexts and theological perspectives with the goal of
enabling the student to plan appropriately and to lead worship in
a particular ministry setting. Prerequisites: BTGE-1725 The Bible
and the Gospel; BTGE-2730 Old Testament Literature; BTGE-2740
New Testament Literature.
BTAT-3840 Theology of Sexuality and Family–Fa
3 hours
A study of the key issues in biblical and systematic theology
related to human sexuality, gender, marriage, and family.
Emphasis will be given to central biblical texts for formation of
doctrine, historical disputes, and contemporary challenges, such
as homosexuality and transgenderism. Crosslisted as BTHT.
Prerequisite/Corequisite: BTGE-3755 Theology I.(odd years)
BTAT-3903 Theological Foundations of Human Life–Su
3 hours
Students will examine the theological concepts of the image of
God, human value, and human rights. From a biblical perspective,
students will review historical examples of Christian social
reformation as an outworking of the gospel and world missions
and the lessons applicable to the current pro-life movement.
BTAT-4300 Teaching Ministry of the Church–Fa
3 hours
Course focuses on the practice of expressing biblical and
theological content in written documents and/or teaching
curriculum for various audiences and settings. Attention is given to
the variety of delivery methods for expositional teaching available
within a church’s ministry. (Crosslisted with BTCM) (dual-listed
with BTAT/BTCM-6300 Teaching Ministry of the Church)
BTAT-4510 Advanced Urban Ministry–Sp
3 hours
Continuation of the earlier Urban Ministry course, including
global urban issues, particular challenges in world-class cities,
sociology of the city, and its implications for mission in the city.
Prerequisite: BTAT-3510 Introduction to Urban Missiology. (odd
years)(Fee: $75)
BTAT-4560 Text-Driven Preaching 2–Fa
3 hours
Advanced course on the nature of preparing and delivering
sermons shaped by Scripture’s textual meaning. Emphasis
is placed on moving from textual interpretation of various
biblical genres to skilled delivery to a contemporary audience.
Prerequisite: BTAT-3500 Text-Driven Preaching 1 or permission of
the instructor. (dual-listed with BTAT-6560 Text-Driven Preaching 2)
BTAT-4710 Ministry Internship–Fa, Sp, Su
2–3 hours
A mentored and evaluated ministry experience under the
direction of a qualified field mentor. Prerequisites: Approval of
the faculty of the School of Biblical and Theological Studies;
senior academic status; BTGE-2730 Old Testament Literature;
BTGE-2740 New Testament Literature; one history and theology
elective BTHT-XXXX; one applied theology elective BTAT-XXXX.
Repeatable up to three times


BTAT-3250 – BTAT-4710
BTAT-4720
3–12 hours
Cross-Cultural Missionary Internship–Fa, Sp, Su
Internship consisting of four to six weeks in a cross-cultural
context gaining experience in acclimating to a cross-cultural
surrounding and engaging in missions activity in that setting.
Supervision is provided by School of Biblical and Theological
Studies faculty and an approved missionary/pastor. This internship
is open to students in various majors, with the approval of the
faculty. Prerequisites: BTGE-2730 Old Testament Literature; BTGE-
2740 New Testament Literature; two missions courses; approval of
the SBTS faculty. Repeatable up to 12 credit hours.
BTAT-4730 Pastoral Internship–Fa, Sp, Su
3–12 hours
A mentored and evaluated local church ministry experience
under the direction of qualified pastoral staff. This is an opportunity
to utilize and develop knowledge and skills from courses in a
ministry context appropriate for student’s interest and preparation.
Capstone course. Repeatable to 12 hours. Prerequisites: approval
of the faculty of the School of Biblical and Theological Studies,
senior academic status, completion of the following courses
BTAT-3420 Introduction to Pastoral Ministry; BTAT-3430 Ministerial
Counseling; BTAT-3500 Text-Driven Preaching 1; BTAT-4560 Text-
Driven Preaching 2.
BTAT-4900
1–3 hours
Independent Study in Applied Theology–Fa, Sp, Su
Students will investigate an area of pastoral ministry or
missions, the latter including mission boards, methods, and places
of service.
BTAT-4990 Topics in Applied Theology–Fa, Sp
1–3 hours
Investigation of special topics in Bible and theology, which
have intrinsic worth and engage student interest. Permission of
instructor required for non-majors.
Bible and Theology: Biblical Languages (BTBL)
BTBL-2010
3 hours
Introduction to Biblical Language–Fa
This course is an introduction to the basic principles of
phonology (sounds), morphology (forms), and grammar of biblical
Greek and Hebrew. (Fee $100)
BTBL-2510 Elementary Greek I–Fa
4 hours
Basic elements of the Greek language. Careful attention is
given to grammar, syntax, vocabulary, and the reading of selected
portions of the Greek New Testament.
BTBL-2520 Elementary Greek II–Sp
4 hours
Basic elements of the Greek language. Careful attention is
given to grammar, syntax, vocabulary, and the reading of selected
portions of the Greek New Testament. (Fee $100)
BTBL-3510 Intermediate Greek I–Fa
3 hours
Detailed study of advanced Greek grammar, reading in the
Greek New Testament, the application of advanced syntactical
rules, and an introduction to exegesis. Prerequisite: BTBL-2510,
2520 Elementary Greek. (dual-listed with BTBL-6510 Intermediate
Greek)
BTBL-3520 Intermediate Greek II–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Detailed study of advanced Greek grammar, reading in the
Greek New Testament, the application of advanced syntactical
rules, and an introduction to exegesis. Prerequisite: BTBL-3510
Intermediate Greek I.
BTBL-3610
3 hours
Biblical Hebrew Grammar and Syntax I–Fa
Biblical Hebrew Grammar and Syntax I equips the student
with the essential elements of nominal and verbal morphology, a
working vocabulary, and a foundational understanding of phrase
and clause syntax.
BTBL-3620
3 hours
Biblical Hebrew Grammar and Syntax II–Sp
Biblical Hebrew Grammar and Syntax II initially focuses on
clause diagraming and then moves to syntax above the level of the
clause. Students will work through the Hebrew text of a small book
(e.g., Jonah, Ruth, etc.), acquiring skills for Hebrew exegesis. They
will also develop a vocabulary of 1,000 words based on frequency.
BTBL-4110 Greek Syntax and Exegesis–Sp
3 hours
Exegetical study of the Greek New Testament, focusing on
the grammatical and syntactical issues of specific passages.
The course provides the opportunity for students to develop
their own exegetical skills in working with the Greek text of the
New Testament and to grow in their ability to preach and teach
expository messages on the Bible. Prerequisite: BTBL-3510
Intermediate Greek I. (dual-listed with BTBL-6110 Greek Syntax &
Exegesis)
BTBL-4510 Readings in New Testament Greek–Sp
1 hour
Through the translation of a wide variety of Greek texts
primarily from the New Testament period, this course reviews and
strengthens foundational concepts and skills for the study of Koine
Greek. Prerequisite: BTBL-3510 Intermediate Greek I
(even years).
BTBL-4900
1–3 hours
Independent Study in Biblical Language–Fa, Sp, Su
The student will translate and/or exegete a Scripture passage or
investigate advanced grammar and syntax.
BTBL-4990 Topics in Biblical Languages–Fa, Sp
1–3 hours
Investigation of special topics in Bible and theology that
have intrinsic worth and engage student interest. Prerequisite:
Permission of instructor required for non-majors.
Bible and Theology: Biblical Studies (BTBS)
BTBS-1000 Introduction to Biblical Studies–Sp
1 hour
This course will introduce the student to the field of biblical
studies and related career opportunities. This will provide an
overview of the major and the various complementary minors,
introduce the various areas of study and related skills, survey
career possibilities and aid the student in determining his or her fit
with the field.
BTBS-2020 Biblical Research Methods–Sp
0 hour
The student will learn both how to conduct research and how to
produce a research paper, the contents and style of which comply
with generally accepted standards held by biblical scholars. In
addition, the student will demonstrate these skills by producing a
research paper that proposes the student’s plan for fulfilling the
program’s senior-seminar capstone requirement. (Fee: $15) (even
years)
BTBS-3400 Bible Backgrounds–Sp
3 hours
An introduction to the world of the Bible including the historical
context, geographical setting, and cultural milieu. These will
be accomplished through a survey of Ancient Near Eastern
backgrounds, a survey of the main geographical features of
Israel and the Fertile Crescent, and a survey of Intertestamental
literature. Prerequisites: BTGE-2730 Old Testament Literature;
BTGE-2740 New Testament Literature. (odd years)
BTBS-4310 Hermeneutics–Fa, Sp
3 hours
A study of the theory and related practice of the roles of author,
reader, and text toward the end of authoritative interpretation
and contextualization of the Bible. (crosslisted with BTHT-4310
Hermeneutics) (dual-listed with BTBS/BTHT-6310 Hermeneutics)
BTBS-4850 Senior Seminar–Sp
3 hours
The senior seminar is a reading and writing intensive course
dealing with key aspects of biblical studies. Students will meet
with the appointed biblical studies faculty for written presentations
and discussion of guided readings in classical and contemporary
studies in the discipline. Prerequisite: Senior status.




BTAT-4720 – BTBS-4850
Bible and Theology: Christian Ministry (BTCM)
BTCM-1000 Orientation to Bible Ministries Majors–Fa
1 hour
An introduction to the ministries majors provided within the
School of Biblical and Theological Studies (youth ministries,
Christian education, or missions). The course will provide an
overview of the program, survey career opportunities in Christian
ministry, and introduce the student to significant people and
resources in the field, on the campus, and in the community.
Credit/no credit.
BTCM-2050 Foundations for Ministry–Fa
1 hour
This course will provide an introductory view of Christian
ministry within the context of the local church. It will focus on
how worship directs the development and implementation of
Christian service related to the edification of the body of Christ
and the evangelism of the lost. The topics that will be addressed
will include a theology of church service, the definition of biblical
leadership, the essential qualities of the minister, the missiological
directive of Christianity, and various ministries that are frequently
employed in the contemporary setting. (odd years)
BTCM-2200 Introduction to Youth Ministry–Sp
2 hours
The course will examine the status of contemporary youth
ministries, including a survey of various models of ministry.
Foundational personal issues for the professional Christian
minister will be explored, including a definition of “success” in
youth ministries, and the knowledge, skills, heart, and character
necessary for one to lead such ministries successfully.
BTCM-2400 Interpreting and Teaching the Bible–Fa
6 hours
Principles for interpreting, organizing, and presenting the
biblical text, and a survey of learning theory are examined to
provide a framework for effective lesson preparation in light of the
characteristics and needs of students. Prerequisite: BTGE-1725
The Bible and the Gospel.
BTCM-3510 Small Group Ministry–Fa
3 hours
Study of the theory and practice of the small group process
in ministry. Emphasis will be given to the formulation and
maintenance of small groups. Emphasis placed on how
evangelism and spiritual maturity can be fostered by the small
group environment.
BTCM-3520 Counseling and Mentoring Women–Fa
3 hours
Study of the distinctives of biblical counseling specifically
applied to counseling women, the mandate and skill of mentoring
woman to woman, and biblical responses to life struggles that are
specific to women. Crosslisted as PYCH-3520; dual-listed with
BTAT-6150 Counseling and Mentoring Women.
BTCM-3530
3 hours
Contemporary Ministry to Women and Girls–Sp
Study of women today who are impacting the Church and
edifying the body of Christ through various ministry opportunities.
The course also includes a survey of current and potential full-
time, part-time and volunteer opportunities for women, concluding
with the development of each student’s own “dream ministry.”
(dual-listed with BTCM-6530 Contemporary Ministry to Women &
Girls)
BTCM-3560 Counseling and Mentoring Men–Sp
3 hours
In this course, the distinctive theological foundations and
skills of biblical counseling will be examined and applied
specifically to the ministry of mentoring and counseling men.
Study will focus on the mandate and skills of leading men toward
comprehensive maturity and counseling as it pertains to common
life challenges for men in contemporary society. Crosslisted with
BTAT. Prerequisite: BTAT-3400 Biblical Care and Counseling; or
permission of the instructor.
BTCM-3685 Children’s Ministries–Sp
[0-9] hours
An engagement of biblical texts to establish a biblical
theological approach to ministry to preschool and elementary-age
children and their families in connection with the local church, with
an awareness of familial influences, developmental characteristics,
and contemporary sociological factors. Students are equipped to
utilize creative, interactive strategies for teaching the Bible and
to develop effective ministry programs. Course consists of class
sessions and teaching practice.
BTCM-3700 Campus Ministries–Sp
4 hours
Principles from  prepare a biblical
philosophy for ministry to junior high and senior high youth in light
of developmental characteristics and contemporary sociological
factors. Students are equipped to utilize creative, interactive
strategies for teaching the Bible and to develop effective age-
appropriate ministry programs. Course consists of three weekly
class sessions and a two-hour teaching lab. Prerequisites: BTCM-
2400 Intrepreting and Teaching the Bible; major or minor status or
permission of the instructor.
BTCM-3705 Youth Ministries–Sp
3 hours
An engagement of biblical texts to establish a biblical
theological approach to ministry to junior high and senior high
youth in connection with the local church, with an awareness
of familial influences, developmental characteristics, and
contemporary sociological factors. Students are equipped to
utilize creative, interactive strategies for teaching the Bible and
to develop effective ministry programs. Course consists of class
sessions and teaching practice. Prerequisites: BTCM-2200
Introduction to Youth Ministry; or permission of the instructor. (Fee:
$20)
BTCM-3725 Adult Ministries–Fa
3 hours
An engagement of biblical texts to establish a biblical
theological approach to ministry to adults of various ages in
connection with the local church, with an awareness of familial
influences, developmental characteristics, and contemporary
sociological factors. Students are equipped to utilize creative,
interactive strategies for teaching the Bible and to develop effective
ministry programs. Course consists of class sessions and teaching
practice.
BTCM-4100
3 hours
Leadership of Christian Educational Ministries–Sp
An examination of models of leadership for Christian ministries,
emphasizing practical issues such as developing mission and
vision statements, creating effective leadership teams, and the
strategic planning, implementation, and oversight of ministries.
For youth ministry and Christian education majors, this must be
the final course taken from the sequence of the required BTCM
courses. Prerequisites: For CE and youth ministries majors:
BTCM-2400 Interpreting and Teaching the Bible; BTCM-3685
Children’s Ministries; BTCM-3700 Campus Ministries; BTCM-
3725 Adult Ministries. No prerequisites for non-majors. (Fee: $75)
BTCM-4300 Teaching Ministry of the Church–Fa
3 hours
Course focuses on the practice of expressing biblical and
theological content in written documents and/or teaching
curriculum for various audiences and settings. Attention is given to
the variety of delivery methods for expositional teaching available
within a church’s ministry. (Crosslisted with BTAT) (dual-listed with
BTAT/BTCM-6300 Teaching Ministry of the Church)
BTCM-4350 Teaching Lab–Fa, Sp
1 hour
This course focuses on the practice of teaching biblical and
theological content in a local church and/or para-church setting.
Attention is given to the delivery of a biblical lesson, moving from
textual interpretation to skilled proclamation. Prerequisites: BTCM-
4300 Teaching Ministry of the Church; or BTCM-3705 Youth
Ministries; or BTCM-3725 Adult Ministries.


BTCM-1000 – BTCM-4350
BTCM-4740 Internship in Christian Ministries
3–12 hours
A mentored and evaluated ministry experience under the
direction of a qualified filed mentor. This is an opportunity to
utilize and develop knowledge and skills from classes in a
ministry context appropriate for student interest and preparation.
Repeatable up to 12 hours. Capstone course. Prerequisites: 1)
Approval of the faculty of the School of Biblical and Theological
Studies. 2) Senior academic status. 3) Completion of the following
five courses: BTAT-2350 Theological Foundations of Ministry;
BTCM-2400 Interpreting and Teaching the Bible; BTCM-3680,
3700, or 3720 Children’s Ministries, Campus Ministries, or Adult
Ministries; BTAT-2400 Introduction to Evangelism or BTAT-3410
Discipleship; and one course in ministry concentration area.
Credit/No Credit.
BTCM-4750 Internship in Youth Ministries
3–12 hours
A mentored and evaluated youth experience under the
direction of a qualified youth minister. This is an opportunity to
utilize and develop knowledge and skills from classes in a youth
ministry context appropriate for student’s interest and preparation.
Capstone course. Repeatable to 12 hours. Prerequisites: 1)
Approval of the faculty of the School of Biblical and Theological
Studies. 2) Senior academic status. 3) Completion of the
following five courses: BTAT-2350 Theological Foundations of
Ministry; BTCM-2200 Introduction to Youth Ministry; BTCM-
2400 Interpreting and Teaching the Bible; BTCM-3700 Campus
Ministries; BTAT-2400 Introduction to Evangelism or BTAT-3410
Discipleship. Credit/No Credit.
BTCM-4900
1–3 hours
Independent Study in Christian Education–Fa, Sp, Su
Students will investigate a significant topic or Scripture passage
of special interest with a view toward integration of knowledge.
BTCM-4990 Topics in Christian Education–Fa, Sp
1–3 hours
Investigation of special topics in Bible and theology, that
have intrinsic worth and engage student interest. Permission of
instructor required for non-majors.
Bible and Theology: General Education (BTGE)
BTGE-1725 The Bible and the Gospel–Fa, Sp, Su
3 hours
An introductory course on the nature of the Bible, helpful tools
for biblical interpretation, biblical practices that engender growing
in spiritual maturity, and the Gospel-sharing task of all believers.
Topics of emphasis include the content and appeal of the Gospel,
the Holy Spirit’s role in inspiring the Bible and in applying the Bible
to the believer’s life, gaining a valid interpretation of the author’s
textual meaning, and the role of the local church in spiritual
growth.
BTGE-2730 Old Testament Literature–Fa, Sp, Su
3 hours
Survey of the entire Old Testament, giving special attention to
authorship, historical background, and the theme of each book
with attention to literary genre. This study traces the history of
the Hebrew nation from  the time of Jesus Christ.
Prerequisite: BTGE-1725 The Bible and the Gospel.
BTGE-2740 New Testament Literature–Fa, Sp, Su
3 hours
Survey of the entire New Testament, including the historical
background of the Inter-Testamental period, giving special
attention to main events, the authorship and content of each
book with attention to literary genre, and the unfolding of God’s
redemptive purpose through the Lord Jesus Christ. Prerequisites:
BTGE-1725 The Bible and the Gospel, BTGE-2730 Old Testament
Literature.
BTGE-3755 Theology I–Fa, Sp, Su
3 hours
An introductory reflection on the theological task, the doctrines
of the triune God, creation and humanity, revelation, and sin
by means of a conversation between the Bible and classic and
contemporary theological literature. This theological reflection will
be brought to bear on contemporary challenges. Prerequisites:
BTGE-1725 The Bible and the Gospel; BTGE-2730 Old Testament
Literature; BTGE-2740 New Testament Literature.
BTGE-3765 Theology II–Fa, Sp, Su
3 hours
An introductory reflection on the theological task, the doctrines
of Christ, salvation, the Holy Spirit, the Church, and last things
by means of a conversation between the Bible and classic and
contemporary theological literature. This theological reflection
will be brought to bear on contemporary challenges with a focus
on developing the students’ practice of theological thinking.
Prerequisites: BTGE-1725 The Bible and the Gospel; BTGE-2730
Old Testament Literature; BTGE-2740 New Testament Literature;
BTGE-3755 Theology I.
Bible and Theology: History and Theology (BTHT)
BTHT-2500 Church History–Fa
3 hours
An introduction to the history of Christianity covering the major
people, movements, institutions, and events of the Church from
its founding by Jesus Christ to the present. This course examines
the unique ways Christianity has shaped and been shaped by its
environment, the rich diversity of its expressions through the ages,
and the significant purpose it fulfills in society and the world.
BTHT-2910 Theological Research–Fa, Sp
2 hours
This course is designed to survey the basic process, as well
as selected special processes, germane to the field of theological
research. Prerequisite: BTGE-1725 The Bible and the Gospel.
BTHT-3050 Renaissance and Reformation Europe–Fa
3 hours
A survey of the period spanning the fourteenth through the
seventeenth centuries, focusing on the origins, rise, nature, and
waning of the Renaissance, especially humanism, and the origins,
development, and influence of the Protestant Reformations and
the Roman Catholic Counter-Reformation. A special emphasis will
be placed on the continuities and discontinuities between the two
movements. Crosslisted with HIST. (even years)
BTHT-3310 American Church History–Sp
3 hours
A survey of major trends, ideas and individuals in the history
of the Church in America from  the present, including
the theological roots of American theology. Special attention will
be given to the Puritans, Jonathan Edwards, the rise of the Social
Gospel and theological liberalism. Crosslisted with HIST. (odd
years)
BTHT-3340
3 hours
Christian Theology 1: Bible, Trinity, God the Father–Fa
Study of the doctrines of the Scripture and the triune God,
with special emphasis on God the Father. The related biblical
and historical material along with contemporary discussions will
be considered. Ministry implications of the doctrines will garner
attention. Prerequisites: BTGE-3755 Theology I or permission of
the instructor. (dual-listed with BTHT-6340 Christian Theology 1:
Bible, Trinity, God the Father)
BTHT-3350
3 hours
Christian Theology 2: God the Son and God the Spirit–Sp
Study of the persons and work of both Christ and the Holy
Spirit. The related biblical and historical material along with
contemporary discussions of the doctrines will be considered.
Ministry implications of the doctrines will garner attention.
Prerequisite: BTGE-3765 Theology II or permission of the
instructor. (dual-listed with BTHT-6350 Christian Theology 2: God
the Son and God the Spirit)




BTCM-4740 – BTHT-3350
BTHT-3360
3 hours
Christian Theology 3: Humanity, Angels, and Salvation–Fa
Study of the nature of humans, heavenly beings, and God’s
saving work from election through final consummation. The
related biblical and historical material along with contemporary
discussions of the doctrines will be considered. Ministry
implications of the doctrines will garner attention. Prerequisite:
BTGE-3755 Theology I or permission of instructor. (dual-listed
with BTHT-6360 Christian Theology 3: Humanity, Angels, and
Salvation)
BTHT-3370
3 hours
Christian Theology 4: The Church and Last Things–Sp
Study of the nature of the church and its mission in the
world until the consummation of all things. The ultimate end of
individuals and the corporate bodies of the church and Israel will
be covered. The related biblical and historical material along with
contemporary discussions of the doctrines will be considered.
Ministry implications of the doctrines will garner attention.
Prerequisite: BTGE-3765 Theology II or permission of the
instructor. (dual-listed with BTHT-6370 Christian Theology 4: The
Church and Last Things) (even years)
BTHT-3500 Historical Theology–Sp
3 hours
An examination of the development of Christian doctrine from
the Apostolic Fathers to the modern era. The course will highlight
key thinkers and theological developments in the patristic,
medieval, Reformation and modern eras. Attention will be given
to the reading and analysis of primary documents. Prerequisites:
BTGE-2730 Old Testament Literature , BTGE-2740 New Testament
Literature, and BTHT-2500 Church History. (dual-listed with BTHT-
6500 Historical Theology) (even years)
BTHT-3510 Christian History and Theology I–Fa
3 hours
A study of the history of Christianity and the development of
doctrine between the apostolic successors and the late medieval
period. Attention will be given to the major people, key thinkers,
movements, and significant events of the Church. This course
examines the primary sources that depict the church’s activity and
articulate Christian theology. This course depicts Christianity’s
historical interaction with its context, the major and minor voices
in theological discussions, and the significant purpose the Church
has fulfilled in society. (dual-listed with BTHT-6110 Christian
History and Theology I)
BTHT-3520 Christian History and Theology II–Sp
3 hours
A study of the history of Christianity and the development
of doctrine between the early reformers to the modern period.
Attention will be given to the major people, key thinkers,
movements, and significant events of the church. This course
examines the primary sources that depict the Church’s activity
and articulate Christian theology. This course depicts Christianity’s
historical interaction with its context, the major and minor voices
in theological discussions, and the significant purpose the Church
has fulfilled in society. (dual-listed with BTHT-6120 Christian
History and Theology II)
BTHT-3740 Biblical Theology of Womanhood–Sp
3 hours
A survey of key biblical components that delineates
what it means to be female in Christ. The course includes a
comprehensive study of major biblical passages concerning
women, a survey of women in the Bible, and discussions of the
application of these texts within the current cultural milieu. (dual-
listed with BTHT-6740 Biblical Theology of Womanhood)
BTHT-3750 Historical Theology of Womanhood–Fa
3 hours
This course includes an overview of major theological concepts
developed and discussed throughout the various periods of church
history as well as an overview of major events in the history of
the church. It will discuss the church’s understanding of humanity
throughout these periods, with a particular interest in womanhood.
This contribution of women to both theological and historical
developments in the church will be investigated. (odd years)
BTHT-3840 Theology of Sexuality and Family–Fa
3 hours
A study of the key issues in biblical and systematic theology
related to human sexuality, gender, marriage, and family.
Emphasis will be given to central biblical texts for formation of
doctrine, historical disputes, and contemporary challenges, such
as homosexuality and transgenderism. Crosslisted as BTAT.
Prerequisite/Corequisite: BTGE-3755 Theology I.(odd years)
BTHT-4100 Biblical Theology–Fa
3 hours
A study of some of the major distinctive theologies of the Old
and New Testaments within the overall unity of Scripture. This
course focuses both on the varieties and tensions among biblical
authors and collections within their particular genres and historical
settings, and on the similarities and unifying themes among the
biblical writings and through both Testaments. (dual-listed with
BTHT-6100 Biblical Theology)
BTHT-4220 Early Christian Thought–Sp
3 hours
A study of the development of doctrine between the apostolic
successors and the late fifth century A.D. Attention will be given
to the major people, key thinkers, movements, and theological
controversies during this period of Church history. This course
examines the primary sources that depict the Church’s activity and
articulate Christian theology. Prerequisite/Corequisite: BTHT-3510
Christian History and Theology I. (odd years)
BTHT-4300 Global Theology–Fa
3 hours
An introduction to the rise and nature of non-Western
theologies along with an examination of the nature of theology and
its relevance in contemporary contexts. (dual-listed with BTHT-
6300 Global Theology)
BTHT-4310 Hermeneutics–Fa, Sp
3 hours
A study of the theory and related practice of the roles of author,
reader, and text toward the end of authoritative interpretation
and contextualization of the Bible. (crosslisted with BTBS-4310
Hermeneutics) (dual-listed with BTBS/BTHT-6310 Hermeneutics)
BTHT-4320
3 hours
Contemporary Theology in Historical Context–Sp
Critical study of traditions, trends, issues, and major thinkers in
contemporary theology. Prerequisites: BTGE-2730 Old Testament
Literature; BTGE-2740 New Testament Literature; or permission of
the instructor. (dual-listed with BTHT-6150 Contemporary Theology
in Historical Context) (even years)
BTHT-4900
1–3 hours
Independent Study in Theology–Fa, Sp, Su
Students will investigate a significant topic of theology of special
interest with a view toward integration of knowledge. Prerequisites:
BTGE-2730 Old Testament Literature; BTGE-2740 New Testament
Literature; or permission of the instructor.
BTHT-4990 Topics in Theology–Fa, Sp
1–3 hours
Investigation of special topics in Bible and theology, which
have intrinsic worth and engage student interest. Permission of
instructor required for non-majors. Prerequisites: BTGE-2730 Old
Testament Literature; BTGE-2740 New Testament Literature; or
permission of the instructor.
Bible and Theology: New Testament (BTNT)
BTNT-3110 New Testament 1: Synoptic Gospels–Fa
3 hours
Study of the canonical texts of the Gospels of Matthew, Mark,
and Luke. Attention is also given to the historical, theological,
and literary structural considerations for the books. Drawing
on the texts, contemporary implications will also be addressed.
Prerequisite: BTGE-2740 New Testament Literature or permission
of the instructor. (dual-listed with BTNT-6110 New Testament 1:
Synoptic Gospels)


BTHT-3360 – BTNT-3110
BTNT-3120
3 hours
New Testament 2: Acts and New Testament Epistles–Sp
Study of the canonical texts of Acts, Hebrews, James, 1
and 2 Peter, and Jude. Attention is also given to the historical,
theological, and literary structural considerations for the books.
Drawing on the texts, contemporary implications will also be
addressed. Prerequisite: BTGE-2740 New Testament Literature
or permission of the instructor. (dual-listed with BTNT-6120 New
Testament 2: Acts and new Testament Epistles)
BTNT-3130 New Testament 3: Pauline Literature–Fa
3 hours
Study of the canonical texts of Romans, 1 and 2 Corinthians,
Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, 1 and 2
Thessalonians, 1 and 2 Timothy, Titus, and Philemon. Attention
is also given to the historical, theological, and literary structural
considerations for the books. Drawing on the texts, contemporary
implications will also be addressed. Prerequisite: BTGE-2740 New
Testament Literature or permission of the instructor. (dual-listed
with BTNT-6130 New Testament 3: Pauline Literature) (even years)
BTNT-3140
3 hours
New Testament 4: Johannine Literature–Sp
Study of the canonical texts of the Gospel of John, 1–3 John,
and Revelation. Attention is also given to the historical, theological,
and literary structural considerations for the books. Drawing
on the texts, contemporary implications will also be addressed.
Prerequisite: BTGE-2740 New Testament Literature or permission
of the instructor. (dual-listed with BTNT-6140 New Testament 4:
Johannine Literature)
BTNT-4900
1–3 hours
Independent Study in New Testament–Fa, Sp, Su
Student will investigate a significant topic or Scripture passage
of special interest with a view toward integration of knowledge.
BTNT-4990 Selected Studies in the New Testament 1–3 hours
Selected studies in a New Testament book or specific
grouping of books. Repeatable with different books or groupings.
Prerequisites: BTGE-2740 New Testament Literature; or
permission of instructor. (dual-listed with BTNT-6150 Exposition of
New Testament Book)
Bible and Theology: Old Testament (BTOT)
BTOT-3140 Psalms–Fa
3 hours
Examination of the book of Psalms with special attention
given to the various types of psalms and their application to life.
Prerequisites: BTGE-2730 Old Testament Literature; BTGE-2740
New Testament Literature or permission of the instructor.
BTOT-3150 Wisdom Literature–Sp
3 hours
Examination of the books of Job, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes,
and Song of Solomon. Special attention is given to their literary
qualities and practical applications for today. Prerequisites:
BTGE-2730 Old Testament Literature; BTGE-2740 New Testament
Literature; or permission of the instructor.
BTOT-3110 Old Testament 1: Pentateuch–Fa
3 hours
Study of the canonical texts of Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus,
Numbers, and Deuteronomy. Attention is also given to the
historical, theological, and literary structural considerations for the
books. Drawing on the texts, contemporary implications will also
be addressed. Prerequisite: BTGE-2730 Old Testament Literature
or permission of the instructor. (dual-listed with BTOT-6110 Old
Testament 1: Pentateuch)
BTOT-3210 Old Testament 2: Former Prophets–Sp
3 hours
Study of the canonical texts of Joshua, Judges, 1 and 2
Samuel, and 1 and 2  Kings. Attention is also given to the
historical, theological, and literary structural considerations for the
books. Drawing on the texts, contemporary implications will also
be addressed. Prerequisites: BTGE-2730 Old Testament Literature
or permission of the instructor. (dual-listed with BTOT-6120 Old
Testament 2: Former Prophets)
BTOT-3310 Old Testament 3: Latter Prophets–Fa
3 hours
Study of the canonical texts of Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel,
Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk,
Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi. Attention is
also given to the historical, theological, and literary structural
considerations for the books. Drawing on the texts, contemporary
implications will also be addressed.. Prerequisites: BTGE-2730
Old Testament Literature; or permission of the instructor. (dual-
listed with BTOT-6130 Old Testament 3: Latter Prophets)
BTOT-3410 Old Testament 4: Writings–Sp
3 hours
Study of the canonical texts of Psalms, Job, Proverbs, Ruth,
Song of Solomon, Ecclesiastes, Lamentations, Esther, Daniel,
Ezra, Nehemiah, and 1 and 2 Chronicles. Attention is also given
to the historical, theological, and literary structural considerations
for the books. Drawing on the texts, contemporary implications
will also be addressed. Prerequisite: BTGE-2730 Old Testament
Literature; or permission of the instructor. (dual-listed with BTOT-
6140 Old Testament 4: Writings)
BTOT-4900
1–3 hours
Independent Study in Old Testament–Fa, Sp, Su
Students will investigate a significant topic or a Scripture
passage of special interest with a view toward integration of
knowledge.
BTOT-4990
1–3 hours
Selected Studies in the Old Testament–Fa, Sp
Selected studies in an Old Testament book or specific
grouping of books. Repeatable with different books or groupings.
Prerequisites: BTGE-2730 Old Testament Literature or permission
of instructor. (dual-listed with BTOT-6150 Exposition of Old
Testament Book)
Bible and Theology: Philosophy and Apologetics (BTPA)
BTPA-2200 Introduction to Philosophy–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Survey of the principle issues in Western philosophy, covering
such areas as epistemology, metaphysics, aesthetics, and the
major systems of philosophy.
BTPA-2240 Logic–Fa
3 hours
Study of the principles of correct and fallacious reasoning
involved in traditional logic and modern logic. (even years)
BTPA-2250 Ethics–Fa
3 hours
Study and evaluation of the major theories of goodness,
obligation, and motive and the development of a consistent
Christian ethical system, together with the application of ethical
theories to contemporary moral problems.
BTPA-2260 World Religions–Fa, Sp
3 hours
An introduction to the teachings and practices of the major
world religions along with a Christian response to these religions.
BTPA-3240 Epistemology–Fa
3 hours
Study of the nature, sources, types, tests, and limits of human
knowledge. Prerequisite: BTPA-2200 Introduction to Philosophy.
BTPA-3250 Philosophy of Religion–Sp
3 hours
Analysis of the major philosophical problems relating to religion
as these have arisen in the modern intellectual environment.
Prerequisite: BTPA-2200 Introduction to Philosophy. (dual-listed
with BTPA-6250 Philosophy of Religion)
BTPA-3280 Metaphysics–Sp
3 hours
Study of selected topics in metaphysics, including the mind-
body problem, substance, qualities and universals, identity, space
and time, causation, and freedom and determinism. Prerequisite:
BTPA-2200 Introduction to Philosophy. (odd years)
BTPA-3310
3 hours
History of Ancient and Medieval Philosophy–Fa
Survey of men and movements in Greek and Christian
philosophy from  Aquinas. Selected, representative
writings of the philosophers will be read. Prerequisite: BTPA-2200
Introduction to Philosophy. (odd years)




BTNT-3120 – BTPA-3310
BTPA-3320 History of Modern Philosophy–Sp
3 hours
Study of the principle philosophers from Descartes through
Nietzsche. The development of rationalism and empiricism
with the Kantian synthesis and its results will be emphasized.
Prerequisite: BTPA-2200 Introduction to Philosophy. (odd years)
BTPA-3330 Contemporary Philosophy–Fa
3 hours
Survey of significant European and American philosophies of
the 19th and 20th centuries covering philosophical developments
from  analytic philosophy. Prerequisite: BTPA-2200
Introduction to Philosophy. (even years)
BTPA-3450 Biblical Apologetics–Sp
3 hours
Study of theological and philosophical arguments for the
Christian faith. Emphasis on biblical revelation and its use in the
defense and confirmation of the Gospel in historical sources and
contemporary settings. Prerequisite: BTGE-2740 New Testament
Literature; or permission of the instructor. (dual-listed with BTPA-
6450 Christian Apologetics)
BTPA-3500 Current Religious Movements–Sp
3 hours
Survey of new religious movements with attention given to their
history, beliefs, and practices, as well as to critical assessment
and appropriate response. Prerequisites: BTGE-2730 Old
Testament Literature; BTGE-2740 New Testament Literature; or
permission of the instructor.
BTPA-4030 Philosophy and Literature–Sp
2 hours
Course will be divided into two sections. The first will focus on
philosophy of literature, exploring literary theory, hermeneutics,
and literature as a work of art. The second part of the course
will examine philosophy in literature, looking at the ways in
which philosophical ideas are expressed through the medium of
literature. (even years)
BTPA-4290 Topics in Philosophy–Sp
1–3 hours
Various topics offered as interest demands. For majors in
philosophy. Permission of instructor required for non-majors and
minors.
BTPA-4900
1–3 hours
Independent Study in Philosophy–Fa, Sp, Su
The student will investigate a significant topic of philosophy of
special interest with a view toward integration of knowledge.
BTPA-4910 Seminar in Philosophy–Fa
3 hours
Senior course in which students will demonstrate their
knowledge of philosophy and the integration of philosophy with
Scripture and the liberal arts. This will be accomplished through
guided research, critical thinking, and demonstration of oral and
written skills. Course will be taken during the year immediately
prior to graduation. Capstone course. Credit/no credit.
Business Administration (BUS)
BUS-1000 The Business Profession–Fa, Sp
2 hours
Provides a broad and comprehensive introduction to the field
of business and encourages students to discover their calling
to ministry in the marketplace. Includes an introduction to the
academic requirements of the program and provides opportunity
for practical experience in the field of business. (Fee $25)
BUS-2100 Business Communication–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Instruction for writing business letters, memos, email,
and business reports. Oral business presentations, group
collaboration, and the communication process in general are also
discussed. Prerequisite: ENG-1400 Composition.
BUS-2150 Statistics for Business–Fa, Sp
3 hours
An introduction to statistical methods used in business decision-
making including descriptive statistics, probability, probability
distributions, interval estimation, hypothesis tests involving
variances, t-tests, Chi-square tests, F-tests, regression models,
and time series. Prerequisite: GMTH-1020 College Algebra.
BUS-2170 Introduction to Business Analytics–Sp
3 hours
This course will expose students to the data analytics practices
executed in the business world. Key areas include the analytical
process; how data is created, stored, accessed; and how the
organization works with data and creates the environment in which
analytics can flourish. The course will explore the use of statistical
programming languages and packages to perform data analysis.
This course also provides a basis for going deeper into advanced
investigative and computational methods. Prerequisites: ITM-2100
Database Management ; BUS-2150 Statistics for Business. (even
years
BUS-2180 Business Law I–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Examines the legal environment in which business operates.
The course begins by surveying various sources of law and
related ethical principles, and the structure and function of
the judicial system. The remainder of the course addresses
substantive areas of law, typically including torts, contracts,
warranty and consumer protection, agency and employment,
business entities, antitrust, intellectual property, and environmental
law.
BUS-3000 The Business Experience–Fa, Sp
1 hour
This course is to prepare the business student to transition
into the work world upon graduation. Topics and experiences
include: résumé writing, interviewing, networking, internships, and
business etiquette. (Fee $25).
BUS-3150 Operations Analysis–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Introduces mathematical methods of decision analysis. Topics
include probability, forecasting, decision under uncertainty,
decision trees, inventory models, linear programming, and
networks. Prerequisite: BUS-2150 Statistics for Business.
BUS-3180 Business Law II–Sp
3 hours
Continues the study of the legal environment in which
business operates, with particular focus on topics covered on
the CPA exam. Typical course content includes sales, negotiable
instruments, secured transactions, bankruptcy, partnerships,
securities regulation, real and personal property, wills and trusts,
and insurance. Prerequisite: BUS-2180 Business Law I.
BUS-3280
3 hours
Integrated Business Core Practicum–Fa
Guided by faculty, students will organize and operate a
business for the semester and also plan and complete a
community service project. Students in this course will apply
concepts learned in prerequisite and corequisite courses in
establishing a business venture. Prerequisites: MRKT-3600
Principles of Marketing; Corequisites: MGMT-3500 Principles of
Organization and Management; FIN-3710 Principles of Finance
(corequisite courses taken concurrently as a block).
BUS-3400
1–3 hours
Independent Study in Business Administration–Fa, Sp, Su
Research in problems of accounting, management information
systems, general business, economics, finance, management, or
marketing.
BUS-3410 Topics in Business–Fa, Sp, Su
1–3 hours
A variety of courses are covered under this heading on
an experimental basis. This allows the department to meet
the changing needs of the students without formally adding
or dropping courses. (crosslisted with ENTR-3410 Topics in
Entrepreneurship; ITM-3410 Topics in Information Technology
Management)
BUS-3450 Business Internship
3–12 hours
A work-study program designed for junior and senior
business administration majors to receive a variety of job-related
experiences in a business environment. The program is arranged
and administered by the department.


BTPA-3320 – BUS-3450
BUS-3910 International Business–Fa, Sp
3 hours
This course is a broad overview of how business is different
in a global setting by introducing key concepts, terms, trends,
theories and organizations. Each group will put these foundational
principles into practice by developing a country analysis and
business plan to launch a fast food restaurant into a new country.
Additionally, students will consider how to use the principles of
Business As Mission (BAM) to achieve spiritual objectives as well
as profit. (Fee: $20)
BUS-4150
3 hours
Advanced Business Analytics and Visualization
This course will explore the field of data analytics by covering
state-of-the-art modeling, analysis, and visualization techniques.
The course will emphasize the importance of understanding
the underlying data, validating the data, applying a meaningful
analytic to the data, and only then visualizing the data. The course
will discuss practical challenges involving complex real-world
data and include several case studies and hands-on work with a
modern data analysis and visualization package. Crosslisted with
ITM. Prerequisites: BUS-2170 Introduction to Business Analytics.
(odd years)
BUS-4420
2 hours
Business Ethics and Social Responsibility–Fa, Sp
Ethics asks questions about what goals one should pursue and
what actions are appropriate in attempts to achieve these goals.
The course examines alternative frameworks for analyzing difficult
situations. Social responsibility refers to business decision making
linked to ethical values, compliance with legal requirements, and
respect for people, communities, and the environment. Ultimately,
the course will deal with how our biblical worldview defines and
drives the choices we face in the business world. Open only to
seniors in business administration. Must be taken at Cedarville
University; transfer or transient credit for this course will generally
not be accepted.
Conducting (CDMU)
CDMU-2600 Introduction to Conducting–Fa
2 hours
The basic technique of the conductor’s art: score reading,
conducting patterns, interpreting, cueing, rehearsal procedures,
and stylistic conceptualization. Prerequisite: THMU-1210 Music
Theory I or permission of instructor. (Fee: $20)
CDMU-3610 Choral Conducting–Sp
2 hours
Concentrated focus upon the choral conductor’s stylistic
gestures and verbal communication as they impact ensemble
intonation, diction, tone, blend, and balance. This course
emphasizes diagnostic listening, problem solving, observation
of professional conductors, the conducting of larger choral/
instrumental works, and student rehearsal of various music
department choral ensembles. Prerequisite: CDMU-2600
Introduction to Conducting or permission of instructor. (Fee: $20)
CDMU-3620 Instrumental Conducting–Sp
2 hours
Designed to take the student beyond basic conducting
techniques and present the special characteristics of instrumental
conducting. The student will develop skills in rehearsal technique
and score analysis while learning to conceptualize musical
fundamentals such as tone, intonation, balance, rhythmic
ensemble, and interpretation. Prerequisite: CDMU-2600
Introduction to Conducting or permission of instructor.
CDMU-3630 Choral Methods–Fa
2 hours
Further development of conducting skills with special emphasis
placed upon the organization of a comprehensive school choral
curriculum. Rehearsal strategies and vocal techniques are
discussed and practiced as they apply to choirs of all levels and
voicings. Prerequisite: CDMU-2600 Introduction to Conducting or
permission of the instructor. (Fee: $20)
CDMU-4990 Independent Study in Conducting
1–3 hours
Independent and intensive study in a particular area of
conducting for individual students who demonstrate special
interests and ability. Prerequisite: CDMU-3620 Instrumental
Conducting; CDMU-3630 Choral Methods; or equivalent.
Chemistry: General Education (CHEM)
Except where noted, general education courses are designed
to meet the general education requirements for graduation. These
courses will not count toward graduation requirements for majors
found in the School of Science and Mathematics unless they
are specifically listed in the curriculum requirements for a major.
A student majoring in science or mathematics may take these
courses only as electives. However, any course listed for a science
or mathematics major or minor may also count toward fulfilling
general education requirements.
CHEM-1000 Principles of Chemistry–Fa
4 hours
For non-science majors, an introduction to atomic structure,
ionic and covalent bonding, stoichiometry, kinetic theory, solutions
and equilibria, nuclear chemistry, nomenclature, structure, and
reactions of organic compounds. Four lectures and one two-hour
laboratory per week. (Fee: $50)
CHEM-1050 Chemistry for Engineers–Fa, Sp
3.5 hours
Fundamental concepts of chemistry are developed with
applications of chemistry to engineering disciplines. Students
learn measurement, number handling, the Periodic Table,
descriptive properties of atoms, elements, molecules, and ions,
chemical reactions, stoichiometry, chemical bonding, equilibrium,
thermodynamics, gas laws, and the nature of solids and liquids.
Three lectures per week, and one bi-weekly two-hour laboratory.
(Fee: $50)
Chemistry: Major (CHEM)
CHEM-1110 General Chemistry I–Fa
4 hours
Fundamental concepts of physical, inorganic, and analytical
chemistry are developed. Students are introduced to the physical
chemistry concepts of atomic theory, chemical bonding, molecular
structure, gas laws, states of matter, and thermochemistry.
Inorganic concepts of reaction types and stoichiometry are
included. Lab stresses analytical techniques including quantitation,
separation, titration, and statistical analysis of data. Three lectures
and one three-hour lab per week. (Fee: $100)
CHEM-1120 General Chemistry II–Sp
4 hours
A continuation of General Chemistry I, including the physical
chemistry concepts of intermolecular forces, properties of
solutions, kinetics, equilibrium, and Gibbs free energy. Inorganic
topics include acids and bases, oxidation-reduction reactions,
solid-state structures, metal complexes, and nuclear chemistry.
Lab exercises stress quantitative analytical techniques, application
of visible light spectroscopy, and statistical analysis of data. Three
lectures and one three-hour lab per week. Prerequisite: CHEM-
1110 General Chemistry I. (Fee: $100)
CHEM-2210 Analytical Chemistry I–Fa
3 hours
A study of the fundamental concepts and skills of analytical
chemistry including measurement, statistical treatment of data,
equilibrium constant calculations, solubility equilibria, acid-base
equilibria, EDTA-complexation equilibria, volumetric analysis,
and radiochemical analysis. The laboratory sessions focus on
volumetric methods such as precipitation titrations, acid-base
titrations, complexation titrations, and redox titrations where
accurate measurement of volume is essential. Two lectures and
one three-hour laboratory per week. Prerequisite: CHEM-1120
General Chemistry II. (Fee: $150)




BUS-3910 – CHEM-2210
CHEM-2220 Analytical Chemistry II–Sp
3 hours
Detailed study of analytical instrumentation, including
electro-analytical methods such as potentiometry, coulometry,
voltammetry, spectrochemical analysis, and analytical separations,
including various types of chromatography. Two lectures and
one three-hour laboratory per week. Prerequisite: CHEM-2210
Analytical Chemistry I. (Fee: $150)
CHEM-2800 Introduction to Research in Chemistry–Fa  1 hour
An introduction to the purpose and methodology of research
in chemistry, including keeping a laboratory notebook, retrieving
information, using the chemical literature, and writing research
reports. One lecture per week. Prerequisite: CHEM-1120 General
Chemistry II. (Fee: $100)
CHEM-3210 Environmental Chemistry–Sp
4 hours
A detailed study of energy resources, atmospheric chemistry,
and surface water chemistry, with an emphasis on the application
of principles from  current environmental
issues. Three lectures and one three-hour lab per week.
Prerequisite: CHEM-2220 Analytical Chemistry II and CHEM-3510
Organic Chemistry II, or permission of the instructor. (Fee: $100)
(odd years)
CHEM-3400 Advanced Forensic Chemistry–Sp
4 hours
An advanced study of the application of analytical chemistry
to forensic analysis. A detailed study of best practices for quality
control and error analysis in forensic chemistry, modern DNA
typing with an emphasis on sample preparation and interpretation
of results, instrumental methods in fiber and glass trace analysis,
extraction and analysis of accelerants in fire investigation, drug
toxicology and metabolism, and seized drug identification with
an emphasis on acid/base extraction of samples and analysis
by immunoassay, LCMS, and GCMS. Three lectures and one
three-hour lab per week. Prerequisites: CRJU-1310 Introduction
to Criminal Justice; FORS-1500 Introduction to Forensic
Science; BIO-1115 Biology I: Cell Biology. Corequisites: CHEM-
2220 Analytical Chemistry II; CHEM-3510 Organic Chemistry I.
Crosslisted with FORS-3400 (Fee: $100) (even years)
CHEM-3410 Inorganic Chemistry–Fa
3 hours
Detailed study of inorganic compounds, including atomic
structure, the structure of solids, molecular structure and
bonding, molecular symmetry and its applications, acids and
bases, and oxidation and reduction. Lab stresses synthesis and
characterization using instrumental methods. Two lectures and
one three-hour lab per week. Prerequisite: CHEM-2210 Analytical
Chemistry I. (Fee: $100)
CHEM-3510 Organic Chemistry I–Fa
4 hours
Study of the structure, nomenclature, stereochemistry,
physical properties, spectra, syntheses, reactions, and reaction
mechanisms of alkanes, alkenes, alkynes, alkyl halides, alcohols,
and ethers. Biological and medical applications are included.
Lab includes basic techniques, procedures, and instruments, as
well as syntheses and reactions. Three fifty-minute lectures and
one three-hour lab per week. Prerequisite: CHEM-1120 General
Chemistry II. (Fee: $150)
CHEM-3520 Organic Chemistry II–Sp
4 hours
Continuation of Organic Chemistry I, including the detailed
study of conjugated aliphatics, aromatics, aldehydes, ketones,
carboxylic acids, anhydrides, esters, acyl halides, amines,
phenols, and aryl halides. Lab includes systematic qualitative
organic analyses using modern instrumental methods (H-NMR,
C-NMR, FTIR, GC/MS). Three fifty-minute lectures and one three-
hour lab per week. Prerequisite: CHEM-3510 Organic Chemistry I.
(Fee: $150)
CHEM-3710 Biochemistry–Sp
4 Hours
 A study of the chemical and physical properties of
macromolecules such as proteins, carbohydrates, lipids, and
nucleic acids, and the metabolic pathways, enzyme kinetics, and
thermodynamics associated with these molecules. Three lectures
and one lab per week. Prerequisites: BIO-1115 Biology I: Cell
Biology; CHEM-3510 Organic Chemistry I. (Fee: $150)
CHEM-4310 Thermodynamics and Kinetics–Fa
4 hours
A study of the laws of thermodynamics, chemical equilibrium,
solutions, and kinetics. Three lectures and one three-hour lab per
week. Prerequisites: CHEM-2210 Analytical Chemistry I. (Fee:
$150)
CHEM-4320
4 hours
Quantum Mechanics and Spectroscopy–Sp
A study of the states of matter, surface phenomena, quantum
mechanics, bonding, and spectroscopy. Three lectures and one
three-hour lab per week. Prerequisites: CHEM-2210 Analytical
Chemistry I. (Fee: $150)
CHEM-4410 Advanced Inorganic Chemistry–Sp
3 hours
Study of d-metal complexes, the systematic chemistry of the
elements, and advanced topics in inorganic chemistry. Topics
may include main group organometallics, d- and f-block elements,
catalysis, and bioinorganic chemistry. Three lectures per week.
Prerequisite: CHEM-3410 Inorganic Chemistry. (even years)
CHEM-4800 Senior Seminar–Chemistry–Sp
1 hour
Capstone course for majors in chemistry. Students choose a
topic that expands upon a topic covered in their chemistry classes
and research recent, relevant articles connected to the topic. The
student will write a research paper and give an oral presentation
relating to the topic and the relevant articles. The topic may
coincide with research the student has participated in. Each
student must obtain approval of the topic from pic advisor
and the seminar instructor within three weeks of starting the
course. The students must also attend a minimum of 10 seminars
during the senior year. Guest lecturers or faculty members may
present papers at the invitation of the instructor. Prerequisites:
Senior status; attendance of a minimum of 10 seminars during the
sophomore and junior years.
CHEM-4830 Research in Chemistry–Fa, Sp
1–3 hours
Student participate in an inquiry-based research project under
the direction of a faculty mentor. The project stresses methods
of science including literature reviews, experimental design, data
collection, data analysis, and interpretation and communication
of results. The course may be repeated for up to 6 credits.
Prerequisites: CHEM-2800 Introduction to Research in Chemistry;
permission of instructor. (Fee: $150)
CHEM-4880 Topics in Chemistry
1–3 hours
Topics of special interest are selected by the chemistry faculty
from the areas of modern chemistry. Prerequisites: Junior status;
permission of instructor.
CHEM-4900 Independent Study in Chemistry
1–3 hours
Supervised independent study of some chemical phenomena.
Submission and approval of a research proposal must precede
registration. Prerequisites: CHEM-2210 Analytical Chemistry I;
CHEM-3510 Organic Chemistry I; CHEM-4310 Thermodynamics
and Kinetics.
CHEM-4910 Chemistry Internship–Fa, Sp, Su
1–3 hours
Students will gain experience in the chemistry profession in a
departmentally approved work environment. A technical report
detailing the skills and techniques utilized and a supervisor’s
evaluation will be the basis for successful completion. Prerequisite:
CHEM-2220 Analytical Chemistry II or CHEM-3520 Organic
Chemistry II.


CHEM-2220 – CHEM-4910
Chinese (CHN)
CHN-1100 Elementary Chinese I–Fa
4 hours
This course will teach students elementary levels of Chinese
language proficiency in Mandarin or Putonghua. Students will
develop skills in listening, speaking, reading, and writing in
Chinese.
CHN-1200 Elementary Chinese II–Sp
4 hours
This course will teach students elementary levels of Chinese
language proficiency in Mandarin or Putonghua. Students will
develop skills in listening, speaking, reading, and writing in
Chinese. Prerequisite: CHN-1100 Elementary Chinese I.
Music Class Studies (CLMU)
CLMU-1170 Diction for Singers I–Fa
2 hours
Students will master the rules of pronouncing Italian and Latin
language song texts using the International Phonetic Alphabet.
Classroom activities will include listening to, reading, and singing
Italian and Latin language song texts.
CLMU-1180 Diction for Singers II–Sp
2 hours
Students will master the rules of pronouncing German and
French language song texts using the International Phonetic
Alphabet. Classroom activities will include listening to, reading,
and singing German and French language song texts.
CLMU-1810 Piano Class I–Fa
2 hours
Group instruction in piano fundamentals. Required for music
majors who are unable to pass the piano proficiency. Open to
other individuals with permission of the instructor. (Fee: $30)
CLMU-1820 Piano Class II–Sp
2 hours
Continued group instruction in piano fundamentals and
repertoire. Prerequisite: CLMU-1810 Piano Class I. (Fee: $30)
CLMU-1860 Voice Class–Fa
1 hour
Group instruction in basic vocal technique and repertoire.
Enrollment open to any student not majoring in voice. Repeatable.
(odd years)
CLMU-2200 Music Literature: Special Topics
1–2 hours
A survey of the history and literature for the specified
instrument.
CLMU-2210 Brass Literature–Fa
1 hour
A survey of brass literature covering all historical periods but
emphasizing the chamber music genre. (even years)
CLMU-2220 Percussion Literature–Sp
1 hour
A survey of literature for percussion with special emphasis on
the 20th century. Total percussion will be considered. (even years)
CLMU-2230 String Literature–Sp
1 hour
A survey of string literature covering all historical periods but
emphasizing the chamber music genre. (even years)
CLMU-2240 Woodwind Literature–Fa
1 hour
The study of the history and literature of the woodwind
instruments (flute, oboe, clarinet, bassoon). (odd years)
CLMU-2300 Keyboard Literature–Sp
2 hours
A survey of music for the piano and its precursors, covering the
period from  the present, with a focus on the works which
have come to form the core of the repertoire. (odd years)
CLMU-2310 Collaborative Piano–Fa, Sp
1 hour
Supervised piano accompanying experience. The student
is assigned to work with one vocalist or instrumentalist for the
semester and will prepare music for studio lessons as well as
public performances.
CLMU-2750 Performance Seminar–Fa, Sp
0 hours
A once-per-semester seminar, that may take the form of a
lecture, masterclass, or recital.
CLMU-2760 Performance Portfolio–Fa, Sp
0 hours
The student will assemble and present materials, that
demonstrate performance achievement and professional
awareness. The portfolio may include documentation of
performances, masterclass, and repertoire.
CLMU-2800 Introduction to Music Composition–Fa
2 hours
Designed to introduce the student to the foundational concepts
of musical composition. Students will gain facility with the tools of
composition and will begin composing in various styles.
CLMU-2850 Composition Seminar–Fa, Sp
0 hours
A once-per-semester seminar designed to expose students
to aspects of the compositional art that are not part of general
course material. The seminar may take the form of a lecture,
masterclass, or recital.
CLMU-2860 Composition Portfolio–Fa
0 hours
Designed as an opportunity for students to receive guidance
and feedback on preparing, assembling, and presenting a
composition portfolio. The portfolio may include documentation of
performances, masterclasses, and completed compositions.
CLMU-3110 Choral Repertoire–Fa
2 hours
This course exposes the student to exemplary repertoire for
choirs of all levels and voicings. Most class sessions are devoted
to sight-reading and discussing a large number of choral pieces as
well as evaluative listening to recordings. Open to all music majors,
minors, and to all CU ensemble members. For music majors, it is
recommended that this course be taken concurrently with CDMU-
3630 Choral Methods.
CLMU-3120 Vocal Literature–Sp
3 hours
Survey of literature for the solo voice from the onset of
Thoroughbass to the 21st century. Includes major repertoire in
Italian, French, English, and German, along with important works
in other languages. Analysis of song and aria scores will be
complemented by recordings and live performance. Crosslisted
with HLMU. (even years)
CLMU-3130 Opera and Oratorio Literature–Sp
3 hours
Survey of opera and oratorio literature from Monteverdi’s Orfeo
and Carissimi’s Jephte to works of the 21st centry. Analysis of
scores will be complemented by recordings, live performance,
libretti studies, and historical background. Crosslisted with HLMU.
CLMU-3410 Traditional Irish Music–Fa
2 hours
This course introduces students to the practice of traditional
Irish music through study of primary tune forms, experience of
the social context of Irish music-making, and acquaintance with
leading performers within the tradition. The class culminates in
an Irish music festival held at a local coffee shop. Crosslisted with
HLMU-3410 Traditional Irish Music. Prerequisite: Permission of
instructor. (Fee: $30)
College Studies (COLL)
COLL-0900 Foundations–Fa, Sp
1 hour
Foundations is designed to orient students to the Cedarville
University learning community, explore academic and life goals,
and develop strengths to enhance academic success. The
one-credit hour may not be used toward the hours needed for
graduation. (Fee: $150)
COLL-0930 MK/TCK PATHways to Success–Fa
1 hour
This course is designed to help Missionary Kid (MKs) and Third
Culture Kid (TCKs) students transition and adapt to expectations
of “American” culture and academics while discovering their own
potential for proactively managing and excelling in all facets
of college life. The class is designed to give each student a
successful start with proven cultural adjustment and academic
strategies and skills to navigate being the ‘invisible immigrant’.
It will address challenges such as plagiarism, intercultural
communication, and cultural intelligence while promoting growth
in their spiritual walk. The course is a semester long extension of
International-MK-TCK student orientation and sets the foundation
for student success, retention, and persistence. This course does
not count toward hours for graduation. (Fee:$150)




CHN-1100 – COLL-0930
COLL-0950 International GATEways to Success–Fa, Sp 1 hour
This course is designed to help international students adapt to
college-level learning in the American classroom and to help them
transition to the expectations of “American” time while discovering
their own potential to proactively manage and excel in all facets
of college life. The class is designed to teach proven cultural
adjustment and academic strategies, and address challenges
such as plagiarism, intercultural communication, and cultural
intelligence while promoting growth in their spiritual walk. The
course will build on their new student orientation and provide the
foundation for student success, retention, and persistence. This
one credit hour course does not count toward the hours needed
for graduation. (Fee:$300)
COLL-1010 MAP
0 hour
MAP (academic probation course) — a unique avenue in which
to cultivate scholarship and discipline from a holistic approach for
students who are struggling academically. The course is designed
to help students in the context of relationship and accountability, to
enable students to learn within the dynamics of their lives, to bring
concrete strategies to the learning process and to develop skills
that will translate into other realms of living. (Fee: $200)
Communication Studies (COM)
COM-1100 Fundamentals of Speech–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Public speaking and strong verbal communication skills are
critical components of many careers. Students learn to inform
others about ideas, advocate for a position, work in groups
and teams, listen and critique messages, and practice conflict
resolution. These skills are imperative to prepare students for an
increasingly diverse workforce.
COM-1120 Honors Speech–Fa
3 hours
Exposes students to and prepares them for competition in
the three general areas of intercollegiate forensic competition:
oral interpretation (prose, poetry, dramatic-duo), public speaking
(persuasion, informative, communication analysis), and limited
preparation events (impromptu and extemporaneous speaking).
Prerequisites: Audition; permission of instructor.
COM-1150 Communication Seminar–Fa, Sp
1 hour
A foundational seminar to provide students with a background
in the discipline of communication and an orientation to the
professional standards of the discipline.
COM-1230 Voice for the Performer–Fa
3 hours
See course description for THTR-1230 Voice for the Performer.
COM-2000 Persuasive Theory–Fa
3 hours
Methods of applying contemporary communication theories on
attitudes, involvement, and change are studied along with classical
positions on the principles and methods of attitude change and
advocacy.
COM-2050 Communication Theory–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Introduction and critical assessment of communication theories
that underlie interpersonal, group, organization, public, mass
media, and cultural studies.
COM-2140 Intercultural Communication–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Provides the foundations of the way communication functions
in intercultural settings with a focus on the way culture affects
communication. Students learn to identify cultural differences,
understand adaptation processes and learn communication
effectiveness in cross-cultural contexts.
COM-2200
3 hours
Communication in Applied Contexts–Fa, Sp
Provides students with an opportunity to develop their speaking
skills beyond Fundamentals of Speech, emphasizing the use of
technology, professional use of public address, and preparation for
upper-level applied and speaking courses. Prerequisite: COM-1100
Fundamentals of Speech or COM-1120 Honors Speech.
COM-2220 Quantitative Research–Fa
3 hours
Students select samples, write surveys, conduct interviews, and
administer experiments to discover how communication works in
both personal and professional settings. Learning formal methods
of inquiry encourages critical thinking, problem solving, good
writing, and personal effectiveness. Quantitative research trains
students to seek explanations, find answers, and test solutions.
COM-2225 Qualitative Research–Sp
3 hours
Students conduct interviews, observe interactions, and
analyze documents and discourse to understand the cultural
and organizational contexts in which they are a part. Qualitative
research produces knowledge that promotes effective
communication with unique people in particular situations.
COM-2300 Voices of Diversity–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Examination and critical analysis of the significant contributions
and issues related to women, people of color, cultural minority
groups, and the differently abled in the development of American
cultural history. Cultural, social, and artistic contributions are
examined and discussed. Field trips and guest performers/
speakers will be incorporated.
COM-2330
3 hours
Writing for Communication Professions–Fa
This course covers the form and style of writing for internal
and external communication, including use of social media
and persuasive writing. Coursework includes writing executive
summaries, memos, proposals, reports, grants, press releases,
and opeds as part of a semester-long project. Students will also
learn to manage communication in email, Twitter, and Facebook.
COM-2440 Advanced Forensics–Fa, Sp
1 hour
Advanced training for intercollegiate forensic competition. Focus
on literary and rhetorical criticism, extemporaneous speaking, and
the writing of original oratory. Repeatable up to six hours.
COM-2510 Media History–Sp
3 hours
This course offers the historical foundations of mass
communication from  the present. Focuses
on the growth of news and entertainment media within a social,
political, and economic framework of each era of development.
Particular attention is given to the interaction of minority and
mainstream media.
COM-2520 Virtual Communication–Fa
3 hours
This course will teach students how to be successful biblical
and professional virtual communicators through hands-on practice
of successful online communication principles and techniques.
COM-2820 Political Communication–Fa
3 hours
A survey of the theory and practice surrounding the relationship
between media and politics. Issues such as the role of media in
promoting democracy; media effect theories, political knowledge,
and the public’s response to news; and the role of public opinion in
an open society will be explored. (even years)
COM-3100 Advanced Public Speaking–Sp
3 hours
Emphasizes the creative, logical, and audience-centered
thinking needed for excellent public address. Students exhibit
logical communication skills through writing and speaking
assignments. Prerequisite: COM-2200 Communication in Applied
Contexts.
COM-3150 Gender, Politics, and Communication–Fa
3 hours
Using communication theory and biblical application, this
course studies the patterns and the effects of communication upon
male and female genders identifying the political struggles that are
a part of gender relationships and communication. The women’s
movement, contemporary masculinity studies, and the Christian
church’s response to gender issues are surveyed.


COLL-0950 – COM-3150
COM-3230 Organizational Communication–Sp
3 hours
The study using communication for organizational structure. The
course focuses on major organizational theories, topics, and their
communicative implications. The role of communication during
conflict management, negotiation, crisis management, and small
group process in the organizational context. (Fee: $10)
COM-3240 Interpersonal Communication–Sp
2 hours
Centers on the nature and function of interpersonal
communication as it operates within casual encounters, families,
organizations, and institutions. Implications for personal, social,
and professional growth will be considered.
COM-3250 Interviewing–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Focuses on the study of fundamental interviewing principles.
Instruction and training are offered across a variety of interviewing
situations, including informational, employment, and persuasive
interviews.
COM-3260 Organizational Negotiation–Fa
3 hours
Focus on communication and the negotiation process in the
organizational context, coverage of negotiation theories, elements
of the negotiation process, and negotiation formats (e.g., salary
negotiations, budget negotiations, collective bargaining, etc.).
COM-3330 Organizational Training–Fa
2 hours
Focuses on trainer skills essential for training the adult
employee in an organizational setting. Techniques and learning
resources are presented to aid the trainer in assessing training
needs. Prerequisite: COM-3230 Organizational Communication or
permission of instructor.
COM-3350 Event Planning–Sp
3 hours
This course introduces students to event planning processes
and techniques. Emphasis is on creating, organizing, planning,
processing, marketing, implementing, and evaluating a wide
variety of events. Focus includes information and resources
applicable to community, professional, private, nonprofit and for-
profit events.
COM-3450 Forensics/Individual Events–Fa, Sp
1 hour
Students receive individual coaching for participation in
intercollegiate speech competition. Areas of competition include
oral interpretation, public speaking, and limited preparation events.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor.
COM-3451 Debate Practicum–Fa, Sp
1 hour
Students receive individual coaching for participation in
intercollegiate debate competition. Prerequisite: Permission of
instructor. Credit/no credit; repeatable up to six times.
COM-3500 Storytelling–Sp
3 hours
The history, development, and usage of storytelling is presented
in a format where the student participates in developing skills as
a teller. Students are assisted in developing their own style and
method for presenting stories. Open to all majors.
COM-3550 Advocacy Communication–Fa
3 hours
This course studies advocacy as it relates to social and political
change. Advocacy communication requires unique practices that
rely on public speaking skills and analysis of advocacy discourse.
Students will think critically about current social, political, and
ethical issues and will develop persuasive and strategy skills as
they practice how to mobilize the public, influence public opinion,
and negotiate policy decisions. These skills are useful to those
anticipating careers in politics, consulting, speechwriting, law,
sales, nonprofits, and religion.
COM-3650
[0-9] hours
Clinical Methods in Teaching Speech–Fa, Sp
Students seeking certification for teaching speech will gain
classroom experience. One credit hour equals 20 classroom
hours. Department staff members will supervise all assignments.
Credit/no credit.
COM-3710 Narrative and Cultural Literacy–Sp
3 hours
An examination of early New Testament and American cultural
narratives helps students examine current communication
practices using biblical, critical, and theological perspectives.
COM-3810 Speechwriting for the Professional–Sp
3 hours
This course focuses on the skills necessary to research for
and effectively write a variety of public messages. Students will
practice using the skills necessary for effective communication
in organizational, political, and nonprofit contexts. Theory that
enriches the understanding of speech writing will be presented
and applied. Prerequisite: COM-3100 Advanced Public Speaking.
COM-3840 Media Analysis–Fa
3 hours
Overviews the study and application of theories that analyze
and critique news, and film media. Theories of media criticism will
be presented, along with a Christian view. Students will produce
critiques of media using the theories presented and integrating a
Christian worldview into their analysis.
COM-3901 Rhetoric of Abortion Ethics–Su
3 hours
This course helps the student to enter the serious intellectual
discussion about the foundation for human rights and the
value of life. Course material will review the basic pro-life case
and examine the underlying worldview assumptions that both
academic and lay people bring to debates over abortion,
embryonic stem cell research, and cloning. The course will also
discuss why the Christian worldview in particular does a better job
accounting for intrinsically valuable human beings, fundamental
human rights, and objective moral rules. (even year)
COM-3902 Public Advocacy in Bioethics–Su
3 hours
This course provides students with a thorough understanding
and mastery of the often difficult public conversation concerning
life and abortion. Through a rigorous workshop environment,
the student will learn to quickly evaluate a question or subject,
research it sufficiently, and then prepare and deliver a speech
or remarks on the matter at hand. Course material will establish
best practices for public discourse from a Christian perspective
and provide the student with a thorough knowledge of reasoning,
persuasion and fallacies. The course will also prepare students to
network into their communities by identifying and preparing target
audiences for engagement and by training others to become
successful advocates as well. (even years)
COM-4060 Organizational Leadership–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Leadership as a societal role is addressed through analysis
of theory and observation of practitioners. A chronology of
methodological approaches to the study of leadership is
presented. Students observe and evaluate leaders in a variety of
disciplines.
COM-4110 History of Public Address–Fa
3 hours
Classical rhetorical systems and theories are studied from the
perspective of the rhetorical critic. The development of rhetoric is
traced from  the present. Analysis is made of
the part rhetoric has played in the development of philosophies
and nations.
COM-4120 Contemporary Rhetoric–Sp
3 hours
A survey of rhetorical theory that has developed since WWII.
Selected representative, contemporary rhetorical theories will
be studied and applied to U.S. political communication. Seeks to
integrate the study of political messages and the current political
culture. Prerequisite: COM-4110 History of Public Address or
permission of instructor.
COM-4610 Communication Ethics–Sp
2 hours
Seminar focuses on how to reason biblically about ethical
issues. Surveys contemporary Christian ethicists; examines issues
of concern to the Christian community; suggests communication
dynamics that build Christian social ethics.
COM-4640 Special Topics–Fa, Sp
2–3 hours
Topics of important interest are examined on an as-needed
basis.




COM-3230 – COM-4640
COM-4710–4760 Independent Study
1–3 hours
 COM-4710–General Communication–Fa, Sp
1–3 hours
COM-4720–Organizational Communication–Fa, Sp1–3 hours
 COM-4750–Media–Fa, Sp
1–3 hours
 COM-4760–Forensics–Fa, Sp
1–3 hours
Taken to secure an in-depth background in one of the areas of
communication. Repeatable to a total of eight credit hours in the
field. Prerequisite: Permission of instructor.
COM-4850 Senior Seminar–Sp
1 hour
A transitional seminar to provide students with the opportunity
to culminate their academic program and begin the orientation
to the professions of communication. The course will prepare
students for employment demands, revise resumes, develop
interview skills, and establish networking techniques for success
in their communication profession.
COM-4900
3–12 hours
Internship in Communication–Fa, Sp, Su
Students are placed with professional organizations to gain
experience in actual career situations. Internships depend upon
availability.
COM-4950 Applied Capstone–Fa, Sp
3 hours
This course is the culmination of the major in Communication.
It provides an opportunity for students to bring together the
academic training and professional skills in a focused application.
Students work with an advisor to develop a project culminating
their program of study in one of four options selected with
approval of the capstone coordinator and the faculty advisor. All
capstone projects will be presented in written and/or public forum.
Prerequisites: COM-2050 Communication Theory and COM-2220
Quantitative Research or COM-2225 Qualitative Research. (Fee:
$15)
Criminal Justice (CRJU)
CRJU-1310 Introduction to Criminal Justice–Fa
3 hours
Introduction to the discipline and institutions of criminal justice
in the United States. Law enforcement, the courts, and corrections
will be recognized as a system with interacting and interdependent
institutions. An understanding and comprehensive view of the
formal criminal justice system is essential. (Fee: $60)
CRJU-2200 Criminology–Fa
3 hours
Introduction to the major criminological perspectives regarding
crime causation. Selected notorious crimes are considered as
case studies to enhance understanding of each perspective.
Crosslisted as CRJU or SOC.
CRJU-2310 Juvenile Delinquency–Fa
3 hours
Study and assessment of causal theory and problems of
correction and prevention of delinquency. Crosslisted as CRJU or
SOC (Fee: $15)
CRJU-2840

Concepts of Chemical Dependency–Fa
3 hours
Available to all students. This course presents an overview
of the social, economic, political, legal, spiritual, and ethical
considerations concerning the use and abuse of alcohol and other
drugs in our culture. A primary emphasis of the course includes
application of a biblical perspective to assess use of various
philosophies and perspectives on drugs and abuse. Treatment and
prevention options for individuals and families will be discussed.
Crosslisted as CRJU, PYCH, SOC, or SWK.
CRJU-3300 Corrections–Fa
3 hours
In-depth consideration of probation, penology, and community
supervision sectors of the field of criminal justice. (Fee: $30)
CRJU-3310 Corrections Administration–Fa
3 hours
Contemporary issues related to management of correctional
organizations from the administrator’s perspective within the
context of legal and political parameters. Prerequisite: CRJU-1310
Introduction to Criminal Justice.
CRJU-3350 Criminal Law–Sp
3 hours
Focuses on the general classification of criminal offenses,
rules of construction, burden and degree of proof, jurisdiction
and venue, limitations to criminal prosecution, requirements for
criminal liability, culpable mental states, defenses to criminal
liability, and elements of criminal offenses. Prerequisite: CRJU-
1310 Introduction to Criminal Justice.
CRJU-3360 American Judicial System–Fa
3 hours
An introduction to federal and state court systems, duties and
responsibilities of the prosecutor, defense counsel, jury, and
judge including related topics ranging from
sentencing. Prerequisite: CRJU-1310 Introduction to Criminal
Justice.
CRJU-3390 Criminal Evidence–Sp
3 hours
Focuses on the evidence process applicable to criminal case
preparation and presentation in court. Emphasis on types of
evidence, tests of admissibility, objections, weight of evidence,
witness competency and credibility, defenses, suppressions,
order of evidence presentation at trial, and rules of evidence.
Prerequisite: CRJU-1310 Introduction to Criminal Justice.
CRJU-3400 Criminal Procedure–Sp
3 hours
Pertains to procedural law, which governs the enforcement
of substantive criminal law. Emphasis on legal authority of law
enforcement personnel and rights of the accused person with a
review of pertinent U.S. Supreme Court decisions. Consideration is
given to various procedural stages from criminal charges through
post-conviction appeal. Prerequisite: CRJU-1310 Introduction to
Criminal Justice.
CRJU-3500
3 hours
Foundations of Emergency Management–Sp
Intensive study of the community structures that are in place to
prepare for, and respond to, community emergencies. Particular
emphasis will be given to understanding the various government,
nongovernment, and private agencies and organizations that
participate in the community preparedness schema, the process
of communicty emergency planning, and the risks and realities of
serious emergencies in our communities. Students will critically
interact with previous American disasters and the impact of
policies and practices in their outcomes. Also, students will be
guided to how they can positively contribute to the resiliency
of their community and what to do in the event of a serious
emergency event. Prerequisite: CRJU-1310 Introduction to
Criminal Justice. (even years)
CRJU-3700
3 hours
Financial Management for Social Science Professionals–Sp
Biblical principles of personal financial responsibility and their
importance for honoring God, a Christian testimony, and avoiding
monetary-corruptive influences in a criminal justice career. Topics
in this area include: the biblical basis of work, budgeting, giving,
tithing, spending, saving, debt, investing and financial stewardship.
Prerequisites: CRJU 1000-level core courses; ECON-2110
Essentials of Economics; or permission of instructor.
CRJU-3990 Criminal Justice Internship–Fa, Sp, Su 3–12 hours
This internship places students in a professional criminal
justice setting where they will gain insight into the practical and
challenging situations of a career in criminal justice. Under
supervision, students will apply classroom knowledge and
contribute to agency operations. Students may earn up to 12 credit
hours. Prerequisite: CRJU 1000 and 2000-level core courses or
program director’s permission.
CRJU-4150 Homeland Security–Sp
3 hours
This course is a study of the four central missions of domestic
security. These areas are: domestic security, emergency
preparedness, intelligence gathering and communication, and
policy making. Prerequisite: CRJU-1310 Introduction to Criminal
Justice.


COM-4710 – CRJU-4150
CRJU-4160
3 hours
International and Domestic Terrorism–Sp
This course will introduce the student to the reality of domestic
and international terrorism from a historical and contemporary
perspective. Topics for consideration and study will include the
mind and characteristics of the terrorist, the distinction between
domestic and international terrorism, the religious terrorist
contrasted with the political terrorist, the weapons of the terrorist,
the United States government’s efforts to control and/or eradicate
terrorism, and future predictions relative to terrorist activity.
Crosslisted INTL and CRJU. (odd years)
CRJU-4200 Police Administration–Fa
3 hours
Focuses on contemporary policing issues and related
administrative matters from the perspective of executive
leadership. Emphasis on management of organizational resources
regarding basic line and staff functions. Consideration is given to
contemporary issues of community-oriented policing and federal
legislative mandates. Case study is utilized. Prerequisite: CRJU-
1310 Introduction to Criminal Justice.
CRJU-4320 Criminal Investigation–Fa
3 hours
Focuses on criminal investigative methods, identification
procedures, crime scene search, categories of physical evidence,
evidence collection and preservation, sources of information,
interviews, and interrogations. Prerequisite: CRJU-1310
Introduction to Criminal Justice.
CRJU-4440 Special Topics: Criminal Justice
1–3 hours
Investigation of specific topics in Social Science and History
that have intrinsic worth and engage student interest.
CRJU-4500 Comparative Criminal Justice–Sp
3 hours
This course has been developed to provide students basic
knowledge and understanding of criminal justice from an
international/comparative perspective. The course will consist
of study of historical legal traditions and the influence of those
traditions on modern criminal justice processes and transnational
criminal justice agencies. Prerequisites: CRJU-1310 Introduction
to Criminal Justice. (odd years)
CRJU-4630
3 hours
American Constitutional Law: Civil Liberties and Rights–Sp
The United States Constitution defines the powers and scope
of the American government and delineates the rights and
liberties retained by the American people. This course focuses on
the Supreme Court’s interpretation of those rights and liberties
by examining the Court’s decisions in their legal and historical
contexts. Crosslisted as POLS. Prerequisite: GSS-1100 Politics
and American Culture
CRJU-4900 Research Issues in Criminal Justice–Sp
3 hours
This is a capstone course for criminal justice majors. The course
will usually focus on a significant issue in contemporary criminal
justice. Major papers will be presented by individual students
on sub-categories of the primary topic. Additionally, the course
will prepare a project that will be presented in a public forum.
Prerequisite: Senior status as a CRJU major. (Fee: $80)
CRJU-4960
1–3 hours
Independent Study in Criminal Justice
Provides the means whereby gifted and interested students
may explore, in a more in-depth and intensive manner, general
information acquired in the major courses. Further, independent
study provides a logical way to complete required hours not
obtained in normal sequencing. Prerequisite: Permission of the
instructor.
Computer Science (CS)
CS-1210 C++ Programming–Fa, Sp
2 hours
Introduction to computer programming, software engineering
principles, structured program design and implementation, using
the C++ programming language; students will become familiar
with common commands for managing the file system and
constructing programs in the Linux operating system. Two lecture
hours and one one-hour laboratory per week. (Fee: $50)
CS-1220 Object-Oriented Design Using C++–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Further development of student problem solving and
programming skills beyond CS-1210 by increased exposure to
the C++ language features including pointers, object-oriented
language constructs and design principles, memory management
mechanisms, exception handling, event-driven programming,
and graphical user interfaces (GUI). This course also promotes
professional programming practices with emphasis on the careful
reading and documenting programs to support the understanding
and analysis of source code, program testing and debugging,
secure software engineering practices, and following established
language styles and conventions. Readings and lectures are
reinforced with programming demonstrations, exercises, and
assignments in both the Linus and Windows environments.
Prerequisite: CS-1210 C++ Programming. (Fee: $50)
CS-2210 Data Structures Using Java–Fa, Sp
3 hours

Introduction to the proper use of data structures for
developing efficient software; data structures include stacks,
queues, priority queues, hash tables, trees, and graphs.
Students will develop skill in object-oriented design and the Java
programming language. Design project required. Prerequisite: CS-
1220 Object-Oriented Design Using C++. (Fee: $50)
CS-3210 Programming Language Survey–Fa
3 hours
Systematic study of the principles, concepts, and mechanisms
of computer programming languages: their syntax, semantics,
and pragmatics; the processing and interpretation of computer
programs; programming paradigms; and language design.
Illustrative examples will be selected and programming exercises
will be assigned from a variety of programming language
paradigms. Prerequisite: CS-1220 Object Oriented Design Using
C++. (Fee: $50)
CS-3220 Web Applications–Sp
3 hours
Introduction to the design and implementation of web-based
applications. Technologies such as HTML5, CSS3, Javascript,
JQuery, PHP, Java Servlets, XML, and MySQL are explored.
Multiple design projects required. Prerequisite: CS-2210 Data
Structures Using Java. (Fee: $50)
CS-3310 Operating Systems–Fa, Sp
3 hours
A state-of-the-art survey of operating system principles. Covers
fundamental technology and contemporary design issues such as
threads, real-time systems, multiprocessor scheduling, distributed
systems, and security. Course content is developed through
lectures, student research of the relevant literature, presentations,
and programming projects using both C++ and Java. Prerequisite:
CS-1220 Object-Oriented Design Using C++. (Fee: $50)
CS-3410 Algorithms–Fa,Sp
3 hours
Introduction to classical algorithms that have broad application
in solving computer science problems; topics include analysis of
algorithms, advanced data structures, graph algorithms, numerical
methods, and NP-completeness. Prerequisite: CS-2210 Data
Structures Using Java; Corequisite: MATH-2520 Discrete Math
and Probability Principles for Computer Science; or instructor
approval. (Fee: $50)




CRJU-4160 – CS-3410
CS-3510 Compiler Theory and Practice–Sp
3 hours
Introduction to the foundational technology of modern
compilers, with emphasis on underlying theory and practical
techniques for implementing a compiler by applying object-
oriented and appropriate data structures. Design project typically
developing a compiler is required. Prerequisite: CS-3410
Algorithms. (Fee: $50)
CS-3610 Database Organization and Design–Sp
3 hours
Introduction to the analysis, design, and implementation of
relational databases and the Structured Query Language (SQL);
topics include data modeling techniques, data model to logical
schema conversion techniques, relational algebra, SQL, database
file organizations, query evaluation, transaction management, and
client-server application architectures. Design project required.
Prerequisites: CS-2210 Data Structures Using Java. Corequisite:
MATH-2520 Discrete Math and Probability Principles for
Computer Science. (Fee: $50)
CS-3920 Computer Science Internship–Fa, Sp
1–3 hours
An opportunity for a computer science student to work closely
with an industrial advisor. Specific attention is given to solving
a particular problem(s) in the industry or firm. A faculty advisor
assists in supervising and approving the internship, including
assessing the number of credit hours. A final report (approximately
seven pages per credit hour) describing the experience, including
the problem and solution, is required. Must be arranged with a
faculty sponsor and work supervisor before starting. No more
than one hour of CS-3920 can be used to fulfill program technical
elective requirements. Prerequisites: Junior or Senior computer
science major status; faculty advisor permission.
CS-3950 Topics in Computer Science–Fa, Sp, Su
1–3 hours
Selected topics in computer science at the 3000-level that will
complement or extend existing 2000- and 3000-level courses
or expose students to topics not taught in other courses. Topics
may be proposed by the computer science faculty or students.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor.
CS-3980
1–3 hours
Independent Study in Computer Science–Fa, Sp, Su
Opportunity to perform independent study or research in
computer science and allied fields of application. A formal
proposal for study must be approved by the faculty advisor
before registering for this course. Prerequisites: Junior or Senior
computer science or engineering major status, and permission of
instructor.
CS-4410 Parallel Computing–Fa
3 hours
Introduction to the exploitation of parallelism to solve
computational intensive problems; emphasis is placed on both the
message passing (using MPI) and the shared memory paradigms;
projects are required using both paradigms. Crosslisted as CS and
EGCP. Prerequisites: CS-3310 Operating Systems. Corequisite:
CS-3410 Algorithms; permission of instructor. (Fee: $50) (even
years)
CS-4430 Machine Learning for Intelligent Agents–Sp
3 hours
Introduction to applied machine learning with specific
applications in interactive simulated 3D environments. Topics
include Supervised Learning, Unsupervised Learning,
Reinforcement learning. Prerequisite: CS-2210 Data Structures
Using Java. (Fee: $50) (odd years)
CS-4710 Computer Graphics–Fa
3 hours
Introduction to three-dimensional computer graphics and
computer game content creation and programming. Topics
include geometric modeling and common game engine
capabilities; techniques for enhancing realism such as local
lighting effects, texture, transparency, and physical modeling; and
common computations in the rendering pipeline such as model
transformations, clipping and culling, shading, rasterization and
collision detection. Group design project required. Prerequisite:
CS-2210 Data Structures Using Java. (odd years) (Fee: $50)
CS-4730 Virtual Reality Applications–Sp
3 hours
Introduction to virtual reality application development. Extensive
coverage of hardware and software development required to
implement virtual reality. Including topics of visual and audio
rendering, tracking, human physiology, and applications of VR.
Group design project required. Prerequisite: CS-2210 Data
Structures Using Java. (Fee: $50) (even years)
CS-4810 Software Engineering I–Fa
3 hours
The capstone design experience for computer science majors.
Introduction to software engineering principles focusing on
requirement development, detailed design, project scheduling and
management, quality assurance, and testing. Student teams meet
regularly to develop a project management plan, a requirements
document and a detailed design and begin to implement their
project that will be completed in CS-4820. Prerequisites: CS-3220
Web Applications; CS-3610 Database Organization and Design.
Corequisite: CS-3410 Algorithms. (Fee: $50)
CS-4820 Software Engineering II–Sp
4 hours
Continuation of CS-4810 Software Engineering I. Student teams
will complete the implementation, testing, and release of their
capstone project, submit regular progress reports, prepare a final
report, and make a formal project presentation. Prerequisite: CS-
4810 Software Engineering. (Fee: $50)
CS-4950 Advanced Topics in Computer Science
1–3 hours
Selected topics in computer science at the 4000-level that
expand the depth of existing 3000- and 4000-level courses or that
expose the students to advanced concepts not taught in other
courses. Prerequisite: Permission of instructor.
CS-4980 Independent Study in Computer Science
1–3 hours
Opportunity to perform independent study or research in
computer science and allied fields of application. A formal
proposal for study must be approved by the faculty advisor
before registering for this course. Prerequisites: Junior or Senior
computer science or engineering major status, permission of
instructor.
Creative Writing (CWRT)
CWRT-2220 Introduction to Creative Writing–Fa, Sp
3 hours
This course is a prerequisite requirement for any 3000-level
creative writing course. The course covers basic instruction
in technique and style for all three genres of creative writing:
fiction, creative nonfiction, and poetry. Prerequisite: ENG-1400
Composition.
CWRT-3030 Fiction–Sp
3 hours
Workshop approach to studying, creating, and responding to
short stories. Course focuses on the elements of the modern
short story from Chekhov forward. Emphasis is on traditional
literary fiction; the course does not cover science fiction, fantasy,
adolescent fiction, or children’s literature. Prerequisites: ENG-1400
Composition; CWRT-2220 Introduction to Creative Writing.
CWRT-3040 Poetry–Fa
3 hours
Provides guided practice, instruction in craft, constructive
criticism, and a supportive atmosphere. Students should leave the
course with more confidence about how to read and write poetry,
as well as knowledge of the tradition, issues, and forms of poetry.
Prerequisites: ENG-1400 Composition; CWRT-2220 Introduction to
Creative Writing.
CWRT-3050 Creative Nonfiction–Fa
3 hours
Intensive study in writing literary nonfiction. Course focuses
on sub-genres in contemporary nonfiction: the personal essay,
autobiography/the memoir, the short, reportage. Workshop and
conference approach. Prerequisites: ENG-1400 Composition;
CWRT-2220 Introduction to Creative Writing.


CS-3510 – CWRT-3050
CWRT-3240 Directed Writings–Fa, Sp
1–3 hours
Students will work in close consultation with a faculty member
on the creation and production of a significant project in one of the
following genres: poetry, fiction, creative nonfiction. Upper-level
literature courses cannot be used as a substitution for the general
education literature requirement. Prerequisite: any 3000-level
creative writing workshop.
CWRT-4220 Creative Writing Capstone I–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Course provides an opportunity to produce and workshop
an original body of work in a genre of your choice. Workshop
environment will be rigorous and diagnostic, but also supportive.
Prerequisite: any 3000-level creative writing workshop.
CWRT-4221 Creative Writing Capstone II–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Course provides an opportunity to produce and workshop
an original body of work in a genre of your choice. Workshop
environment will be rigorous and diagnostic, but also supportive.
Prerequisite: CWRT-4220 Creative Writing Capstone I.
Cyber Operations (CY)
CY-1000 Introduction to Cybersecurity–Fa,Sp,Su
3 hours
This course provides a broad overview of key cybersecurity
concepts and practices and broadly characterizes the
organizational security landscape. It is structured as a series
of ordered modules that cover foundational security principles,
organization risk management, and adversarial thinking as an
organizing narrative for a series of other modules on data security,
system security, and internet security. Practical skills such as
cyber hygiene and personal device protection for personal security
are also emphasized. Students will be taught how to evaluate
the social, political, cultural, and economic impact of security in
cyberspace from a biblical perspective. (Fee: $50)
CY-2310 Cyber Forensics–Fa
3 hours
This course provides students with the necessary information
and hands-on experience with common software tools and
command-line applications to prepare them for responding to
cybersecurity incidents within their organization. In this course,
students will learn basic processes for incident response and
become familiar with the typical processes used in responding
to an incident. These processes include creating an incident
response plan, acquiring evidence, analyzing the collected
evidence, and preparing written reports for both internal
organizational use and in a courtroom. Prerequisite: CY-1000
Introduction to Cybersecurity. (Fee: $50)
CY-3320 Linux Systems Programming–Fa
3 hours
A study of the Linux operating system with special emphasis
given to developing low-level programming skills in C and
assembly language for the purpose of understanding Linux’s
separation of user- and kernel-space features, system code,
and how to develop kernel modules. In addition to the emphasis
on low-level programming, students will study various system
administration skills, scripting languages, administration
and programming tools, and gain a better understanding of
capabilities and limitations of the Linux operating systems (O/S).
Students will also learn general information on how the Linux
O/S is constructed, including its common organization into
subsystems and programmer interfaces. Finally, students will
practice administering user capabilities, the file system, access
controls, kernel capabilities, and other system services (e.g.,
firewall, printing and networking) by configuring their own Linux
distribution. Prerequisites: CS-2210 Data Structures Using Java;
CS-3310 Operating Systems.(Fee: $50)
CY-3420 Cyber Defense–Fa
3 hours
This course covers fundamental topics in data security,
system security, network security, human security, organizational
security,and societal security. In labs students will apply security
principles and best practices that are necessary for organizations
to maintain operations in the presence of risks and threats.
Focused attention is paid to cryptography as the technical
foundation of cybersecurity. Prerequisites: CY-1000 Introduction to
Cybersecurity, CS-1220 Object Oriented Design Using C++. (Fee:
$50)
CY-4310 Cyber Operations–Sp
3 hours
This course covers cyber operations and the best practices
for securing a technology infrastructure. Topics include offensive
cyber operations, cyber-related legal precedents and regulations,
wired and wireless network security, intrusion detection and
prevention systems, system hardening, and defense in-depth. This
is a hands-on course with a heavy emphasis on virtual machine-
based lab exercises. Prerequisites: CY-3420 Cyber Defense;
EGCP-4310 Computer networks. (Fee: $50)
CY-4330 Software Security–Sp
3 hours
A detailed look at issues involved in providing secure software
systems. Students will study principles and practices of software
development that result in software that is robust and secure from
attack. Students will learn techniques for analyzing software to
determine whether it contains weaknesses that are vulnerable
to exploitation. Students will also explore reverse engineering
of software to understand the design of an existing software
component to determine its security and whether it could contain
malware. Prerequisites: CY-3320 Linux Systems Programming;
CY-3420 Cyber Defense. (Fee: $50)
CY-4810 Secure Software Engineering I–Fa
3 hours
The capstone experience for Cyber Operations majors.
Introduction to secure software engineering principles focusing on
requirement development, detailed design, risk analysis, project
scheduling and management, quality assurance, and testing.
Student teams meet regularly to develop a project management
plan, a requirements document, and a detailed design. They begin
implementation of their project that will be completed in CY-4820
Secure Software Engineering II. Prerequisite: CY-3420 Cyber
Defense; Corequisite: CS-3410 Algorithms. (crosslisted with CS-
4810 Software Engineering I) (Fee: $50)
CY-4820 Secure Software Engineering II–Sp
4 hours
Continuation of CY-4810 Secure Software Engineering I.
Student teams will complete the implementation, testing, and
release of their capstone project, submit regular progress reports,
prepare a final report, and make a formal project presentation.
Prerequisite: CY-4810 Secure Software Engineering I. (crosslisted
with CS-4820 Software Engineering II)(Fee: $50)
Economics (ECON)
ECON-2110 Essentials of Economics–Fa, Sp
3 hours
The course provides an introduction to the essential principles
of economics. These principles would include such areas as
supply and demand, elasticity, productivity and cost analysis,
economic efficiency, national income, the consumer price index,
monetary and fiscal policy, business cycles, and economic
performance. Course not applicable to any major from the Robert
W. Plaster School of Business and also not open to students with
credit for ECON-2330 Microeconomics
and/or ECON-2340 Macroeconomics.
ECON-2330 Microeconomics–Fa, Sp
3 hours
The area of economic inquiry that is concerned with the
effect of human behavior on the conduct of affairs within rather
narrowly defined units. It is the study of decision-making regarding
consumption, production, and exchange that is carried on by
individual households and by business firms.




CWRT-3240 – ECON-2330
ECON-2340 Macroeconomics–Fa, Sp
3 hours
The area of economic study that focuses on how human
behavior affects outcomes in highly aggregated markets, such
as the market for labor or for consumer products. It is a study
of the behavior of the economy as a whole, including the study
of economic phenomena such as interest rates, the price level
and national income, and output and employment. Prerequisite
or Corequisite: ECON-2330 Microeconomics or permission of
instructor.
ECON-3310 Money and Financial Markets–Sp
3 hours
This course will introduce the student to monetary economics
and how the monetary system impacts the whole complex of
financial markets. Building on the foundation of macroeconomics,
the course will include detailed analysis of financial markets and
institutions as well as monetary theory. The institution of central
banking and its influence on money and financial markets will be
specifically evaluated. Prerequisite: ECON-2340 Macroeconomics
or permission of instructor. Crosslisted with FIN-3310.
ECON-3335 Intermediate Microeconomics–Fa
3 hours
Microeconomics is a study of economic principles that explain
how our market-directed economy organizes and coordinates
production and exchange. The principles explain a wide variety
of economic and social phenomena. The course studies basic
economic units, households and firms, and the equilibrium
through exchange among competing and cooperating people.
Prerequisites: ECON-2330 Microeconomics; GMTH-1020 College
Algebra; or permission of instructor.
ECON-3340 History of Economic Thought
3 hours
Principal figures in the development of economic ideas
and the contribution of each period of economic thought from
the mercantilist to the present. Prerequisites: ECON-2330
Microeconomics; or permission of instructor.
ECON-3345 Intermediate Macroeconomics–Sp
3 hours
This course will expand on macroeconomic principles to
provide an analytical framework for understanding business
cycles and associated short run economic fluctuations, long-
run correspondence with classical exonomic theory, as well as
growth theory. Macroeconomic policy debates will be reviewed
with the analytical tools developed. Prerequisites: ECON-2340
Macroeconomics; GMTH-1020 College Algebra; or permission of
instructor.
ECON-3350 Comparative Economic Systems–Fa
3 hours
Analysis of different types of economic systems. Special
emphasis is placed on centralized planning from both a theoretical
and empirical perspective. Centralized economic planning
is compared and contrasted with a free-market distribution
of resources. Individual country case studies are included.
Prerequisite: ECON-2330 Microeconomics or permission of
instructor.
ECON-3360 International Trade and Economics–Fa
3 hours
A study of international economic theory and international trade
policy. The economic basis of trade and factor mobility, the benefits
of international trade, and the barriers to international trade flows
will be examined. Prerequisite: ECON-2330 Microeconomics or
permission of instructor.
ECON-3375 Mathematical Economics–Sp
3 hours
Mathematical Economics presents the mathematics required for
studying economics at the graduate level. Mathematical concepts
are developed in the context of economics and applications
are drawn from a wide range of fields in economics including
microeconomics, macroeconomics, and economic growth. The
main focus of this course is on optimization; therefore the course
will focus on single and multi-variable calculus techniques to
provide tools to analyze economic problems. Prerequisites: ECON-
2330 Microeconomics; ECON-2340 Macroeconomics; ECON-
3335 Intermediate Microeconomics; MATH-1710 Calculus I. (odd
years)
ECON-3380
3 hours
Economic Development and Political Economy–Sp
A study of the interaction of political and economic systems to
produce economic development and growth of nation states. A
framework for analysis of development is explored and applied to
specific case studies of both industrial and developing economics
that have recently undergone significant change. Prerequisite:
ECON-2330 Microeconomics; or permission of instructor.
ECON-3390 Public Finance–Fa
3 hours
This course will review the role of government in the economy,
to include measures of economic efficiency and how inefficiencies
within the market system may allow for government action to be
potentially welfare enhancing. Theories of collective choice will
be analyzed, and an analysis of supply and demand in political
markets will be used to assess government policies such as
regulation and taxation. Crosslisted as PUAD. Prerequisite: ECON-
2330 Microeconomics; or permission of instructor. (even years)
ECON-3410 Topics in Economics–Fa, Sp, Su
1–3 hours
A variety of courses are covered under this heading on an
experimental basis. This allows the department to meet the
changing needs of the students without formally adding or
dropping courses.
ECON-4110 Introduction to Econometrics–Sp
3 hours
Econometrics is a set of research tools used to estimate
and test economic relationships. The methods taught in this
introductory course can also be employed in the business
disciplines of accounting, finance, marketing, and management
and in many social science disciplines. The aim of this course
is to provide you with the skills helpful in filling the gap between
being a student of economics and being a practicing economist.
By taking this introduction to econometrics, you will gain an
overview of how statistical techniques can increase understanding
of how economic variables are related. Prerequisites: GSS-3650
Quantitative Methodology or BUS-2150 Statistics for Business.
(even years)
Primary (P–5) Education (EDEC)
EDEC-2100
2 hours
Fine Arts in the Classroom–Fa, Sp
An overview of the use of art and music to enhance the Primary
(P–5) classroom. A strong emphasis on practical techniques and
projects for personal expression based on an understanding of
the importance of art and music at the system, school, classroom,
and individual levels. Prerequisite: EDUC-1000 The Education
Profession. (Fee: $20)
EDEC-2300 Phonics and the Reading Process–Fa, Sp
4 hours
The study of phonics and the place of phonics in the overall
reading program. The course addresses multisensory strategies
for reading, spelling, and writing instruction. It provides the
scientific definition of dyslexia, its common characteristics
standardized by the IDEA, and the most effective research-based
methodologies to address the instructional needs of individuals
with dyslexia. Special emphasis on literacy and reading readiness.
Prerequisite: EDUC-1000 The Education Profession.
EDEC-3200
1 hour
Faith and Learning Alignment (P–5)–Fa, Sp

An introduction into the principles and practices of biblical
integration in the P–5 school setting. Course examines the
theological and theoretical foundations of biblical integration
and prepares the teacher candidate to align curriculum and
instructional techniques to their grade level and educational
setting. Crosslisted with EDUC-3200 Faith and Learning Alignment
(4–12). Prerequisite: EDUC-3100 Philosophical Foundations of
Education. Corequisite: Enrollment in appropriate methods of
teaching course for licensure area.


ECON-2340 – EDEC-3200
EDEC-4200
3 hours
Teaching Primary (P–5) Science–Fa, Sp
An examination of science curricula for students with particular
emphasis on the Ohio Model and the National Science Teaching
Standards. Instructional methodologies that emphasize three-
dimensional science, an inquiry approach and S.T.E.M. will
be modeled and practiced with attention given to a hands-on
instruction. Prerequisite: Successful completion of the Primary
(P–5) Methods I block. Corequisite: Other courses in the Primary
(P–5) Methods II block. (Fee: $15)
EDEC-4300
3 hours
Teaching Primary (P–5) Social Studies–Fa, Sp
An examination of social studies curricula for the Primary
(P–5) with particular emphasis on the Ohio model, the NCSS
Standards, Ohio history, and the integration of social studies with
other disciplines. Instructional methodologies that emphasize
the teaching of thinking, student interaction, and the use of
instructional technologies will be modeled and practiced.
Application of skills in the field as required. Prerequisite:
Successful completion of the Primary (P–5) Methods I block.
Corequisite: Other courses in the Primary (P–5) Methods II block.
EDEC-4450
3 hours
Primary (P–5) Field Experience II–Fa, Sp
Teacher candidates spend 20–25 days in an elementary
classroom, grades 1–5, including 17–22 days teaching
mathematics, social studies, and science. This field experience
provides theory-driven application to instruction with an emphasis
on reflective teaching and collegial teamwork. Teacher candidates
are formally supervised and evaluated by University supervisors.
This course requires a current Ohio FBI Background Clearance
Report to be on file with the School of Education for the duration
of the field experience. Prerequisite: Successful completion of the
Primary (P–5) Methods I block. Corequisite: Other courses in the
Primary (P–5) Methods II block. (Fee: $45)
EDEC-4880
1–3 hours
Topics in Primary (P–5) Education–Fa, Sp, Su
Selected topics in primary (P–5) education that will complement
or extend existing courses or expose candidates to topics not
taught in other courses; may be proposed by a P5ED faculty
or student. Prerequisites: Faculty advisor and instructor’s
permission.
EDEC-4900
12 hours
Student Teaching and Seminar: Primary (P–5)–Fa, Sp
A teaching experience in a primary (P–5) setting under the
supervision of the mentor teacher and a university supervisor.
Required seminars encourage reflection on the teaching
experience, as well as discussion of issues of importance to
educators. This course requires a current Ohio BCI and FBI
Background Clearance Report to be on file with the School of
Education for the duration of the field experience. Prerequisite:
Successful completion of the Primary (P–5) Methods II block.
(Fee: $400)
Middle Childhood Education (EDMC)
EDMC-2800
2 hours
Developmental Issues in Young Adolescents–Su
A study of the physiological, social, emotional, cognitive, and
spiritual issues in human development endemic to the transition
from  adolescence. Emphasis on development
research as it applies to the development of educational
objectives, learning environments, and teacher characteristics
conducive to the needs of younger adolescents.
EDEC-3500 Primary (P–5) Education–Fa, Sp
3 hours
An introductory descriptive overview of current primary (P–5)
education, including various approaches, programs, and curricula.
Emphasis on the development, implementation, and evaluation
of primary programs. This course requires a current Ohio FBI
Background Clearance Report to be on file with the School of
Education for the duration of the field experience. Prerequisite:
Admission to the Teacher Education Program. Corequisite: Other
courses in the Primary (P–5) Methods I block. (Fee: $10)
EDEC-3600
3 hours
Issues in Primary (P–5) Administration–Fa, Sp
An examination of program issues important to both teachers
and administrators. Includes examination of models for leadership
and for developing and maintaining personal and community
working relationships. Prerequisite: admission to the Teacher
Education Program. Corequisite: Other courses in the Primary
(P–5) Methods I block.
EDEC-3800
4 hours
Teaching Primary (P–5) Language Arts–Fa, Sp
An introduction to the objectives, skills, instructional strategies,
teaching aids, resource materials, and assessment techniques
for teaching reading and the language arts to the primary (P–5)
student. An associated clinical experience provides theory-driven
application. Prerequisite: admission to the Teacher Education
Program. Corequisite: Other courses in the Primary (P–5)
Methods I block. (Fee: $30)
EDEC-3900 Kindergarten Field Experience–Fa, Sp
1 hour
 An observation and participation experience focusing on
classroom routines and instruction in a kindergarten or preschool
classroom. Designed to give a practical, field-based perspective
to all of the courses in the primary (P–5) methods 1 block.
Prerequisite: Admission to the Teacher Education Program.
Corequisite: Other courses in the Primary (P–5) Methods I block.
(Fee: $45)
EDEC-3950 Primary (P–5) Field Experience I–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Teacher candidates spend three mornings per week for
14 weeks in a classroom for grades 1–5. The implementation
of reading and language arts objectives, skills, strategies of
instruction, teaching aids, and resource materials is practiced in
a University-supervised setting. Prerequisite: Admission to the
Teacher Education Program. Corequisite: Other courses in the
Primary (P–5) Methods I block. (Fee: $45)
EDEC-3990
1–3 hours
Independent Study in Primary (P–5) Education–Fa, Sp, Su
An investigation of contemporary topics in primary (P–5)
education through reading, writing, or creative projects.
EDEC-4000
2 hours
Reading in the Content Areas: Primary (P–5)–Fa, Sp
An introduction to the dimensions, strategies, and
programs for learning and teaching the reading process,
assessment techniques, and instructional strategies to increase
comprehension of the textual material of the various content
disciplines taught in the Primary (P–5) grades. Prerequisite:
Successful completion of the Primary (P–5) Methods I block.
Corequisite: Other courses in the Primary (P–5) Methods II block.
EDEC-4100
3 hours
Teaching Primary (P–5) Mathematics–Fa, Sp
An introduction to the objectives, skills, instructional strategies,
teaching aids, and resource materials for teaching mathematics
in the elementary grades, based on the Ohio Model and NCTM
Standards. An associated clinical experience provides theory-
driven application. Prerequisite: Other courses in the Primary
(P–5) Methods II block.




EDEC-3500 – EDMC-2800
EDMC-3500
4 hours
Principles of Teaching Middle School–Sp
Teacher candidates learn to develop instruction based on
observable learning objectives aligned with curriculum guides.
Emphasis will be given to instructional models most appropriate
for middle school students, including use of instructional
technology. The course examines the developmental periods
of later childhood and early adolescence from a psychological
and sociological perspective and how school programs can be
designed and implemented to deal with the unique aspects of
these developmental periods. This course includes the application
of grade-appropriate principles of assessment (including value-
added). Prerequisite: Admission to the Teacher Education
Program. Corequisite: Other courses in the M.C. Methods I block.
(Fee:$20)
EDMC-3550
3 hours
Curriculum and Instruction for Grades 4 and 5–Su
An examination of the curricula of grades 4–5 and instructional
strategies that emphasize content mastery and the development
of critical inquiry. Particular emphasis placed on the Ohio
Academic Content Standards for grades 4–5 in language arts,
mathematics, science, and social studies. Prerequisite: Admission
to Early Childhood Education Endorsement program. Corequisite:
Enrollment with EDMC-2800 Development Issues in Young
Adolescents and EDMC-3970 Middle school clinical (Grades
4–5).
EDMC-3600
3 hours
Phonics and the Structure of Language–Sp
An introduction to the rationale, skills, instructional and
assessment strategies, teaching aids, resource materials, and
appropriate technologies for the teaching of phonics. Emphasis
given to the source, structure, function, and history of spoken
language. Prerequisite: Admission to the Teacher Education
Program. Corequisite: Other courses in the M.C. Methods I block.
EDMC-3700
4 hours
Teaching Reading Through Middle Childhood Literature–Sp
In this course students examine major theories and seminal
works related to reading instruction for upper elementary and
adolescent students. Within the context of multicultural literature
and other genres of literature, students are introduced to
comprehension strategies, informal assessments, differentiated
instruction, the creation of literate environments, and professional
teaching and literacy standards. Prerequisite: Admission to the
Teacher Education Program. Corequisite: Other courses in the
M.C. Methods I block.
EDMC-3800
3 hours
Writing Process and Language Arts Methods for Middle

Childhood–Fa
An introduction to the instructional strategies and resources
for teaching, assessing, and supporting the language arts
development at the middle school level based on NCTE, InTASC,
and Ohio’s learning standards for English/language arts. Teacher
candidates will implement ELA strategies, technology, and 21st
century skills to meet the needs of all students in a middle school
field experience. Prerequisite: admission to the Teacher Education
Program. Corequisite: Other courses in the M.C. Methods lI block.
(Fee:$55)
EDMC-3950
2 hours
Middle Childhood Field Experience: Teaching Reading–Sp
This experience provides for implementation of instructional
strategies for teaching reading in a middle childhood setting.
Teacher candidates are formally supervised and evaluated by
mentor teachers and university supervisors based on the OSTP,
InTASC, and AMLE standards.Prerequisite: Admission to the
Teacher Education Program. Corequisite: Other courses in the
M.C. Methods I block. (Fee: $45)
EDMC-3970 Middle School Clinical (Grades 4–5)–Su
2 hours
An observation and participation experience in grades 4 or
5. Clinical experience provides for the implementation of the
objectives, skills, and strategies of grad 4–5 instruction and
classroom management under the supervision of the experienced
cooperating teacher and university supervisor. Prerequisite:
Admission to Early Childhood Education Endorsement program.
Corequisites: Enrollment with EDMC-2800 Development Issues in
Young Adolescents and EDMC-3550 Curriculum and Instruction
for Grades 4–5.
EDMC-3990
1–3 hours
Independent Study in Middle Childhood Education–Fa, Sp, Su
An investigation of contemporary topics in middle childhood
education through reading, writing, or creative projects.
EDMC-4000
3 hours
Reading and Writing in the Disciplines:

Middle Childhood–Fa
An introduction to the range of strategies and programs for
teaching the reading process, including the nature of the reading
process, assessment techniques, and instructional strategies
to increase comprehension. The use of trade books and
informational books in the content areas across the disciplines
taught in the middle childhood grades is emphasized. Prerequisite:
successful completion of the M.C. Methods I block. Corequisite:
Other courses in the M.C. Methods II block.
EDMC-4100
3 hours
Teaching Mathematics: Middle Childhood–Fa
In this course, teacher candidates will examine major theories,
seminal works, and instructional strategies associated with
learning-centered teaching practices for middle childhood
mathematics. Using a variety of current P–12 curricula and
standards from NCTM, InTASC, and AMLE, and Ohio learning
standards, teacher candidates will develop and implement
lesson plans, a variety of assessments, classroom appropriate
technology, critical thinking techniques, and differentiation to meet
the needs of learners. Prerequisite: Successful completion of
the M.C. Methods I block. Corequisite: Other courses in the M.C.
Methods II block.
EDMC-4125
3 hours
Topics in Middle Childhood Mathematics–Fa
In this course, teacher-candidates will examine middle
childhood mathematical concepts through in-depth problem
solving strategies. Teacher-candidates will develop current
classroom technology practices, critical thinking and questioning
techniques, and relevant conceptual and procedural knowledge
tasks in order to advance learning for all learners. Prerequisite:
EDUC-2800 Principles of Mathematics II.
EDMC-4200 Teaching Science: Middle Childhood–Fa
3 hours
An introduction to the professional knowledge, skills, methods
and instructional strategies required for teaching middle school
science, based on Ohio Educator Standards, AMLE teacher
preparation standards and NSTA science teacher preparation
standards within the context of a biblical framework. Emphasis
is on the facilitation of learning and innovation skills for middle
school students. Prerequisite: Successful completion of the M.C.
Methods I block. Corequisite: Other courses in the M.C. Methods
II block. (Fee: $95).
EDMC-4300
3 hours
Teaching Social Studies: Middle Childhood–Fa
An introduction to the objectives, skills, and instructional
strategies for teaching middle school social studies, based on the
NSSA Standards. The course provides a particular emphasis on
the Ohio Model and the integration of social studies with other
disciplines. Prerequisite: Successful completion of the M.C.
Methods I block. Corequisite: Other courses in the M.C. Methods
II block. (Fee: $95)

EDMC-3500 – EDMC-4300
EDMC-4440 Middle Childhood Field Experience II–Fa
2 hours
This clinical experience allows the teacher candidate to
apply the theories, principles, and techniques provided in the
associated methods courses. This course requires a current Ohio
FBI Background Clearance Report to be on file with the School
of Education for the duration of the field experience. Prerequisite:
Successful completion of the M.C. Methods I block. Corequisite:
Other courses in the M.C. Methods II block. (Fee: $45)
EDMC-4880
1–3 hours
Topics in Middle Childhood Education–Fa, Sp, Su
Selected topics in middle childhood education that will
complement or extend existing courses or expose candidates to
topics not taught in other courses; may be proposed by an EDMC
faculty or student. Prerequisites: Faculty advisor and instructor’s
permission.
EDMC-4900
12 hours
Student Teaching and Seminar: Middle Childhood–Fa, Sp
A teaching experience in a middle childhood setting under the
supervision of the mentor teacher and the University supervisor.
Required seminars encourage reflection on the teaching
experience as well as discussion of issues of importance to
educators. This course requires a current Ohio FBI Background
Clearance Report to be on file with the School of Education for
the duration of the field experience. Prerequisite: Successful
completion of the M.C. Methods II block. (Fee: $400)
Adolescent / Young Adult Education (EDSE)
EDSE-3000
4 hours
Principles of Teaching: Adolescent and
Young Adult Learners–Sp
Teacher candidates learn to develop student-centered
instruction based on observable learning outcomes aligned with
curriculum guides, with emphasis on instructional models most
appropriate for adolescent to young adult (7–12th grade) students
implementing the use of 21st century skills and instructional
technology. The course examines, analyzes, and utilizes a variety
of teaching strategies, assessments, and classroom management
to facilitate differentiated student-centered instruction for all
students. Includes an in-school experience. Prerequisite:
Admission to the Teacher Education Program as an AYA or
MASPN candidate. (Fee:$45)
EDSE-3300 Developmental Reading–Sp
3 hours
This course focuses on the reading goals and processes used
in teaching English, language arts, and literature by language arts
teachers at the secondary level. Corequisite: Other courses in
the Adolescent and Young Adult Principles of Teaching block or
permission of the dean. (Fee: $30)
EDSE-3900 Music Education Field Experience–Fa, Sp
2 hours
This supervised experience in a K–12 school prepares the
teacher candidate for the student teaching experience by providing
an opportunity to practice teaching methods. Candidates will be
evaluated and must show potential to be successful in student
teaching to receive credit. Prerequisites: Admission to the Teacher
Education Program and completion of or concurrent registration
in MUED-3710 Music for Early Childhood; and/or MUED-3720
Music for Adolescent/Young Adults. (Fee: $30)
EDSE-3990
1–3 hours
Independent Study in Adolescent and Young Adult Education
–Fa, Sp, Su
An investigation of contemporary topics in adolescent and
young adult education through reading, writing, or creative
projects.
EDSE-4450
2 hours
Adolescent/Young Adult Field Experience–Fa
An opportunity for the implementation of the objectives, skills,
and instructional strategies in a setting appropriate for each
discipline area. Teacher candidates teach two–three periods a day
for five weeks. Prerequisite: Admission to the Teacher Education
Program. Corequisites: Other courses in the Adolescent and
Young Adult Principles of Teaching block. (Fee: $45)
EDSE-4880
1–3 hours
Topics in Adolescent and Young Adult Education–Fa, Sp, Su
Selected topics in adolescent and young adult education that
will complement or extend existing courses or expose candidates
to topics not taught in other courses; may be proposed by
an EDSE faculty or student. Prerequisite: Faculty advisor or
instructor’s permission.
EDSE-4900
12 hours
Student Teaching and Seminar: Adolescent / Young

Adult–Fa, Sp
A teaching experience in an adolescent/young adult setting
under the supervision of the mentor teacher and the University
supervisor. Required seminars encourage reflection on the
teaching experience, as well as discussion of issues of importance
to educators. (Fee: $400)
Special Education (EDSP)
EDSP-2100 Exceptionalities and Behavior–Fa, Sp
2 hours
Reviews the historical sequence leading to the mandates in
special education. Explores implications of federal law with an
emphasis on the definitions and characteristics of exceptionalities
and various philosophies regarding the education of students with
exceptional learning needs. Strategies of inclusion are discussed.
Includes an introduction to nondiscriminatory evaluation and
functional assessment of individuals with exceptionalities and
the use of assistive technologies for enabling instruction. The
course will present a rational and pragmatic approach to general
classroom management. Throughout the course, emphasis will
be given to the Positive Behavior and Intervention Support (PBIS)
framework, establishing rules, preventing behavior problems,
and teaching social skills. Students will complete a minimum of
15 hours in a field experience with persons with an exceptional
learning need.
EDSP-2400
2 hours
Language Development and Communication Disorders–Sp
An introduction to speech and language development for
teachers. The course incorporates a range of instructional
practices, technologies, and curricular materials to address the
communication needs of students with disabilities and/or differing
cultural and linguistic backgrounds.
EDSP-2500
1 hour
Survey of Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities–Fa, Sp
Survey of the multidisciplinary perspectives, identification, early
influences, causation, levels of support, and practices related to
the education of individuals with intellectual and developmental
disabilites in early childhood. Prerequisites: EDSP-2100
Exceptionalities and Behavior; or may be taken concurrently with
EDSP-2100 Exceptionalities and Behavior.
EDSP-2700
2 hours
Teaching Children with Mild to Moderate Disabilities–Fa
An overview of mild to moderate disabilities with a focus on
instructional strategies and accommodations for students in
inclusive settings. Prerequisite: TEP Acceptance, Primary (P–5)
Methods I.




EDMC-4440 – EDSP-2700
EDSP-3100
3 hours
Diagnostics and Intervention in Reading–Fa, Sp
An introduction to the use of formal and informal assessment
techniques for identification and remediation of reading difficulties.
Teacher candidates learn practical instructional strategies for
teaching students with reading problems and apply the techniques
by working with elementary students in a school setting.
Prerequisite: EDEC-2300 Phonics and the Reading Process. For
Primary (P–5) majors. Corequisite: Other courses in the Methods I
block. (Fee: $20)
EDSP-3150
3 hours
Intervention and Diagnosis in Reading for
Special Educators–Sp
Study and implementation of individual testing and teaching
strategies for skill development in reading, analysis of programs
and materials, and development of individualized plans for
remediation of specific skill deficits. Prerequisites: The Introduction
to Teaching block; EDEC-2300 Phonics and the Reading Process.
For Special Education majors. Corequisite: Other courses in the
Methods I block (Fee: $20)
EDSP-3500 Special Education Law–Fa
1 hour
An overview of special education law with an emphasis on the
history of the law and children with disabilities and understanding
the implementation and accountability mechanisms of inclusive
education.
EDSP-3950
3 hours
Special Education Field Experience: Primary (P–5)–Fa, Sp
This school-based experience allows teacher candidates to
design and teach Language-Arts and Reading lessons to P–5
students with and without mild-moderate needs in an inclusive
classroom setting. Teacher candidates apply research-based
strategies and develop initial skills related to administering and
analyzing assessments, classroom practice and technology/media
applications. This course requires a current Ohio FBI Background
Clearance Report to be on file with the School of Education for
the duration of the field experience. Prerequisites: Admission
to the Teacher Education Program; major in special education.
Corequisite: Other courses in the Primary (P–5) Methods I block.
(Fee: $45)
EDSP-4100 Adaptive Curriculum and Instruction–Fa
2 hours
An introduction to the curriculum, intervention strategies,
instructional materials, and educational technology used
with students with mild–moderate special educational needs.
Prerequisite: Admission to the Teacher Education Program.
Corequisite: Other courses in the Special Education block.
EDSP-4125
1 hour
Middle School Mathematics Topics for

Special Educators–Fa
A course with an investigative approach to topics such as logic,
history of mathematics from underrepresented cultures, and
teaching mathematics to diverse cultures. Mathematical modeling,
formulating, and solving problems for both mathematical and
everyday situations are included. Real-world connections provide
opportunities for exploration and communication by written,
oral, and technological presentations. Prerequisite: EDUC-2800
Principles of Mathematics II.
EDSP-4150
3 hours
IEP Development and Student Transitions Throughout

the K–12 Experience–Fa
This course prepares candidates with the skills and knowledge
to develop Individualized Education Programs for students with
exceptionalities across K–12 grade levels. An emphasis will
be on the IEP development as well as working with families to
provide successful student transitions throughout the educational
experience, focusing on educational issues, independent living
preparation, community living skills, and vocational preparation.
Prerequisite: Admission to the Teacher Education Program.
Corequisite: Other courses in the Special Education block. (Fee:
$20)
EDSP-4250
2 hours
Communication, Collaboration, and Inclusion–Fa, Sp
A presentation of the techniques of collaboration and
consultation needed to enhance the teacher candidate’s
communication with individuals with special needs, parents,
educational team members, and other professionals. Also includes
strategies for adapting and modifying instruction for students
with special needs and an introduction to assistive technology.
Prerequisite: Admission to the Teacher Education Program and
completion of Methods I.
EDSP-4300
2 hours
Behavioral and Instructional Management–Fa
A study of behavior management concepts and techniques for
teachers of special education. Prerequisite: Open only to degree-
seeking students.
EDSP-4400 Assessment in Special Education–Fa
2 hours
Study in the administration and interpretation of formal and
informal educational assessment instruments to identify and place
students with mild–moderate needs in special education. Students
will use the information from  develop an
evaluation team report. Prerequisite: Admission to the Teacher
Education Program. Corequisites: Other courses in the Special
Education block.
EDSP-4450
3 hours
Special Education Field Experience: Middle
Childhood–Fa, Sp
An opportunity to implement the objectives, skills, and
instructional strategies for teaching mathematics, science, and
social studies to students with mild to moderate needs at the
middle childhood level. This course requires a current Ohio FBI
Background Clearance Report to be on file with the School of
Education for the duration of the field experience. Prerequisite:
Successful completion of the Primary (P–5) Methods I block.
Corequisites: Other courses in the Primary (P–5) Methods II
block. (Fee: $45)
EDSP-4550
3 hours
Special Education Field Experience: Adolescent and
Young Adult–Fa
An opportunity to use the skills learned developing and
implementing individualized educational plans and behavior
intervention strategies for adolescent and young adult students
with mild to moderate special educational needs. This course
requires a current Ohio FBI Background Clearance Report to be
on file with the School of Education for the duration of the field
experience. Prerequisite: Admission to the Teacher Education
Program. Corequisite: Other courses in the Special Education
block. (Fee: $30)
EDSP-4880
1–3 hours
Topics in Special Education–Fa, Sp, Su
Selected topics in special education that will complement or
extend existing courses or expose candidates to topics not taught
in other courses; may be proposed by an EDSP faculty or student.
Prerequisites: Faculty advisor and instructor’s permission.


EDSP-3100 – EDSP-4880
EDSP-4900
12 hours
Student Teaching and Seminar: Special Education
A teaching experience for special education only majors
with students who have mild–moderate special educational
needs under the supervision of the cooperating teacher and
the University supervisor. Seminars encourage reflection on the
teaching experience as well as discussion of issues of importance
to educators. This course requires a current Ohio BCI and FBI
Background Clearance Report to be on file with the School of
Education for the duration of the field experience. Prerequisite:
Successful completion of the Primary (P–5) Methods II and
Special Education blocks. (Fee: $400)
Education (EDUC)
EDUC-1000 The Education Profession–Fa,Sp
2 hours
An introduction to the social and historical context of the
teaching profession, current issues, and requirements for
teacher licensure. Focus is on 1) Historical context for American
education; 2) Cultural diversity overview; 3) Twenty-first century
skills; 4) Stages of teacher preparation and development including
dispositional requirements; 5) School and curricular models; 6)
Foundations of classroom practice; 7) Laws and ethics. Fifteen
(15) hours bulit-in field experience required. Prerequisite: Declared
major in an Ohio licensure-seeking program.(Fee: $159)
EDUC-1050
0 hours
Preliminary Student Involvement–Fa, Sp, Su
Teacher candidates arrange a field experience for five
consecutive full days in a public or private P-12 school setting
where they observe and participate in classroom activities.
A follow-up report is required. Prerequisite: EDUC-1000 The
Education Profession or permission of instructor.
EDUC-1800 Principles of Mathematics I–Fa, Sp
3 hours
The course develops basic proficiencies needed for teaching
Ohio’s Competency Based Comprehensive Programs for
mathematics (NCTM Standards). This course may be waived
with an ACT Math subscore of 23 or higher or SAT Quantitative
subscore of 570 or higher. Prerequisite: Proficiency in
mathematics.
EDUC-2050 Teaching Diverse Learners–Fa, Sp
2 hours
A survey of issues and strategies needed to teach diverse
students. The course seeks to develop cultural competencies that
accompany various aspects of multicultural education related
to racial, ethnic, linguistic, and cultural diversity. Strategies for
the practice of culturally responsive teaching will be introduced.
As a course assignment, students will log at least 15 hours of
interaction with diverse students and complete a reflective journal.
EDUC-2100 e-Learning for Educators–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Teacher candidates learn to use a wide range of new and
emerging electronic learning technologies (e-Learning) for
developing and enhancing student-centered classroom and online/
distance instruction. The course requires the completion of various
projects and assignments that demonstrate their proficiency in
addressing the multifaceted demands on a 21st century K–12
educator in an increasingly global, changing, and complex world
through blended and online/distance learning contexts. (Fee: $25)
EDUC-2300 Assessment and Differentiation–Fa, Sp
2 hours
A study of assessment and differentiated instruction concepts
and procedures in a K–12 school setting including the Ohio Model
of Value Added Assessment. Prerequisites or Corequisite: EDSP-
2100 Exceptionalities and Behavior, or enrollment in the Bible
teacher education minor.
EDUC-2400 Children’s Literature–Fa, Sp
3 hours
A survey of the early history, major types, and modern trends of
literature for children in preschool through grade 5. The social and
personal value of literature is studied along with methods for using
trade books for reading instruction. Prerequisite: EDUC-1000 The
Education Profession.
EDUC-2500 Educational Psychology–Fa, Sp
3 hours
An introduction to the principles of child and adolescent
development, learning theories, and the principles and processes
that affect teaching and learning. The course focuses on learning
theory and the skills necessary to create and maintain an optimal
learning environment in a diversity of settings. Prerequisite or
Corequisite: EDUC-1000 The Education Profession; or with
permission of instructor.
EDUC-2600 Topics in Children’s Literature–Su
3 hours
An overview of current topics and trends in children’s literature.
May be credited toward the reading/language arts middle school
concentration. Offered during Summer School Session III and
intermittently by arrangement with instructor. Prerequisite: EDUC-
2400 Children’s Literature or permission of the dean.
EDUC-2800 Principles of Mathematics II–Fa, Sp
3 hours
A course is based on an NCTM standards-based framework
and develops mathematical content proficiency required for
teaching mathematics in grades PK–9. In addition, it develops new
mathematical topics that are connected to real-world situations
and other disciplines. Prerequisite: EDUC-1800 Principles of
Mathematics I (or an ACT Math subscore of 23 or higher or SAT
Quantitative subscore of 570 or higher).
EDUC-3100
3 hours
Philosophical Foundations of Education–Fa, Sp
A study of the institutional development of schooling in the
United States. Examines the biblical foundations for education
and engages in a critical analysis of foundational educational
philosophies and their impact on Christian approaches to
education. Examines current and historical philosophical,
social, and economic issues and how these affect the principles
and practices of American schooling. Prerequisite: ENG-1400
Composition.
EDUC-3200
1 hour
Faith and Learning Alignment (4–12)–Fa, Sp

An introduction into the principles and practices of biblical
integration for the middle and secondary school setting. Course
examines the theological and theoretical foundations of biblical
integration and prepares the teacher candidate to align curriculum
and instructional techniques to their teaching/licensure area.
Crosslisted with EDEC-3200 Faith and Learning Alignment (P–5).
Prerequisite: EDUC-3100 Philosophical Foundations of Education.
Corequisite: Enrollment in appropriate methods of teaching
course for licensure area.
EDUC-3570 Supervised Field Experience
1–3 hours
A 30–90 clock hour supervised placement in an early, middle,
and/or adolescent/young adult classroom. Designed to give a
transfer teacher candidate, an early childhood education candidate
seeking a Reading Endorsement, or a teacher candidate repeating
other field experiences the necessary P-12 supervised experience
needed to meet program requirements. (Fee: $30)
EDUC-3620
3 hours
Intensive Multisensory Literacy Instruction I–Fa
This course is an introduction to the basic understandings of
reading difficulties and dyslexia and provides an approach to the
remediation of reading difficulties using an intensive multisensory
method inspired by Orton and Gillingham. (Fee:$75)




EDSP-4900 – EDUC-3620
EDUC-3630
3 hours
Intensive Multisensory Literacy Instruction II–Sp
This course is a sequel to EDUC-3620 Intensive Multisensory
Literary Instruction I and provides further understandings of
reading difficulties and dyslexia and provides an approach to the
remediation of reading difficulties using an intensive multisensory
method inspired by Orton and Gillingham. Students assess
a K–12 student’s reading achievement and plan and teach
1:1 lessons using structured procedures. This course has an
embedded clinical experience. Prerequisite: EDUC-3620 Intensive
Multisensory Literacy Instruction I. (Fee:$75)
EDUC-3990 Independent Study in Education
1–3 hours
An investigation of contemporary topics in education through
reading, writing, or creative projects. Prerequisite: 15 semester
hours in education.
EDUC-4000
3 hours
Reading and Writing in Disciplines: AYA and Multi-Age–Fa
An introduction to the range of strategies for teaching reading
within disciplinary content areas related to adolescent and young
adult and multi-age Spanish, physical education, health education,
and music education licensure programs. This course addresses
the reading process, assessment techniques, instructional
strategies to improve comprehension, academic language, and
Ohio dyslexia standards. This course will be taught in online
format. Prerequisite: Admission to the Teacher Education Program
or Senior status and permission of the dean.
EDUC-4850 Internship in Applied Education
3–12 hours
Juniors and seniors who have been accepted into the Teacher
Education Program may, with the approval of the School of
Education Dean, engage in an internship that involves the
meaningful use of knowledge gained in previous education
courses and experiences. A school faculty member will assist with
the internship, arrangements, and evaluation of the experience.
The school Dean will approve the number of credit hours to be
granted for the experience. Prerequisite: Permission of the School
of Education Dean. (Fee: $80)
EDUC-4880
12 hours
Student Teaching (Nonlicensure) and Seminar–Sp
A teaching experience working with students in a range of
age levels under the supervision of the cooperating teacher and
University supervisor. Seminars encourage reflection on the
teaching experience as well as discussion of issues of importance
to educators. Prerequisite: Completion of all TEP requirements
except internship. (Fee: $80)
EDUC-4900
12 hours
Student Teaching and Seminar: Multi-Age–Fa, Sp
A teaching experience working with students in a range of
age levels under the supervision of the mentor teacher and the
University supervisor. Seminars encourage reflection on the
teaching experience as well as discussion of issues of importance
to educators. This course requires a current Ohio BCI and FBI
Background Clearance Report to be on file with the School of
Education for the duration of the field experience. Capstone for the
Multi-Age Physical Education Major. (Fee: $400)
EDUC-4910 Special Student Teaching
3–10 hours
Occasionally, unusual situations arise that entail special
provisions (e.g., summer school student teaching for experienced
teachers, repeated experiences, etc.). (Fee: $100)
EDUC-4950
12 hours
Student Teaching and Seminar in Special Education and
Primary (P–5)–Fa, Sp
A full semester teaching experience with significant exposure in
both special education and primary (P–5) education settings. The
student teacher will work under the supervision of cooperating
teachers and University supervisors in each field. Seminars
encourage reflection upon the teaching experience and discussion
of issues of importance to educators. This course requires a
current Ohio BCI and FBI Background Clearance Report to be
on file with the School of Education for the duration of the field
experience. (Fee: $400)
Civil Engineering (EGCE)
EGCE-1920 Introduction to Civil Engineering–Sp
2 hours
Introduction to the civil engineering profession. Course will
cover the breadth of the civil profession and include a survey
of major civil engineering sub-disciplines. Professional practice
topics including career paths, ethics, professional engagement,
teamwork, communication, design processes, and legal aspects of
civil engineering practice will be introduced. The integrated lab will
provide introduction to civil engineering drawing and will include a
class project to introduce concepts of project-based engineering.
Prerequisite: EGGN-1110 The Engineering Profession.(Fee:$100)
EGCE-2320 Principles of Surveying–Fa
2 hours
Surveying is an essential element in civil engineering planning,
design, construction, and monitoring processes. Lectures will
introduce the skills, knowledge, and roles of surveyors, and will
seek to develop understanding of basic surveying principles and
basic interpretation of graphical data. Laboratory exercises will
enable students to apply presented materials in a physical context,
developing basic skill in performing survey work. Prerequisite:
EGCE-1920 Intro to Civil Engineering.(Fee:$100)
EGCE-2410 Civil Engineering Materials–Fa
4 hours
Introduction to the behavior of steel, concrete, wood, polymers,
and asphalt as they apply to civil engineering and construction
applications. Topics will include material response to mechanical
loading and environment conditions in order to explain possible
modes of failure when materials are placed into service.
Integrated lab component provides hands-on experience in
the characterization and testing of civil engineering materials.
Emphasis will be placed on characterization of materials to
internationally recognized standards. Testing techniques and
quality control will also be introduced in lectures and developed in
laboratory exercises. Prerequisite: EGCE-1920 Introduction to Civil
Engineering. (Fee: $100)
EGCE-3110 Geotechnical Engineering–Sp
4 hours
Characteristics and classification of geological materials;
physical, mechanical, and hydraulic properties of soil and rock;
issues such as seepage, consolidation, stress distribution, and
settlement will all undergo analyses. Integrated laboratory work in
soil classification and soil mechanics. Prerequisites: EGCE-2410
Civil Engineering Materials; EGME-2530 Statics and Mechanics
of Materials. (Fee:$100)
EGCE-3210 Introduction to Hydraulic Engineering–Fa
3 hours
Collection and distribution of water; flow of fluids through
orifices and weirs; laminar and turbulent flows in closed conduits
and open channels; model analysis using the principles of
dimensional analysis; rainfall and runoff. Prerequisites: EGME-
2530 Statics and Mechanics of Materials; MATH-2710 Calculus
III; PHYS-2110 General Physics.


EDUC-3630 – EGCE-3210
EGCE-3220 Design of Water Distribution Systems–Sp
4 hours
Extension of fundamental hydraulics theory into design
practice for commonly encountered problems in civil engineering
hydraulic systems and structures. Basic concepts of hydraulics,
including unsteady pipelines, open channel flows, loose boundary
hydraulics, and coastal hydraulics are reviewed, extended, and
applied to a variety of practical systems. Prerequisite: EGCE-3210
Introduction to Hydraulic Engineering. (Fee:$100)
EGCE-3410 Construction Engineering–Fa
3 hours
This course focuses on construction engineering issues
associated with the implementation of designed civil systems. The
aim is to provide the student with an understanding of the range
of construction equipment and techniques in common use, as well
as the planning and direction of construction works. Addresses
projects of various scales, focusing on common factors such as
utilization of workers, machines and materials, and requirements
for project organization and control. The material covers both
construction techniques, construction management, and project
documentation. Corequisite: EGCE-2320 Principles of Surveying
EGCE-3510 Structural Analysis–Fa
3 hours
Structural analysis of statically determinate and indeterminate
systems; deflections, energy methods, and force method; column
stability. Prerequisite: EGME-2530 Statics and Mechanics of
Materials.
EGCE-3520 Design of Steel Structures–Sp
4 hours
Introduction to structural design practice in steel. Topics
include estimating structural loads, design of individual members,
and structural connection design. Course focuses on design
practice in accordance with nationally recognized codes for both
structural steel design and load estimation. Includes integrated
lab component covering structural detailing and use of computer-
based design software. Course includes major class project.
Prerequisite: EGCE-3510 Structural Analysis. (Fee:$100)
EGCE-3610 Environmental Engineering–Fa
4 hours
Emphasizes chemical, ecological, and hydrological
fundamentals in order to solve environmental engineering
problems related to water quality, air pollution, solid and hazardous
waste management, sustainability, and risk management.
Experiments in water, soil, and air quality and chemistry will be
performed. Prerequisites: CHEM-1050 Chemistry for Engineers;
EGCE-2410 Civil Engineering Materials. (Fee:$100)
EGCE-3620 Air Pollution Management and Design–Sp
4 hours
Course focuses on developing an understanding of the sources,
fates, and effects of various airborne contaminants. There will
be an emphasis on the design and analysis of engineering
treatment systems and control of these contaminants in various
operational scenarios. Includes integrated lab component covering
assessment, and measurement of airborne contaminants,
mitigation assessment and the use of computer-based design
and modeling software. Course includes major class project.
Prerequisites: EGCE-3610 Environmental Engineering (Fee:$100)
EGCE-3710 Transportation Engineering–Fa
3 hours
Transportation systems; transportation planning and future
development; design and analysis of transportation facilities
including traffic operations, highway geometry, and pavement.
Prerequisites: EGCE-2410 Civil Engineering Materials.
EGCE-3910 Civil Engineering Management–Sp
2 hours
This course focuses on engineering economics, project
management, human resource management, contracting, and
legal considerations related to professional civil engineering
practice. Prerequisites: ECON-2110 Essentials of Economics;
EGCE-1920 Introduction to Civil Engineering.
EGCE-4220 Hydrology–Sp
3 hours
Applications-focused introduction to engineering hydrology
and hydrologic design covering a range of important surface and
groundwater hydrological processes. Includes statistical analyses
in the context of hydrologic problem-solving, components of the
hydrologic budget, hydrograph analysis and routing, groundwater
hydrology, urban hydrology, and hydrologic modelling. Prerequisite:
EGCE-3210 Intro to Hydraulic Engineering.
EGCE-4510 Reinforced Concrete Design–Fa
4 hours
Extension of structural design techniques to the design of
concrete structures and elements, concrete technology, analysis
and design of reinforced concrete beams, slabs, columns,
footings, and walls. Different types of reinforced concrete floor
systems and the fundamentals of prestressed concrete structures.
Structural loadings, including wind and seismic loadings. Includes
integrated lab component with design, build and test activities
and the use of computer based design software. Course includes
major class project. Prerequisite: EGCE-3520 Design of Steel
Structures. (Fee:$100)
EGCE-4520 Design of Wood Structures–Sp
3 hours
Extension of structural design theory to cover design of wooden
structures. Examination of both ASD and LRFD design criteria and
both national and international design codes. Includes structural
detailing and computer based structural analysis. Prerequisites:
EGCE-3520 Design of Steel Structures (Fee:$100)
EGCE-4610 Design of Water Treatment Systems–Fa
4 hours
Design of systems for the delivery of safe and reliable
water supplies and the effective treatment of wastewater.
Includes coverage of topics such as water processing,
distribution, wastewater collection, wastewater treatment and
sludge processing. Integrated lab includes the development
of assessment techniques for the evaluation of water quality,
and system function. Prerequisites: BIO-2210 Microbiology
EGCE-3220 Design of Water Distribution Systems; EGCE-3610
Environmental Engineering. (Fee:$100)
EGCE-4620
3 hours
Environmental Management and Policy Development–Sp
Course focuses on developing a comprehensive understanding
of existing environmental laws and institutions related to
environmental policy. The course includes a historical overview of
environmental law and policy, current requirements, and emerging
policy issues both within the United States and at broader
international levels. The course includes coverage of public trust
doctrine, environmental impact assessment, pollution control,
water resources, climate change, population, and biodiversity.
Prerequisite: EGCE-3610 Environmental Engineering.
EGCE-4810 Civil Engineering Senior Design I–Fa
3 hours
This is the senior capstone design project for civil engineers.
Student teams work on a design project to find a solution
consistent with stated specifications using principles studied
in previous courses. Work will include writing a proposal and
performing background research during a mid-term design review
and end-of-semester formal oral presentation. A progress report
is also required at semester’s end. Prerequisite: completion of
one Level II civil engineering design elective; and EGCE-3110
Geotechnical Engineering. (Fee:$100)
EGCE-4820 Civil Engineering Senior Design II–Sp
3 hours
This is a continuation of EGCE-4810 Civil Engineering Senior
Design I. Students are required to present an end-or-semester
formal oral presentation. A final report is also required at
semester’s end. Prerequisite: EGCE-4810 Civil Engineering Senior
Design I. (Fee:$100).




EGCE-3220 – EGCE-4820
EGCE-4910 Civil Engineering Practice–Sp
1 hour
Course aimed at providing students with an understanding of
professional civil engineering practice in contemporary society.
Regular classroom discussions will be supplemented by visiting
professional engineers who will share practical insights from their
professional experience. Issues will include professional licensure,
ongoing professional development, workplace practice, and legal
issues. Several case studies of recent engineering projects will
be included to illustrate issues. Prerequisite: Senior standing
and students must be scheduled to graduate prior to the end of
calendar year.
EGCE-4920 Intrastucture for Developing Contexts–Sp
3 hours
Course focuses on the creation and implementation of
infrastructure development plans for under-developed contexts.
Topics include needs identification and assessment, appropriate
technology theory, cultural adaptation, resource management,
regulatory controls and legal issues, and long-term sustainability.
Prerequisites: EGCE-3220 Design of Water Distribution Systems;
EGCE-3410 Construction Engineering; EGCE-3520 Design of
Steel Structures. (Fee:$100)
Computer Engineering (EGCP)
EGCP-1010 Digital Logic Design–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Introduction to digital logic design, number systems,
Boolean algebra, Karnaugh maps, computer simulation tools,
combinational network design, flip flops, counters, state machines,
and sequential networks. Circuits are designed in class and are
built and evaluated in the laboratory. Two lecture hours and one
two-hour laboratory per week. (Fee: $100)
EGCP-2120 Microcontrollers–Fa
3 hours
Introduction to the fundamentals of microcontrollers and
embedded systems, including microcontroller architecture,
assembly and C programming, peripheral interfacing, data
communications, and the cybersecurity concerns associated with
microcontrollers and embedded systems. Prerequisite: EGCP-1010
Digital Logic Design; CS-1210 C++ Programming. (Fee: $100)
EGCP-3010 Advanced Digital Logic Design–Sp
3 hours
Advanced treatment of digital logical design techniques and
practices with emphasis on rapid electronic prototyping and
effective use of advanced computer-aided design tools; schematic,
textual, and VHDL design entry; arithmetic circuits, advanced
finite-state machines, and advanced controller implementations.
Three lecture hours per week with periodic integrated laboratory;
multiple projects and laboratory experiences including a class
design contest usually involving a robot. Prerequisites: EGCP-1010
Digital Logic Design; CS-1210 C++ Programming; Junior status or
permission of instructor. (Fee: $100)
EGCP-3210 Computer Architecture–Sp
3 hours
Introduction to computer architecture with an emphasis on
hardware, RISC vs. CISC, pipeline and vector processing, I/O,
and memory hierarchy including caches. Students design and
construct a small microprocessor using a logic simulator and then
write an assembler for their processor. Prerequisites: EGCP-1010
Digital Logic Design; CS-1210 C++ Programming.
EGCP-3920 Computer Engineering Internship
1–3 hours
An opportunity for a computer engineering student to work
closely with an industrial advisor. Specific attention is given to
solving a particular problem(s) in that industry or firm. A faculty
advisor assists in supervising and approving the internship,
including assessing the number of credit hours. A final report
(approximately seven pages per credit hour) describing the
experience, including the problem and solution, is required. Must
be arranged with a faculty sponsor and work supervisor before
starting and cannot be used to satisfy elective credit requirements.
Prerequisites: Junior or Senior engineering major status; faculty
advisor’s permission.
EGCP-3950 Topics in Computer Engineering–Fa, Sp 1–3 hours
Selected topics in computer engineering at the 3000-level that
will complement or extend existing 2000- and 3000-level courses
or expose students to topics not taught in other courses; may be
proposed by the engineering faculty or students. Prerequisite:
Instructor’s permission.
EGCP-3980
1–3 hours
Independent Study in Computer Engineering
Opportunity to perform independent study or research in
computer engineering and allied fields of application. A formal
proposal for study must be approved by the faculty advisor
before registering for this course. Up to three credit hours of
engineering electives can be satisfied by an equivalent number
of independent-study hours. Prerequisites: Junior or Senior
engineering major status; faculty advisor’s permission.
EGCP-3990
1–3 hours
Project Design in Computer Engineering

An elective course for students to get academic credit for
extracurricular design work in computer engineering; project
may be related to a design competition, ministry, industry, or
personal interest. Cannot be used to satisfy engineering elective
requirements. Prerequisite: Instructor’s permission.
EGCP-4110 Digital Signal Processing–Fa
3 hours
Introduction to digital signal processing with emphasis on FIR
and IIR filter design. Other topics include Z-transforms, Fourier
Transforms, discrete-time systems, and finite word-length effects.
The implementation of filters in embedded systems is introduced.
Design project required. Crosslisted with EGEE. Prerequisites:
EGEE-3110 Linear Systems; CS-1210 C++ Programming.
EGCP-4210 Advanced Computer Architecture–Fa
3 hours
Advanced study of computer architecture with an emphasis
on performance, performance metrics, benchmarks, integer
and floating point concepts, data-path and control, super-scalar
processing and pipelining, memory hierarchy, I/O and peripherals,
vector, array and parallel processors, and multiprocessors.
Prerequisites: CS-2210 Data Structures Using Java; EGCP-3210
Computer Architecture. (Fee: $100)
EGCP-4250 CMOS VLSI Design–Sp
3 hours
Introduction to CMOS VLSI design with emphasis on circuit
analysis, modeling, mask layout, simulation, and design
verification; both theoretical concepts and CAD tools are used
together for circuit design and verification. Three lecture hours
per week with integrated laboratory. Prerequisite: EGEE-3210
Electronics I.
EGCP-4310 Computer Networks–Fa
3 hours
This course is an introduction to computer networking. The
course will present the layered network architecture of the internet
and examine the services and functions that each layer performs.
The well-known protocols of each layer will be explored in-depth
through written homework, programming assignments, and
packet-capture labs (using Wireshark, for example). Important
fundamental networking topics will be emphasized such as
packet switching, addressing, performance measurement, reliable
data transfer, and routing. Additional topics such as peer-to-peer
networking, wireless and mobile networking, and the history of
the internet will also be addressed. Prerequisites: CS-2210 Data
Structures Using Java; Corequisite: CS-3310 Operating Systems.
(Fee: $50)


EGCE-4910 – EGCP-4310
EGCP-4410 Parallel Computing–Fa
3 hours
Introduction to the exploitation of parallelism to solve
computationally intensive problems; explores schemes for
achieving parallelism, architectures required for parallel
computing, performance analysis, and parallel algorithm design;
uses common standards for message passing (e.g., MPI),
local clusters and remote supercomputer systems. Crosslisted
as CS and EGCP. Prerequisites: CS-3310 Operating Systems.
Corequisite: CS-3410 Algorithms; permission of instructor. (Fee:
$50) (even years)
EGCP-4810
4 hours
Computer Engineering Senior Design I–Fa
Design and development of electronic products to meet
specific requirements. Introduction to computer system design,
power supply design, hardware-software co-design, software
engineering, system performance trade-offs, electronic design
tools, prototype methods, estimating and managing time and cost
constraints, and project management. Student teams prepare a
project proposal, design and prototype a microprocessor-based
system or sub-system, use computerized design tools, submit
weekly progress reports, and conduct design reviews. Three
lecture hours and one two-hour laboratory per week. Prerequisite:
EGEE-3210 Electronics I, CS-3410 Algorithms, CS-3310 Operating
Systems, and Senior status in computer engineering Corequisite:
EGCP-4210 Advanced Computer Architecture. (Fee: $100)
EGCP-4820
4 hours
Computer Engineering Senior Design II–Sp
Continuation of EGCP-4810 Computer Engineering Senior
Design I. Student teams will complete their capstone project,
submit weekly progress reports, prepare a formal final report, and
make a formal design review presentation. Prerequisite: EGCP-
4810 Computer Engineering Senior Design I. (Fee: $100)
EGCP-4950
1–3 hours
Advanced Topics in Computer Engineering
Selected topics in computer engineering at the 4000-level that
expand the depth of existing 3000- and 4000-level courses or
expose the students to advanced concepts not taught in other
courses. Topics may be proposed by the engineering faculty or
students. Prerequisite: Instructor’s permission.
Electrical Engineering (EGEE)
EGEE-2010 Circuits–Sp
5 hours
Introduction to basic circuit analysis using Ohm’s law, Kirchoff’s
laws, independent and dependent sources, Thévenin and Norton
equivalency and source transformations, transient responses in
RC, RL, and RLC circuits, phasor analysis of RLC circuits, power
in AC circuits, introduction to 3-phase circuits, mutual inductance,
frequency response, Transforms, Laplace circuit analysis,
Fourier Series, and introduction to transfer functions. Computer
simulations and bread-board circuits are constructed and
evaluated in the laboratory. Four lecture hours and one two-hour
laboratory per week. Prerequisites: PHYS-2120 General Physics II;
MATH-2740 Differential Equations. (Fee: $100)
EGEE-2050 Circuits and Instrumentation–Sp
4 hours
Introduction to basic circuit analysis using Ohm’s law, Kirchoff’s
laws, independent and dependent sources, Thévenin and Norton
equivalency and source transformations, transient responses in
RC, RL, and RLC circuits, operational amplifiers, and introduction
to polyphase AC circuits. Circuit applications for transducers such
as resistance strain gages, piezoelectric load cells, piezoelectric
accelerometers, and thermocouples are emphasized along
with measurement uncertainty analysis and statistical methods.
Circuits are designed, simulated, constructed, and tested in the
laboratory. Three lecture hours and one two-hour laboratory
per week. This course does not satisfy the EGEE-2010 Circuits
requirement for the Electrical or Computer Engineering majors.
Prerequisites: PHYS-2120 General Physics II; MATH-2740
Differential Equations. (Fee: $100)
EGEE-2110 Engineering Analysis–Sp
3 hours
This course introduces students to mathematical tools used
by electrical engineers. Topics include theory and engineering
applications of complex variables, linear algebra, and probability
and statistics as well as the numerical solution of basic differential
equations. Students are introduced to the Matlab computing
environment. Prerequisites: CS-1210 C++ Programming; MATH-
1720 Calculus II. Corequisites: MATH-2740 Differential Equations.
EGEE-3110 Linear Systems–Fa
3 hours
Introduction to linear time-invariant analysis of continuous and
discrete-time systems, using both time and frequency domain
methods that include convolution, Fourier Series, Fourier, Laplace,
and Z transforms; classical and computer solution methods are
utilized. Prerequisite: EGEE-2010 Circuits.
EGEE-3150 Analog Filters–Sp
 [0-9] hours
Introduction to theory, design, and implementing passive
and active analog filters; basic filter structures, passive network
synthesis, operational amplifier limitations, multiple-amplifier filters,
and filter realization methods. Prerequisite: EGEE-3110 Linear
Systems. (even years)
EGEE-3210 Electronics I–Fa
3 hours
Introduction to semiconductor electronic device theory and
applications. Topics include ideal and nonideal operational
amplifiers, diodes, field-effect transistors (FETs), and bipolar-
junction transistors (BJTs). Two lecture hours and one two-hour
laboratory or recitation per week. Prerequisite: EGEE-2010 Circuits.
(Fee: $100)
EGEE-3220 Electronics II–Sp
5 hours
Continuation of EGEE-3210 Electronics I to include differential
amplifiers, frequency response of amplifier circuits, multi-stage
amplifiers, power amplifiers, feedback circuits, power supplies,
filters, digital logic families, and oscillators. Four lecture hours and
one two-hour lab per week. Prerequisite: EGEE-3210 Electronics I.
(Fee: $100)
EGEE-3310 Electromagnetics–Sp
3 hours
Engineering applications of vector calculus, phasors, and
Maxwell’s equations to electrostatic, magnetostatic and time
varying fields, transmission lines, Smith Chart, propagation of
uniform plane waves, and single-stub matching. Laboratory
exercises introduce field-plotting, transmission line concepts
using wave guides, single stub-tuning, introduction to the network
analyzer, polarization, and radiation fields. Two lecture hours
and one two-hour laboratory or recitation period per week.
Prerequisites: MATH-2710 Calculus III; EGEE-2010 Circuits. (Fee:
$100)
EGEE-3330 Communications Theory–Sp
4 hours
Introduction to analog and digital communications theory. Topics
for random processes are introduced to facilitate noise analysis
in modulation techniques. Three lecture hours and one two-hour
laboratory per week; design project required. Prerequisite: EGEE-
3110 Linear Systems. (Fee: $100)




EGCP-4410 – EGEE-3330
EGEE-3370
3 hours
Probability and Random Processes for Engineers–Sp
Introduction to sample points, sample spaces, probability,
random variables, random vectors, statistical averages, linear
transformations, random processes, linear system response to
stochastic input, spectral analysis with application of the central-
limit theorem, and Gaussian processes to engineering problems.
Prerequisite: EGEE-3110 Linear Systems.
EGEE-3510 Power Electronics–Sp
3 hours
Introduction to the fundamentals of power electronics,
characteristics and application of semiconductor switches, motor
control, device applications, and power processing design. Design
project required. Prerequisite: EGEE-3210 Electronics I. (odd
years)
EGEE-3530 Electrical Machines–Fa
3 hours
Introduction to the fundamentals of power circuits, the
characteristics and analysis of transformers, the four basic types
of rotating machine (DC, SM, IM, and VRM), and their control. Two
lecture hours and one two-hour laboratory per week. Prerequisite:
EGEE-2010 Circuits; or EGEE-2050 Circuits and Instrumentation.
(Fee: $100)
EGEE-3920 Electrical Engineering Internship
1–3 hours
An opportunity for an electrical engineering student to work
closely with an industrial advisor. Specific attention is given to
solving a particular problem(s) in that industry or firm. A faculty
advisor assists in supervising and approving the internship,
including assessing the number of credit hours. A final report
(approximately seven pages per credit hour) describing the
experience, including the problem and solution, is required. Must
be arranged with faculty sponsor and work supervisor before
starting and cannot be used to satisfy elective credit requirements.
Prerequisites: Junior or Senior engineering major status; faculty
advisor’s permission.
EGEE-3950 Topics in Electrical Engineering–Fa, Sp 1–3 hours
Selected topics in electrical engineering at the 3000-level that
will complement or extend existing 2000- and 3000-level courses
or expose students to topics not taught in other courses; may be
proposed by the engineering faculty or students. Prerequisite:
Instructor’s permission.
EGEE-3980
1–3 hours
Independent Study in Electrical Engineering
Opportunity to perform independent research or study in
electrical engineering and allied fields of application. A formal
proposal for study must be approved by the faculty advisor
before registering for this course. Up to three credit hours of
engineering electives can be satisfied by an equivalent number
of independent-study hours. Prerequisites: Junior or Senior
engineering major status and faculty advisor’s permission.
EGEE-3990
1–3 hours
Project Design in Electrical Engineering–Fa, Sp
An elective course for students to get academic credit for
extracurricular design work in computer engineering; project
may be related to a design competition, ministry, industry, or
personal interest. Cannot be used to satisfy engineering elective
requirements. Prerequisite: Instructor’s permission.
EGEE-4110 Digital Signal Processing–Fa
3 hours
Introduction to digital signal processing with emphasis on FIR
and IIR filter design. Other topics include Z-transforms, Fourier
Transforms, discrete-time systems, and finite word-length effects.
The implementation of filters in embedded systems is introduced.
Design project required. Crosslisted with EGCP. Prerequisites:
EGEE-3110 Linear Systems; CS-1210 C++ Programming.
EGEE-4120 Digital Image Processing–Sp
3 hours
Introduction to digital image processing. Topics include linear
filtering in the spatial and frequency domains, morphology,
image segmentation, wavelets, image compression, and pattern
recognition. Prerequisites: EGEE-3110 Linear Systems. (even
years)
EGEE-4310 RF Circut Design–Fa
3 hours
Introduction to the characteristics of noise and nonlinearity in
radio-frequency (RF) circuit, scattering parameters and two-port
network model, impedance matching techniques, and the radio
transmitter and receiver architecture. Topics of designing the circuit
of low noise amplifier, mixers, oscillators, RF filters, and power
amplifier will be covered. Student will learn to use the state-of-the-
art CAD tool and vector network analyzer. Prerequisites: EGEE-
3220 Electronics II, EGEE-3330 Communications Theory. (Fee:
$100)
EGEE-4330
3 hours
Advanced Communications and Networks–Fa
Analysis of the performance of analog and digital
communication systems and networks in the presence of noise,
M-ary signals, signal space concepts, orthogonal signals, and
introduction to communication networks. Prerequisite: EGEE-3330
Communications Theory. Corequisite: EGEE-3370 Probability and
Random Processes for Engineers or instructor’s permission.
EGEE-4410 Feedback Control Systems–Fa
4 hours
Introduction to the analysis and design of analog feedback
control systems with emphasis on modeling, transfer functions,
root locus, frequency response, Bodé plots, Nyquist Criterion,
stability, compensator design for performance and robustness,
PID, phase-lead, phase-lag, lead-lag, and performance indices.
Three lecture hours and one two-hour laboratory or recitation per
week. Design project required. Prerequisite: EGEE-3110 Linear
Systems. (Fee: $100)
EGEE-4450 Digital Control Systems–Sp
3 hours
Introduction to analysis and design of discrete-time sampled-
data control systems, signal sampling, A/D and D/A conversion,
quantization, application of Z-domain transfer function techniques,
transient response, frequency response, stability and performance
of computer controlled systems, digital compensation, and
controller design. Design project required. Prerequisite: EGEE-
4410 Feedback Control Systems.
EGEE-4510 Power Systems–Sp
3 hours
Principles of electrical power generation, transmission,
and distribution, three-phase power circuits, power system
analysis, load flow, symmetrical components, fault currents,
system protection, and stability. Corequisite: EGEE-3310
Electromagnetics. (Fee: $50) (even years)
EGEE-4610 Medical Imaging–Sp
3 hours
Introduction to the physics, phenomenology, and engineering
aspects of major medical imaging modalities: photon radiation,
radiography, computed tomography, ultrasound, and magnetic
resonance imaging. Matlab will be used to process imagery.
Prerequisite: EGEE-3110 Linear Systems. (odd years)
EGEE-4810
4 hours
Electrical Engineering Senior Design I–Fa
Design and development of electronic products to meet specific
requirements using the top-down design method. Introduction
to project management, reliability, probability and statistics
with engineering applications, serial communication protocols,
product cost and safety, electronic design tools, prototype
methods, noise, and circuit-board layout. Student teams prepare
a project proposal, design and prototype electronic systems using
modern technologies and tools, and conduct design reviews
both written and oral. Three lectures and one two-hour lab per
week. Prerequisites: EGEE-3220 Electronics II; EGCP-2120
Microcontrollers; EGEE-3110 Linear Systems; senior status in
electrical engineering. (Fee: $100)


EGEE-3370 – EGEE-4810
EGEE-4820
3 hours
Electrical Engineering Senior Design II–Sp
Continuation of EGEE-4810 implementing the top-down design
method. Students design, build, and test a working electronic
product to meet specific requirements within budget. Engineering
time, team management costs, and component costs are
incorporated into the total cost and grade for the final product.
Formal design reports and presentations required. Two three-
hour laboratories per week. Prerequisite: EGEE-4810 Electrical
Engineering Senior Design I. (Fee: $100)
EGEE-4950
1–3 hours
Advanced Topics in Electrical Engineering–Sp
Selected topics in electrical engineering at the 4000-level that
expand the depth of existing 3000- and 4000-level courses or
expose the students to advanced concepts not taught in other
courses; topics may be proposed by the engineering faculty or
students. Prerequisite: Instructor’s permission.
General Engineering (EGGN)
EGGN-1110 The Engineering Profession–Fa
1 hour
Introduction to the basic concepts and skills necessary to
function effectively as a Christian engineer; ethical and moral
issues in engineering practice and engineering computer
applications. Term project introduces Christian heritage in science
and engineering; students participate in group activities and
design projects. (Fee: $50)
EGGN-1960 Competition Project–Sp
0 hours
Engineering freshmen on a school of engineering intercollegiate
design competition may use this course to provide on their
transcript a record of their participation throughout the year. The
name of the competition will be designated.
EGGN-2960 Competition Project–Sp
0 hours
Engineering sophomores on a school of engineering
intercollegiate design competition may use this course to provide
on their transcript a record of their participation throughout the
year. The name of the competition will be designated.
EGGN-2980 Research Project I–Fa, Sp, Su
0 hours
Engineering and computer science majors will undertake
a research project under the direction of an engineering and
computer science faculty mentor. Students participating on a
school research project may use this course to provide on their
transcript a record of their participation on a research project.
EGGN-3110 Professional Ethics–Sp
3 hours
Introduction to the theories of morality and philosophical issues
of determining what is true and what is good. Applications are
made to professional conduct, engineer-client relations, and
product liability. Legal problems and the engineering code of
ethics are discussed from a biblical perspective.
EGGN-3510 Systems Optimization–Fa
3 hours
The course covers the theory and procedures for optimizing
multi-variable, nonlinear, constrained problems with application to
system design and optimization. Topics include the formulation of
the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) optimality conditions, numerical
algorithms for solving different classes of problems, linear
programming, gradient algorithms, and special topics applicable
to senior design projects. Prerequisites: MATH-2710 Calculus III;
MATH-2740 Differential Equations.
EGGN-3610 Biomedical Engineering Systems–Sp
3 hours
Introduction to the field of biomedical engineering and the
application of engineering to the field of medicine; fundamental
aspects of measuring and modeling physiological systems,
biomedical device design, tissue engineering, bioelectric
phenomena, biosensors, physiological modeling, biomedical
imaging, and biomaterials. Team taught by ME and EE professors.
Prerequisites: Engineering major with junior standing; BIO-1115
Biology I: Cell Biology or GBIO-1000 Principles of Biology. (even
years)
EGGN-3710
2 hours
Biomedical Engineering Research–Fa, Sp, Su
Student will undertake an original research project under the
direction of a departmental faculty mentor, approved mentor
within a summer research program, or within an approved
academic internship experience. Submission and approval of a
research proposal must precede registration. Prerequisites: Major
in engineering; minor in biomedical engineering; junior status;
permission of advisor, and approval of research topic. (Fee: $150)
EGGN-3910 Co-op I
0 hours
First term for an engineering or computer science student
to work in industry for one semester. A final report is required.
Students completing a co-op work assignment and registered
for this course are granted full-time student status. Prerequisite:
Junior status in engineering or computer science and enrollment
in the co-op program. (Fee $75).
EGGN-3911 Co-op IA
0 hours
First half of the first term for an engineering or computer
science student to work in industry part-time for one semester. A
final report is required. Students enrolled in part-time co-op must
register for six or more credit hours to maintain full-time student
status. Prerequisite: Junior status in engineering or computer
science and enrollment in the co-op program. (Fee $40).
EGGN-3912 Co-op IB
0 hours
Second half of the first term for an engineering or computer
science student to work in industry part time for one semester. A
final report is required. Students enrolled in part-time co-op must
register for six or more credit hours to maintain full-time student
status. Prerequisite: EGGN-3911 Co-op IA . (Fee $40).
EGGN-3920 Co-op II
0 hours
Second term for an engineering or computer science student
to work in industry for one semester. A final report is required.
Prerequisite: EGGN-3910 Co-op I or EGGN-3912 Co-op IB. (Fee
$75).
EGGN-3921 Co-op IIA
0 hours
First half of the second term for an engineering or computer
science student to work in industry part time for one semester. A
final report is required. Students enrolled in part-time co-op must
register for six or more credit hours to maintain full-time student
status Prerequisite: EGGN-3910 Co-op I or EGGN-3912 Co-op IB.
(Fee $40).
EGGN-3922 Co-op IIB
0 hours
Second half of the second term for an engineering or computer
science student to work in industry part time for one semester. A
final report is required. Students enrolled in part-time co-op must
register for six or more credit hours to maintain full-time student
status. Prerequisite: EGGN-3921 Co-op IIA. (Fee: $40).
EGGN-3930 Co-op III
0 hours
Third term for an engineering or computer science student
to work in industry for one semester. A final report is required.
Prerequisite: EGGN-3920 Co-op II or EGGN-3922 Co-op IIB. (Fee:
$75). May be repeated.
EGGN-3931 Co-op IIIA
0 hours
First half of the third term for an engineering or computer
science student to work in industry part time for one semester. A
final report is required. Students enrolled in part-time co-op must
register for six or more credit hours to maintain full-time student
status. Prerequisite: EGGN-3920 Co-op II or EGGN-3922 Co-op
IIB. (Fee $40). May be repeated.
EGGN-3932 Co-op IIIB
0 hours
Second half of the third term for an engineering or computer
science student to work in industry part time for one semester. A
final report is required. Students enrolled in part-time co-op must
register for six or more credit hours to maintain full-time student
status. Prerequisite: EGGN-3931 Co-op IIIA. (Fee $40). May be
repeated.




EGEE-4820 – EGGN-3932
EGGN-3960 Competition Project–Sp
0 hours
Engineering juniors on a school of engineering intercollegiate
design competition may use this course to provide on their
transcript a record of their participation throughout the year. The
name of the competition will be designated.
EGGN-4010 Senior Seminar–Fa
0 hours
Required weekly meeting of senior engineering and computer
science majors to discuss the transition into the professional
work environment. Prerequisite: Senior status in engineering or
computer science. (Fee: $35)
EGGN-4960 Competition Project–Sp
0 hours
Engineering seniors on a school of engineering intercollegiate
design competition may use this course to provide on their
transcript a record of their participation throughout the year. The
name of the competition will be designated.
EGGN-4980 Research Project II–Fa, Sp, Su
0 hours
Engineering and computer science majors will undertake
advanced levels of research under the direction of an engineering
and computer science faculty mentor. Students participating on
a school research project may use this course to provide on their
transcript a record of their participation on a research project.
Prerequisite: EGGN-2980 Research Project I.
Mechanical Engineering (EGME)
EGME-1810 Engineering Graphics–Fa
1 hour
Introduction to basic techniques of sketching, drawing,
dimensioning, multiple views, sectioning, multi-view projections,
and pictorial views. Introduction to commercial software for three-
dimensional solid modeling and preparing engineering drawings.
(Fee: $25)
EGME-2050 Computational Methods–Sp
4 hours
Introduction to computer programming and the numerical
methods for solving roots of equations, simultaneous linear
algebraic equations, ordinary differential equations, integration,
introduction to finite-difference approximations, and least-squares
curve fits. Pre- or Corequisites: MATH-2710 Calculus III; MATH-
2740 Differential Equations.
EGME-2410 Properties of Engineering Materials–Fa
4 hours
Introduction to the properties of metallic, ceramic, polymeric,
and composite materials; plastic deformation, strengthening,
fracture, fatigue, corrosion, diffusion, equilibrium and
nonequilibrium processes, phase diagrams, electrical and
magnetic properties, and application to materials selection. Three
lecture hours and one two-hour laboratory per week. Prerequisite:
EGME-2530 Statics and Mechanics of Materials. (Fee: $100)
EGME-2430
3 hours
Contemporary Manufacturing Processes–Fa
Contemporary processing techniques of materials including
machining, casting, forming, hot and cold working; conventional,
NC, and CNC machining as well as 3D printing; inspection
techniques, quality control, and production methods. Prerequisite:
EGME-2410 Properties of Engineering Materials. (Fee: $55)
EGME-2510 Statics–Fa
3 hours
Introduction to analyzing forces in isolated and connected rigid-
body systems; vector analysis, forces, moments, resultants, two-
and three-dimensional equilibrium, centroids, moment of inertia,
friction, trusses, frames, and machines. Design project required.
Prerequisites: EGME-1810 Engineering Graphics; PHYS-2110
General Physics I; MATH-1720 Analytical Geometry and Calculus
II. (Fee: $10)
EGME-2530 Statics and Mechanics of Materials–Fa
5 hours
Introduction to analyzing forces in isolated and connected rigid-
body systems; vector analysis, forces, moments, resultants, two-
and three-dimensional equilibrium, centroids, distributed loading,
moment of inertia, friction, trusses, frames, and machines.
Introduction to the theoretical and experimental analysis of
deformable bodies subject to applied loads; normal and shear
stress and strain, strain energy, torsion, stresses in beams,
deflection of beams, combined stress, stress transformation,
failure theories, and buckling of columns. Design project required.
Prerequisites: EGME-1810 Engineering Graphics or EGCE-1920
Introduction to Civil Engineering; PHYS-2110 General Physics I;
MATH-1720 Calculus II. (Fee: $25)
EGME-2570 Statics and Dynamics–Fa
3 hours
Free-body diagrams, vectors, resultant forces, two- and three-
force members, friction, simple machines, center of gravity, and
moments of inertia. Kinematics and equations of motion of a
particle for rectilinear and cervilinear motion. Planar kinematics of
rigid bodies. Kinetics for planar motion of rigid bodies, including
equations of motion and principles of energy and momentum.
Prerequisites: EGME-1810 Engineering Graphics; MATH-1720
Calculus II; PHYS-2110 General Physics I. (Fee: $10)
EGME-2630 Dynamics–Sp
3 hours
Introduction to kinematic and kinetic analysis of particles,
systems of particles, and rigid bodies; position, velocity,
acceleration, non-rotating and rotating frames of reference,
Newton’s laws, work, energy, impulse, momentum, conservative
and non-conservative systems, and vibration of single-degree-of-
freedom systems. Design project required. Prerequisite: EGME-
2510 Statics or EGME-2530 Statics and Mechanics of Materials.
Pre- or Corequisite: MATH-2740 Differential Equations. (Fee: $10)
EGME-3010
2 hours
Mechanical Engineering Laboratory I–Fa
Experiments using the wind tunnel, engine test cell, testing
machines in the mechanics laboratory, vibrations laboratory, fluids
laboratory, refrigeration laboratory, and heat transfer laboratory
are conducted. Students measure mechanical phenomena such
as acceleration, force, pressure, temperature, strain, fluid flow,
viscosity, and heat transfer using transducers, instrumentation,
and PC-based data acquisition. Students design some of the
experiments. Two 2-hour laboratories per week. Prerequisites:
EGME-2630 Dynamics; EGEE-2050 Circuits and Instrumentation.
Corequisites: EGME-3110 Thermodynamics; EGME-3210 Fluid
Mechanics. (Fee: $100)
EGME-3020
2 hours
Mechanical Engineering Laboratory II–Sp
Continuation of EGME-3010. Two two-hour laboratories
per week. Prerequisite: EGME-3010 Mechanical Engineering
Laboratory I. Corequisite: EGME-3150 Heat Transfer. (Fee: $100)
EGME-3050
3 hours
Introduction to Finite Element Analysis–Sp
Introduction to basic components of the finite element method
including element selection, shape functions, strain-displacement
and stress-strain relations, formulation of the stiffness matrix
for 1-D, 2-D, and 3-D elements, linear strain and isoparametric
formulations, application of boundary conditions, and
interpretation of results; application to 2-D and 3-D problems and
experience using a commercial code. Prerequisites: EGME-2050
Computational Methods; EGME-2530 Statics and Mechanics of
Materials. (Fee: $25)
EGME-3110 Thermodynamics–Fa
5 hours
Introduction to engineering thermodynamics, properties of pure
substances, work, heat, first and second laws of thermodynamics,
energy, enthalpy, and entropy. Specific application to power,
refrigeration cycles, and combustion processes. Prerequisites:
CHEM-1050 Chemistry for Engineers; MATH-2710 Calculus III.


EGGN-3960 – EGME-3110
EGME-3130 Internal Combustion Engines–Sp
3 hours
Introduction to internal combustion engines, fuel-air cycles,
engine simulation, emissions, engine performance and alternative
fuels. Prerequisites: EGME-2630 Dynamics; EGME-3110
Thermodynamics.
EGME-3150 Heat Transfer–Sp
3 hours
Introduction to conduction, convection, and radiation heat
transfer in one and two dimensions; free and forced convection,
analytical and computational techniques applied to Fourier’s Law
of conduction, Newton’s Law of cooling, and Stefan-Boltzman’s
Law of thermal radiation. A heat exchanger design project is
required. Prerequisites: EGME-3110 Thermodynamics; EGME-
3210 Fluid Mechanics. Corequisite: EGME-2050 Computational
Methods.
EGME-3170 Thermal Systems–Sp
2 hours
Introduction to engineering thermodynamics, properties of pure
substances, work, heat, enthalpy, and first law of thermodynamics.
Introduction to conduction and convection modes of heat transfer.
Prerequisites: CHEM-1050 Chemistry for Engineers; MATH-2740
Differential Equations.
EGME-3210 Fluid Mechanics–Fa
3 hours
Introduction to fluid properties, fluid statics, and the concepts,
definitions, and basic equations for subsonic fluid dynamics;
Navier-Stokes equation, viscous and invisid fluid flows, potential
flow analysis, boundary layers, laminar and turbulent flows,
analytical and computational solutions, vector fields, and finite-
integral-control-volume method. Prerequisites: MATH-2710
Calculus III; MATH-2740 Differential Equations.
EGME-3430 Principles of Physical Metallurgy–Sp
3 hours
Introduction to the physical and mechanical properties of
metals and alloys; crystal structure, phase equilibria, defects,
strengthening mechanisms, and kinetics of reactions. Prerequisite:
EGME-2410 Properties of Engineering Materials.
EGME-3450 Plastic and Composite Materials–Sp
2 hours
Introduction to the properties and processing of plastics, resins,
and adhesives; rheology, creep-deformation history, and injection
molding. Fiber-reinforced, carbon-carbon, and metal-matrix
composites are analyzed for strength, anisotropy, and applicability.
Prerequisite: EGME-2410 Properties of Engineering Materials.
EGME-3610
3 hours
Kinematics and Design of Machines–Sp
Introduction to the analysis and synthesis of motion in planar
mechanisms and linkages; velocity and acceleration analysis,
cam design, gears, simple and compound gear trains, computer
solution and simulation. Design project required. Prerequisite:
EGME-2630 Dynamics. (Fee: $40)
EGME-3850 Mechanical Design–Sp
3 hours
Further development of load determination, stress, strain,
deflection and failure theories; integration of an iterative problem
solver in the design process; and analysis of fatigue failure.
Introduction to the design of mechanical components including
shafts, keys, couplings, bearings, gears, springs, and fasteners.
Prerequisite: EGME-2410 Properties of Engineering Materials.
Corequisites: EGME-3020 Mechanical Engineering Laboratory II;
EGME-3610 Kinematics and Design of Machines. (Fee: $25)
EGME-3920 Mechanical Engineering Internship
1–3 hours
An opportunity for a mechanical engineering student to work
closely with an industrial advisor. Specific attention is given to
solving a particular problem(s) in that industry or firm. A faculty
advisor assists in supervising and approving the internship,
including assessing the number of credit hours. A final report
(approximately seven pages per credit hour) describing the
experience, including the problem and solution, is required. Must
be arranged with faculty sponsor and work supervisor before
starting and cannot be used to satisfy elective credit requirements.
Prerequisites: Junior or Senior engineering major status; faculty
advisor’s permission.
EGME-3950
1–3 hours
Topics in Mechanical Engineering–Fa, Sp
Selected topics in mechanical engineering at the 3000-level
that will compliment or extend present 2000- or 3000-level courses
or expose students to topics not taught in other courses; may be
proposed by the engineering faculty or students. Prerequisite:
Instructor’s permission.
EGME-3980
1–3 hours
Independent Study in Mechanical Engineering
Opportunity to perform independent study or research in the
various branches of engineering and allied fields of application.
A formal proposal for study must be approved by the faculty
advisor before registering for this course. Up to three credit hours
of engineering electives can be satisfied by an equivalent number
of hours of independent study. Prerequisites: Junior or Senior
engineering major status; faculty advisor’s permission.
EGME-3990
1–3 hours
Project Design in Mechanical Engineering
An elective course for students to get academic credit for
extracurricular design work in mechanical engineering; project
may be related to a design competition, ministry, industry, or
personal interest. Cannot be used to satisfy engineering elective
requirements. Prerequisite: Instructor’s permission.
EGME-4060
3 hours
Computational Fluid Dynamics–Sp
Finite difference and finite volume methods. Numerical methods
and their consistency, accuracy, stability, boundedness, and
efficiency. Navier-Stokes equation solution methods. Intelligent use
of commercial grid-generation and CFD software to solve practical
engineering fluid flow problems. Prerequisites: EGME-2050
Computational Methods; EGME-3210 Fluid Mechanics. (Fee: $50)
EGME-4160 Radiation and Solar Energy–Fa
2 hours
Introduction to the fundamentals of radiation heat transfer
including shape factors, wave-length dependence, and material
properties. Applications to solar energy engineering and design
problems. Prerequisite: EGME-3150 Heat Transfer.
EGME-4210 Aerodynamics–Sp
2 hours
Introduction to Aerodynamics. Topics include potential flow,
Kutta-Joukowski theorem, wing theory, panel method, lifting
line theory, slender wing and slender body theories, laminar
and turbulent boundary layers. Prerequisite: EGME-3210 Fluid
Mechanics. (odd years)
EGME-4250 Propulsion–Fa
3 hours
This course introduces each type of propulsion system
that is commonly used in modern aerospace vehicles; e.g.,
rockets, piston aero engines, gas turbine engines, ramjets,
and scramjets. This course presents a balance of theory,
fundamental performance analysis, and design. Engineering
principles and functionality mechanisms are used in assignments,
including a group design project, requiring students to analyze
the performance of each type of these propulsion systems.
Prerequisites: EGME-3110 Thermodynamics; EGME-3210 Fluid
Mechanics. (odd years)
EGME-4270 Compressible Fluid Flow–Fa
3 hours
Introduction to the compressible flow of gases in engineering
systems; isentropic flow in variable-area passages, shock and
expansion waves; and flow with wall friction and heat transfer.
Prerequisites: EGME-2050 Computational Methods; EGME-3110
Thermodynamics; EGME-3210 Fluid Mechanics. (even years)
EGME-4410
3 hours
Introduction to Fracture Mechanics–Sp
Introduction to failure modes caused by static and dynamic
loading, brittle fracture criteria, elastic behavior, stress fields
around cracks, fatigue failure, stress corrosion cracking, and strain
hardening mechanisms. Prerequisite: EGME-2410 Properties of
Engineering Materials.




EGME-3130 – EGME-4410
EGME-4530 Advanced Mechanics of Materials–Fa
[0-9] hours
Advanced treatment of stress and strain including coordinate
transformations, the eigenvalue problem, Mohr’s circle and linear
constitutive equations. Failure theories and energy methods,
including Castigliano’s theorems, are studied; applications to
classical topics including analysis of beams with non-symmetrical
sections, non-circular torsion, thin-wall beams, and beams
on elastic foundations. Prerequisite: EGME-2530 Statics and
Mechanics of Materials. (odd years)
EGME-4550 Continuum Mechanics–Fa
3 hours
Continuum Mechanics is a discipline of physics that deals with
both solid and fluid continuous matter. This course establishes the
fundamental mechanical and kinematic equations that are valid
for all continuous media using the laws of physics including the
conservation of mass, momentum and energy and the concepts
of stress and kinematics of deformation. Constitutive equations
which describe the behavior of specific idealized materials (e.g.
perfectly elastic solid, viscous fluid) are also developed. Topics
include: continuum assumptions, essential mathematics, stress
principles, kinematics of deformation and motion, balance laws
and constitutive theory. Prerequisites: EGME-2410 Properties of
Engineering Materials; PHYS-2120 General Physics II; MATH-
Differential Equations. (even years)
EGME-4560 Biomechanics and Biomaterials–Sp
[0-9] hours
Introduction to biomechanics of the human body, reactions
of biological tissue and synthetic materials to load, and the
biomechanics of biomaterials. Advanced mechanical analysis of
rigid and deformable bodies and fluid mechanics applied to bone,
muscle, connective tissue and blood. This course will provide
foundational knowledge to the engineering student for occupations
in medical device manufacturing, health and sport sciences
industries, and advanced fields of study. Prerequisites: EGME-
2410 Properties of Engineering Materials; PHYS-2120 General
Physics II and MATH-2740 Differential Equations. (odd years)
EGME-4610 Dynamics of Machines–Fa
3 hours
Dynamic analysis of machines and mechanisms; Newton’s laws
of motion, energy methods, force analysis, shaking forces, static
and dynamic balancing, engine dynamics, multi-cylinder engines,
and cam dynamics. Prerequisite: EGME-3610 Kinematics and
Design of Machines.
EGME-4660 Principles of Automatic Controls–Fa
3 hours
Introduction to theoretical and experimental analysis of classical
analog feedback control systems with emphasis on modeling,
transfer function formulation, frequency response, root locus,
Bodé plots, stability, and compensator design. Three lecture hours
and one two-hour laboratory or recitation per week; design project
required. Prerequisite: EGEE-2050 Circuits and Instrumentation.
(Fee: $100)
EGME-4710 Vibrations–Sp
3 hours
Free and forced vibrations of mechanical systems having
lumped mass and elasticity, single and multiple degree-of-freedom
systems, matrix formulation, eigenvalues and eigenvectors, normal
mode theory, Laplace Transform, dissipative systems, introduction
to random, continuous, nonlinear vibrations, and engineering
applications. Prerequisite: EGME-2630 Dynamics. (Fee: $15)
EGME-4720 Vibrations Lab–Sp
1 hour
Laboratory experiments to demonstrate and support EGME-
4710 Vibrations; function and calibration of instrumentation
and motion detection transducers, measuring the frequency
response and impulse response function, electrodynamic shakers,
instrumentation, Fast Fourier Transform, spectral analysis, and
experience using a commercial FFT analyzer. One two-hour
laboratory per week. Pre- or Corequisite: EGME-4710 Vibrations.
(Fee: $100)
EGME-4750
3 hours
Random Vibrations and Signature Analysis
Introduction to vibration analysis of discrete and continuous
systems to random excitation, harmonic vibration, transient
response, convolution integral, Laplace and Fourier Transform,
Discrete Fourier Transform, Fast Fourier Transform, random
variables, coherence, correlation, auto- and cross-correlation,
power spectral density, transfer function, and modal analysis;
experience using a commercial FFT analyzer. Design project
required. Prerequisite: EGME-4710 Vibrations. (Fee: $100)
EGME-4810
3 hours
Mechanical Engineering Senior Design I–Fa
This is the senior capstone design project for mechanical
engineers. Student teams work independently on a design project
to find a solution consistent with stated specifications using
principles studied in previous courses. Work in this semester
includes writing the proposal and performing background research
and preliminary design. Students conduct a mid-term design
review and end-of-semester oral and written presentation. Projects
are advised by a faculty committee; course includes weekly written
progress reports and meetings with the faculty project advisor.
Prerequisites: EGME-3850 Mechanical Design; EGME-3610
Kinematics and Design of Machines; EGME-3150 Heat Transfer;
EGME-3020 Mechanical Engineering Lab II; and senior status.
(Fee: $100)
EGME-4820
3 hours
Mechanical Engineering Senior Design II–Sp
A continuation of EGME-4810, emphasizing detailed design,
prototyping, troubleshooting, design modifications, project
completion, reporting, and oral presentation. Students submit
written progress reports and attend meetings each week with the
faculty project advisor, conduct an oral presentation, and prepare
the final report. Prerequisite: EGME-4810 Mechanical Engineering
Senior Design I. (Fee: $100)
EGME-4950
1–3 hours
Advanced Topics in Mechanical Engineering–Sp
Selected topics in mechanical engineering at the 4000-level
that expand the depth of existing 3000- and 4000-level courses
or expose the students to advanced concepts not taught in other
courses. Topics may be proposed by the engineering faculty or
students. Prerequisite: instructor’s permission.
English (ENG)
ENG-0900 Composition Workshop–Fa, Sp
1 hour
This course prepares students for university-level, academic
writing by focusing on the rhetorical situation and exposing
students to a wide variety of writing situations for which
appropriate audiences, purposes, genres, stances, and mediums
must be ascertained. The course aids students with various writing
assignments by workshopping drafts in process for composition
and other courses across the curriculum. While the rhetorical
situation and writing process are emphasized, grammar will be
a major focus as well. Corequisites: ENG-1400 Composition; or
permission of instructor.
ENG-1400 Composition–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Designed to assist the student in developing the skills
necessary to meet the demands of typical undergraduate writing
situations. The course emphasizes critical reading, research, and
argumentation, requiring students to apply the writing process,
synthesize and document resources into academic discourse,
incorporate common writing methods (description, analysis,
exposition, and argumentation), and produce effective prose. (Fee:
$25)


EGME-4530 – ENG-1400
ENG-4230 Independent Study in English–Fa, Sp
1–3 hours
Independent study in a selected field for students with special
interests and demonstrated ability.
Entrepreneurship (ENTR)
ENTR-1010 Creative Problem-Solving–Fa, Sp
2 hours
This course prepares students to understand and address two
pressing issues in organizations today: how to recognize and
create new opportunities and how to think more creatively within
workplace environments. Students will be introduced to a number
of tools, concepts, and approaches including human-centered
design, ideation techniques, the importance of embracing
ambiguity, personal responsibility, and the place of risk and failure
in entrepreneurship, creativity, and life. (Fee:$20)
ENTR-1020 Introduction to Entrepreneurship–Fa, Sp
2 hours
This course introduces students to the opportunities and
challenges associated with the creation and management of
startup and small businesses. Students will learn about the Lean
Startup framework, which allows founders to test, advance, and
improve business ideas and meet important milestones. The
course also provides an overview of small business concepts,
including topics such as: how to recognize business opportunities,
types and characteristics of entrepreneurship, the business life
cycle, entrepreneurial economics, intellectual property, product
and service research development and acquisition, and the use of
technology.
ENTR-2030 Entrepreneurial Finance–Sp
2 hours
Entrepreneurial Finance differs from traditional corporate
finance due to the way startups are founded and funded. This
course lays out the financial decision-making process of founders,
owners, and CEOs from  late-stage ventures and covers
financial techniques such as bootstrapping, venture capital, public
grants, and crowd funding, etc. Students will learn capital table
strategy, discover sources and types of venture funding, and
calculate startup venture metrics and valuations.
ENTR-2040 Social Enterprising–Fa, Sp
2 hours
This course uses research and cases from both secular and
faith-based organizations to understand the blending of business
models and mission-focused purposes to solve social problems
and further the Kingdom of God. The student will learn to identify
opportunities, develop blended business approaches, avoid
pitfalls, determine methods to raise capital, and plan a launch of
their enterprise.
ENTR-3010
3 hours
Digital Marketing: Creating Content –Fa, Sp
The rate at which customers shop and source information
online is accelerating at a frenzied pace. Many companies —
ranging from  established corporations — are unsure
how to best engage these content-starved consumers and find
themselves struggling to grow awareness and generate leads.
This course reveals why and how many companies are compelled
to supplement or replace traditional marketing methods with
digital-style engagements and provides an immersive experience
alongside the most common platforms and tactics used in social
media marketing, content creation and automated marketing.
(Fee:$20)
ENTR-3020 Digital Marketing: Brand Advertising–Sp
3 hours
Ensuring brands and products are easily found by customers
requires both inbound and outbound methods backed by a solid
web presence. Choosing the right channels and refining digital
content allows companies to enjoy higher conversion rates while
receiving the best ROI on advertising efforts. This class will
evaluate the different E-commerce Platforms, how to optimize
product information and explore the best SEO methods to ensure
highest deliverability. Advertising through various PPC (pay-per-
click) campaigns then evaluating metrics using assorted analytics
software are also covered in this course. (Fee:$20)
ENG-2020
2 hours
Career Development for the English Major–Sp
Course will orient students to the marketplace value of
an English major. Topics will include skills and personality
assessment, career exploration, and the development of a
theology of vocation.
ENG-2070 Fundamentals of English Grammar–Fa
3 hours
This course is a foundational course for preservice language
arts educators and is a prerequisite for Advanced Grammar.
It covers forms and functions of words, pronoun/antecedent
agreement, subject/verb agreement, and pedagogy.
ENG-2120
3 hours
History of Rhetorical Theory and Literary Criticism–Sp
A study of the rich philosophic heritage of the West, this course
is designed to familiarize students with the writers whose works
have shaped rhetorical theory and led to the literary critical canon.
We will examine three major questions: What are the functions
of rhetoric and literature? What are the intersections between
the two? How do we evaluate each? Featured writers will include
Plato, Aristotle, Augustine, Blair, Grimke, Cady Stanton, Burke,
and Bakhtin. Prerequisite: ENG-1400 Composition.
ENG-2230 Advanced Composition–Fa, Sp
3 hours
An advanced treatment of the composing process, particularly
related to the planning, drafting, revision, and final composition
of essays. Writing workshops and peer evaluations are included.
Prerequisite: ENG-1400 Composition.
ENG-3010 Style and Mechanics for Writers–Fa, Sp, Su[0-9] hours
Students will learn to apply reliable principles to make writing
clear, concise, coherent, and cohesive. (Crosslisted with PWID-
3010 Style and Mechanics for Writers) Prerequisite: ENG-1400
Composition.
ENG-3060 The English Language–Fa
3 hours
Historic treatment of the growth and change in the English
language with some attention to the ideologies implicit in the
development of variant conventions. Prerequisite: ENG-1400
Composition.
ENG-3070 English Grammar–Fa, Sp
3 hours
In this course, students will study the conventions of the
English language, which include the grammar and syntax of
standard English. Students will use Reed and Kellogg traditional
sentence diagrams to analyze and to represent the syntax of
English sentences. The course also includes discussions about
contemporary usage. Required of all majors with English as
a teaching field. Prerequisite for adolescent and young adult
language arts majors only: ENG-2070 Fundamentals of English
Grammar.
ENG-3180 Visual Rhetoric–Fa,Sp
2 hours
In this course, students will practice reading visuals as texts,
as well as producing visuals that serve as effective texts by
balancing ethos, pathos, and logos in ways persuasive to specific
audiences. This course seeks to illuminate connections between
contemporary visual practices and classical rhetorical theory.
ENG-3200 Practicum in Writing Instruction–Sp
2 hours
This course is designed to explore and practice the various
methods and theories essential to the teaching of written
expression. Course content includes discussion of and practice
with the CCSS (Common Core) writing standards, the writing
process, and assessment of student writing.
ENG-3333 Internship–Sp
1–3 hours
Department-approved work-study program for advanced
English majors or minors to receive academic credit for a career
development opportunity in a job related to an English field.
ENG-3550 Writing Center Theory and Training–Fa, Sp
1 hour
Designed to orient students to writing center theory and
practice. Will train students for employment opportunities in the
writing center. Prerequisite: ENG-1400 Composition; permission of
instructor.




ENG-2020 – ENTR-3020
ENTR-3040 Entrepreneurship Practicum–Fa, Sp
1–12 hours
This course will be a practicum for students to gain experience
in a small business or entrepreneurial setting that is appropriate
for their future goals. These experiences will be in the form of
internships, shadowing entrepreneurs, working in a small business
or entrepreneurial firm on significant projects, or in significant
roles, or consulting with these types of firms.
Due to the dynamic nature of opportunities provided by small
business people and entrepreneurs, it can be taken, with the
permission of the lead professor, at any time. In addition, since
each experience is unique, it can be taken more than once for up
to 12 semester hours. Prerequisite: Permission of instructor.
ENTR-3070 Entrepreneurship Accelerator I–Fa, Sp
2 hours
The Entrepreneurship Accelerator gives developing startups
access to mentorship, education, potential investors, and other
support to help them reach higher-growth stages and strong
positioning to claim a share of their target markets. Accelerator
I will pull founders through the process of creating an MVP
(Minimum Viable Product) aimed at specific Total Addressable
Markets (TAMs). Founders will work with faculty and staff
to develop a product roadmap and launch plan. Successful
completion of this segment’s stage-gates will allow the founder to
enroll in ENTR-3080 Entrepreneurship Accelerator II. (Fee: $40)
ENTR-3080 Entrepreneurship Accelerator II–Fa, Sp
2 hours
The Entrepreneurship Accelerator II gives developing startups
access to mentorship, education, potential investors, and other
support to help them reach higher-growth stages and strong
positioning to claim a share of their target markets. Accelerator
II pursues high-growth techniques through industrialization
and paves the way for obtaining seed capital. Course reviews
legal entity types in tandem with business requirements and
investigates how to grow sales through the most suitable channels.
Founders will work with faculty and staff to develop the best
product roadmap and launch plan. Successful completion of the
segment’s stage-gates will allow the founder to enroll in ENTR-
3090 Entrepreneurship Accelerator III. ($Fee: 40).
ENTR-3090 Entrepreneurship Accelerator III–Fa, Sp
2 hours
The Entrepreneurship Accelerator III gives developing startups
access to mentorship, education, potential investors, and other
support to help them reach higher-growth stages and strong
positioning to claim a share of their target markets. Accelerator
III concentrates on the requirements for a successful product/
service launch and establishes a process to obtain venture
capital. Founders will explore and evaluate revenue streams and
identify how to pivot — if needed — after evaluating feedback
from customers, partners and potential investors. Successful
completion of this segment’s stage-gates will allow the founder to
complete the sequence of the Accelerator courses. (Fee:$40)
ENTR-3410 Topics in Entrepreneurship–Fa, Sp, Su
1–3 hours
A variety of courses are covered under this heading on an
experimental basis. This allows the department to meet the
changing needs of the students without formally adding or
dropping courses. (crosslisted with BUS-3410 Topics in Business)
ENTR-3510
3 hours
Entrepreneurship and Small Business Management–Fa
This course will introduce students to business innovation
and entrepreneurship in small and large organizations. The
basics of envisioning, evaluating, starting, and running a brand-
new business and/or a new business unit within an existing
organization will be explored. (crosslisted with MGMT-3510
Entrepreneurship and Small Business Management)
Environmental Science (ENVS)
ENVS-1110
4 hours
Environment: Science, Sustainability, and Stewardship–Sp
An interdisciplinary study of the environment that considers
foundational understanding rooted in science, society, and
economy. We will explore the socio-ecological implications of
human activity, impacts, and responsibility for the environment.
Students from
develop and apply a biblical stewardship ethic. Three lectures and
one two-hour laboratory per week. Crosslisted with GSCI-1110.
(Fee: $100)
ENVS-3100
4 hours
Principles of Geographic Information Systems–Fa
An introduction to the science of geographical information
systems (GIS). Students will study the theory and practice modern
thematic cartography and spatial analysis using GIS. Students
will gain experience with techniques of GPS data collection,
web-based data retrieval, using software (ArcGIS) for data
management, storage and analysis of vector and raster datasets.
Students will conduct a spatial analysis project and prepare a
map product portfolio. This course satisfies the physical science
requirement of the general education requirements. Three one-
hour lectures and one two-hour laboratory per week. Crosslisted
with ESCI-3100 (Fee: $100)
ENVS-3200 Advanced Ecology–Fa
3 hours
An advanced study of fundamental concepts of ecology across
the organizational hierarchy from  globe. Emphasis
will be placed on the topics of biodiversity, biogeography,
biogeochemistry, evolution, and conservation with respect to
a biblical environmental stewardship ethic in the face of global
environmental change. Two hours lecture and one two-hour lab
per week. Course includes a travel study experience to the Indiana
Dunes National Lakeshore. Crosslist with BIO-3200. Prerequisites:
BIO-2600 General Ecology or permission of the instructor. (Fee:
$100)
ENVS-3600 Environmental Ethics–Sp
[0-9] hours
An introductory study of ethical systems that addresses
the relationship and responsibility of humankind toward the
natural world. Emphasis will be upon the biblical environmental
stewardship ethic and its application to contemporary
environmental issues. Three lectures per week. Prerequisites: One
semester of biology; junior status; permission of instructor. (odd
years)
ENVS-4100 Environmental Geology–Fa
4 hours
Application of geology to environmental problems such
as natural resource extraction, water supply, pollution, waste
disposal, landslides, floods, and land use planning. Required
field trip. Includes three lectures and one three-hour lab per week
Prerequisites: GEOL-1110 Introduction to Physical Geology and
junior status. (Fee:$150) (even years)
Earth Science (ESCI)
Except where noted, general education courses are designed
to meet the general education requirements for graduation. These
courses will not count toward graduation requirements for majors
found in the School of Science and Mathematics unless they
are specifically listed in the curriculum requirements for a major.
A student majoring in science or mathematics may take these
courses only as electives. However, any course listed for a science
or mathematics major or minor may also count toward fulfilling
general education requirements.


ENTR-3040 – ENVS-4100
ESCI-2310 Introduction to Oceanography–Sp
4 hours
An introductory survey of the oceans and the processes
that occur in and around them. Major topics will include ocean
currents, coastlines, plate tectonics, marine sediments, waves,
tides, composition of sea water, interaction of the ocean with
the atmosphere, marine life forms, and their habitats. A field trip
will visit a local aquarium. Lecture three times per week and one
laboratory per week. This course satisfies the physical science
requirement of the general education requirements. (Fee: $100)
(odd years)
ESCI-2410 General Meteorology–Sp
4 hours
A survey of basic meteorological principles and weather
systems. Topics covered will include the vertical structure of the
atmosphere, cloud development and precipitation, optical effects
of the atmosphere, wind systems, air masses, fronts, and severe
weather. Labs will be used to develop basic meteorological skills
such as observation of local weather, decoding and interpretation
of meteorological data, and introductory weather forecasting.
Three weekly lectures and one two-hour laboratory per week. This
course satisfies the physical science component of the general
education requirements. (Fee: $100) (even years)
ESCI-2510 Introduction to Astronomy–Fa
4 hours
An introduction to the structure and composition of the universe.
Topics covered will include measurement of celestial objects,
structure of the solar system and galaxy, composition and history
of the universe. Time will be spent in the discussion of various
cosmological models and their implications. The course and lab
will be taught at a level which requires the use of algebra and
trigonometry. Three weekly lectures and one two-hour laboratory
per week. Variations in the laboratory schedule will be made to
accommodate field observations. This course satisfies the physical
science requirement of the general education requirements. (Fee:
$100) (odd years)
ESCI-3100
4 hours
Principles of Geographic Information Systems–Fa
An introduction to the science of geographical information
systems (GIS). Students will study the theory and practice modern
thematic cartography and spatial analysis using GIS. Students
will gain experience with techniques of GPS data collection,
web-based data retrieval, using software (ArcGIS) for data
management, storage and analysis of vector and raster datasets.
Students will conduct a spatial analysis project and prepare a
map product portfolio. This course satisfies the physical science
requirement of the general education requirements. Three one-
hour lectures and one two-hour laboratory per week. Crosslisted
with ENVS-3100 Prerequisite: GMTH-1030 Precalculus or GMTH-
2110 Biostatistics, or permission of instructor. (Fee: $100)
Exercise and Sport Science Education (ESED)
ESED-2900
2 hours
Health and Movement Education for the Young Child–Fa, Sp
An investigation of current trends, methods of instruction, and
curriculum design in health and physical education for primary
(P–5) classrooms, including review of appropriate Ohio models.
Emphasis is given to the importance of nutrition, safety, and
movement education for the young child, including a look at
basic nutritional, health, and safety management, especially in
relationship to childhood illnesses and communicable diseases.
Prerequisite: EDUC-1000 The Education Profession.
Exercise and Sport Science (ESS)
ESS-1350 Introduction to Exercise Science–Fa
2 hours
Orientation to the history, philosophy, and scope of modern
exercise science from a biblical perspective.
ESS-1400 First Aid and Safety Education–Fa, Sp
2 hours
 American Red Cross Standard First Aid and C.P.R. certificate
may be granted at the end of the course. (Fee: $35)
ESS-2380 Motor Learning and Development–Sp
3 hours
A study of the stages in motor development and the factors
affecting the acquisition of motor skills and learning as it relates
to motor skill acquisition. The course provides cognitive and
psychomotor knowledge of fundamental locomotor, non-locomotor,
and manipulative motor skills.
ESS-3800 Sport Psychology–Fa
3 hours
Surveys the concepts and issues related to the human
psyche in the context of sports and from a biblical perspective.
Prerequisite: PYCH-1600 General Psychology, junior status, or
permission of instructor.
ESS-3880
1–3 hours
Special Topics in Exercise and Sport Science
Investigation of special topics in exercise science that have
intrinsic worth and engage student interest. Prerequisite:
permission of instructor.
ESS-3890
5 hours
Human Anatomy and Physiology for the Physical

Educator–Fa
This course is designed to be a study of the structure and
function of the human body from a Christian theistic perspective
with particular emphasis on applications and understanding for
physical educators. Prerequisite: GBIO-1000 Principles of Biology.
(Fee: $25)
ESS-3900 Physiology of Exercise–Sp
3 hours
A study of the physiological processes of the body and how
they are affected by and adapt to varying exercise conditions.
Prerequisite: GBIO-2010 Human Anatomy and Physiology I or
ESS-3890 Human Anatomy and Physiology for the Physical
Educator. (Fee: $25)
ESS-3920 Biomechanics–Fa, Sp
3 hours
The study of the mechanics of human movement and their
applications to sports performance and rehabilitation. (Fee: $25)
ESS-3940 Structural Kinesiology–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Application of musculoskeletal anatomy and biomechanics to
movement analysis, exercise prescription, and clinical conditions.
Prerequisites: GBIO-2010 Human Anatomy and Physiology I
or ESS-3890 Human Anatomy and Physiology for the Physical
Educator. (Fee: $25)
ESS-4850
1–3 hours
Independent Study in Exercise and Sport Science–Fa, Sp
Independent study in the area of exercise and sport science.
Prerequisite: Departmental approval is required.
Exercise and Sport Science Elective (ESSE)
ESSE-3100 Strength and Conditioning–Fa, Sp
3 hours
This course is designed to provide a comprehensive overview
of strength and conditioning. Emphasis is placed on exercise
selection and technique, program design, and testing and
evaluation. Prerequisites: GBIO-1000 Principles of Biology,
BIO-1115 Biology I: Cell Biology, or permission of the instructor.
(Fee:$15)
ESSE-4850 Independent Study in Sport Ministry
1–3 hours
Independent study in the area of Sport Ministry by students
pursuing the Sport Ministry minor. Prerequisites: Departmental
approval is required.
Exercise Science (EXSC)
EXSC-2000 Worksite Observation–Fa, Sp, Su
0 hours
Students are required to arrange a field experience for five
consecutive full days (minimum of 30 contact hours) in an exercise
science work setting approved by their advisor where they can
observe and participate in exercise science worksite activities.
Prerequisites: Departmental approval and a follow-up report are
required. Credit/no credit.




ESCI-2310 – EXSC-2000
EXSC-3010 Practium I–Fa, Sp
1 hour
This practicum is a minimum of 30 contact hours assisting
or instructing on-campus experiences such as group aerobics,
strength conditioning, workout supervision and personal training.
Departmental approval is required. Credit/No Credit. Prerequisite:
EXSC-2000 Worksite Observation.
EXSC-3020 Practicum II–Fa, Sp
1 hour
This practicum is a minimum of 30 contact hours and is
intended to provide a hands-on experience in either a sports
enhancement facility, hospital cardiac rehabilitation center, or
similar facility. Departmental approval is required. Credit/No Credit.
Prerequisite: EXSC-2000 Worksite Observation.
EXSC-3810
3 hours
Organization and Administration of Exercise Science–Fa
This course is designed to provide the knowledge and begin to
develop the skills and abilities necessary to organize, administer,
manage, promote, and deliver quality health/fitness programs
effectively, safely, and efficiently, meeting the needs and desires
of both the client and the employer. Prerequisites: Junior status or
permission of the instructor.
EXSC-3860 Basic Exercise Testing–Fa
4 hours
This course includes guidelines and techniques of evaluation
for basic fitness testing with emphasis on aerobic capacity,
flexibility, strength, and body composition. Basic concepts of EKG
interpretation, including electrode placement, arrhythmia, and
electrophysiology, are introduced. The content is consistent with
the skills necessary to prepare students for the American College
of Sports Medicine certified exercise physiologist certification.
Prerequisite: ESS-3900 Physiology of Exercise; GMTH-1020
College Algebra. (Fee:$75)
EXSC-3870 Basic Exercise Prescription–Sp
4 hours
This course stresses the scientific foundations of conditioning
with specific attention to exercise programming using the
components of frequency, duration, intensity, mode, and
progression, for apparently healthy individuals. The content
is consistent with the skills necessary to prepare students for
the American College of Sports Medicine certified exercise
physiologist certification. Prerequisite: EXSC-3860 Basic Exercise
Testing. (Fee:$75)
EXSC-4600 Research Methods–Sp
3 hours
Overview of the principles of research methodology, with an
emphasis on developing skills in evaluating and interpreting
research literature and fostering an appreciation for the
importance of quality research in allied health and exercise
science. Prerequisite: Junior status or permission of the instructor.
EXSC-4700 Senior Research–Fa
3 hours
Students will work with a faculty mentor to conduct a research
project, write a paper, and present the project for peers and
faculty. The opportunity to present at conferences and/or publish
the paper exists for those interested. Prerequisite: EXSC-4600
Research Methods. (Fee: $35)
EXSC-4850
1–3 hours
Independent Study in Exercise Science–Fa, Sp
Independent study in the area of exercise science by students
pursuing the exercise science major. Prerequisite: Departmental
approval is required.
EXSC-4880
3 hours
Exercise Testing and Prescription for Special Populations–Fa
This course will prepare exercise science students to do
exercise testing and prescriptions for individuals who are either
acutely or chronically distinct from the “apparently not at risk” adult
population. These include individuals who are children, elderly, or
pregnant, as well as those who have acute or chronic illness or
disease conditions that might affect the testing protocol or details
of the exercise prescription. Prerequisites: EXSC-3860 Basic
Exercise Testing; EXSC-3870 Basic Exercise Prescription. (Fee:
$75)
EXSC-4990 Internship in Exercise Science–Fa, Sp  9–12 hours
This is an actual work experience in an exercise science setting
for a minimum of 300 work hours for 9 credit hours and up to
400 work hours for 12 credit hours with a minimum of 30 work
hours per week. Capstone course for exercise science major.
Prerequisite: Senior status and departmental approval is required.
Film (FILM)
FILM-2350 Christian Motifs in Film–Fa
[0-9] hours
Study of depictions of Christ and Christ-figures as well as
other Christian motifs in film. This course will provide a detailed
introduction to the characteristics of the Christ-figure and its
most common manifestations in film. The course will focus on
viewing and evaluating films containing Christian motifs such as
redemption, sacrifice, sin, and faith. This course may be used to
satisfy the general education humanities elective requirement.
Finance (FIN)
FIN-1710 Personal Finance–Fa, Sp
3 hours
This course is designed to educate and inform the
undergraduate student about personal finance, with the view
toward practical application, both currently and upon graduation.
The course integrates principles of personal finance with biblical
principles. Topics include: biblical stewardship, work, financial
planning, budgeting, giving, taxation, use of credit, investments,
asset protection, retirement and estate planning. (This course is a
general elective course.)
FIN-2730 Church Business Administration
3 hours
A study of the principles and procedures of the financial
management of the local church organization. (Credit not
applicable to meet business elective requirements.).
FIN-3310 Money and Financial Markets–Sp
3 hours
This course will introduce the student to monetary economics
and how the monetary system impacts the whole complex of
financial markets. Building on the foundation of macroeconomics,
the course will include detailed analysis of financial markets and
institutions as well as monetary theory. The institution of central
banking and its influence on money and financial markets will be
specifically evaluated. Prerequisite: ECON-2340 Macroeconomics
or permission of instructor. Crosslisted with ECON-3310.
FIN-3410 Topics in Finance–Fa, Sp, Su
1–3 hours
A variety of topics are covered under this heading on an
experimental basis. This allows the department to meet the
changing needs of the students without formally adding or
dropping courses.
FIN-3710 Principles of Finance–Fa, Sp
3 hours
A study of the theoretical and practical aspects of financial
decision-making. Topics include financial statement analysis,
financial markets, risk and return, determinants of interest
rates, time value of money, valuation of financial assets, cost
of capital and capital budgeting, dividends, multi-national
financial management, and financial planning and forecasting.
Prerequisites: ACCT-2110 Principles of Accounting I; BUS-2150
Statistics for Business.
FIN-3730 Investments–Sp
3 hours
A study of the various types of investments including
stocks, bonds, mutual funds, commercial, paper, options, and
commodities. Particular emphasis is given to return and risk
in developing investment strategies. Prerequisite: FIN-3710
Principles of Finance. (Fee $50)
FIN-3750 International Finance–Sp
3 hours
Discussion and analysis of financial management within a
global context. Topics include international financial markets,
foreign exchange rates and risk, exchange risk management, and
other financial management issues relative to the multinational
firm. Prerequisite: FIN-3710 Principles of Finance


EXSC-3010 – FIN-3750
FIN-3760 Financial Planning–Fa
3 hours
This course provides an introduction to the field of personal
financial planning. The course includes an overview of
investments, income taxation, insurance, estate planning,
retirement planning, and employee benefits. Prerequisite: FIN-
3710 Principles of Finance
FIN-3770
3 hours
Security Analysis and Portfolio Management–Fa
The theory and practice of security analysis techniques and
portfolio management objectives. Students research securities in
order to make informed buy/sell recommendations and evaluate
security and portfolio performance with a particular emphasis on
common stocks. Students manage a funded portfolio. Prerequisite:
FIN-3730 Investments. (Fee: $20)
FIN-4715 Applied Portfolio Management–Fa, Sp
1 hour
An in-depth application of investment theory and techniques.
Students research securities in order to make informed by/sell
recommendations and evaluate security and portfolio performance
with a particular emphasis on common stocks. Students manage
a funded portfolio. Repeatable up to three times. Prerequisite or
Corequisite: FIN-3730 Investments. (Fee: $20)
FIN-4750 Financial Institution Management–Fa
3 hours
This course takes an in-depth look at financial institution
management and covers topics such as: types of financial
institutions, asset and liability management, risks faced by
financial institutions, ways of dealing with those risks, and the
regulatory environment in which these institutions operate.
Prerequisite: FIN-3710 Principles of Finance. (Fee: $20)
FIN-4770 Advanced Financial Management–Sp
3 hours
An in-depth analysis of topics of concern to financial managers
of modern corporations. Topics include capital budgeting, financial
forecasting, working capital management, and valuation of merger
and acquisition candidates. Prerequisite: FIN-3710 Principles of
Finance.
Forensic Science (FORS)
FORS-1500 Introducation to Forensic Science–Sp
3 hours
An introduction to the areas of modern forensic science, with
an emphasis on criminalistics and forensic science as a science.
Areas to be covered include the nature of science, recognition and
collection of evidence, crime scene analysis, bloodstain pattern
analysis, medicolegal death investigation, forensic anthropology,
biological evidence, DNA typing, forensic toxicology, drug
analysis, fingerprint analysis, firearm and tool mark analysis, trace
evidence, questioned documents, and arson and fire investigation.
Corequisites: CHEM-1110 General Chemistry I, BIO-1115 Biology
I: Cell Biology.
FORS-3400 Advanced Forensic Chemistry–Sp
4 hours
An advanced study of the application of analytical chemistry
to forensic analysis. A detailed study of best practices for quality
control and error analysis in forensic chemistry, modern DNA
typing with an emphasis on sample preparation and interpretation
of results, instrumental methods in fiber and glass trace analysis,
extraction and analysis of accelerants in fire investigation, drug
toxicology and metabolism, and seized drug identification with
an emphasis on acid/base extraction of samples and analysis
by immunoassay, LCMS, and GCMS. Three lectures and one
three-hour lab per week. Prerequisites: CRJU-1310 Introduction
to Criminal Justice; FORS-1500 Introduction to Forensic
Science; BIO-1115 Biology I: Cell Biology. Co-requisites: CHEM-
2220 Analytical Chemistry II; CHEM-3510 Organic Chemistry I.
Crosslisted with CHEM-3400 (Fee: $100) (even years)
FORS-4800 Forensic Science Capstone–Fa, Sp
1 hour
Capstone course for the forensic science major. Students will
research a specific forensic procedure and give a brief explanation
of it. This will be followed by a series of detailed questions from a
panel of faculty members, designed to simulate the examination
of an expert witness. Students will be graded on their knowledge
and professional presentation. Corequisite: FORS-3400 Forensic
Science.
FORS-4900 Forensic Science Project–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Students will gain experience in forensic science through a
special, faculty-supervised project undertaken on campus. A
technical report detailing the skills utilized and knowledge gained
and the instructor’s evaluation will be the basis for successful
completion. Prerequisites: CHEM-2220 Analytical Chemistry
II; FORS-1500 Introduction to Forensic Science; FORS-3400
Forensic Science (recommended). (Fee: $100)
FORS-4910 Forensic Science Internship–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Students will gain experience in forensic science through time
at a departmentally approved work environment. A technical
report detailing the skills utilized and knowledge gained and a
supervisor’s evaluation will be the basis for successful completion.
Prerequisites: CHEM-2220 Analytical Chemistry II; FORS-1500
Introduction to Forensic Science; FORS-3400 Forensic Science
(recommended).
French (FREN)
FREN-1910
4 hours
Elementary French I–Fa
Development of basic skills in reading, writing, speaking, and
listening in French, along with an introduction to French culture.
FREN-1920
4 hours
Elementary French II–Sp
Development of basic skills in reading, writing, speaking, and
listening in French, along with an introduction to French culture.
Prerequisite: FREN-1910 Elementary French I; or equivalent or
placement test.
FREN-2910 Intermediate French I–Fa
4 hours
Development of all four language skills through grammar review,
composition, conversation and readings in French literature and
culture. Prerequisite: FREN-1920 Elementary French II.
FREN-2920 Intermediate French II–Sp
3 hours
Development of all four language skills through grammar review,
composition, conversation and readings in French literature and
culture. Prerequisites: FREN-1920 Elementary French II; FREN-
2910 Intermediate French I; instructor’s approval or placement by
exam.
FREN-3910 French Conversation–Fa
3 hours
Designed to increase the student’s aural comprehension and
oral communication in French. Attention given to pronunciation,
vocabulary building, communication strategies, and effective
cross-cultural communication. Prerequisite: FREN-2920
Intermediate French II; instructor’s approval or placement by
exam.
FREN-3920 Contemporary French Culture–Sp
3 hours
Exploration of beliefs, behaviors, and values of Francophone
cultures through a comparative approach that provides a
framework for describing France and the French in relation to
others and themselves. Prerequisite: FREN-2920 Intermediate
French II; instructor’s approval or placement by exam. (odd years)
FREN-3930 Survey of French Literature–Sp
3 hours
This course focuses on a sampling of French literature
selections set in historical context. The course includes readings
from major French and Francophone authors. Students will gain
knowledge of the literature, analyze the techniques used, and gain
cultural background and understanding. Prerequisite: FREN-2920
Contemporary French Culture or permission of instructor. (even
years)




FIN-3760 – FREN-3930
FREN-3940 Special Topics in French–Fa, Sp, Su
1–3 hours
This course is offered as an intensive and independent study in
a particular area of the French language, literature, or culture for
individual students who demonstrate special interests and ability.
Prerequisite: FREN-2920 Intermediate French II
General Biology (GBIO)
Except where noted, general education courses are designed
to meet the general education requirements for graduation. These
courses will not count toward graduation requirements for majors
found in the School of Science and Mathematics unless they
are specifically listed in the curriculum requirements for a major.
A student majoring in science or mathematics may take these
courses only as electives. However, any course listed for a science
or mathematics major or minor may also count toward fulfilling
general education requirements.
GBIO-1000 Principles of Biology–Fa, Sp, Su
3.5 hours
Emphasizes basic life processes and the principles by
which these processes operate at the ecological, organismic,
and cellular levels of organization with emphasis on human
responsibility toward life at all levels. Three lectures each week
and one two-hour, bi-weekly laboratory. (Fee: $50)
GBIO-1010 Basics of the Cell–Fa
1 hour
Foundational principles of the cell will be covered, with a focus
on the following topics: the cell membrane; cellular organelles;
chromosome structure, DNA replication, transcription and
translation; the cell cycle and cellular division (mitosis and
meiosis); and Mendelian genetics. The course is designed to fulfill
the prerequisite requirement for GBIO-2010 Human Anatomy and
Physiology.
GBIO-1100 Pre-Health Professional Development I–Sp 1 hour
This course is designed to introduce pre-health professions
students to health-related fields (including medicine, dentistry,
optometry, and veterinary medicine) and provide guidance for
the academic/professional preparation required for entrance into
these graduate programs. Students are introduced to the role
of Cedarville’s pre-health professions committee, are given the
opportunity to interact with CU alumni medical professionals, and
are exposed to a variety of medical professions and programs.
One meeting per week. Prerequisite: Interest or intention of
applying to medical, dental, optometry, or veterinary school, or
instructor’s permission.
GBIO-2010 Human Anatomy and Physiology I–Sp
4 hours
Survey of the anatomy and physiology of the human body
with an emphasis on cell and human tissues and on the skeletal,
muscular, nervous, and endocrine systems. Three lectures and
one laboratory experience per week. Prerequisite: One semester
of biology; or permission of the instructor. (Fee: $75)
GBIO-2015 Human Anatomy and Physiology II–Fa
4 hours
Survey of the anatomy and physiology of the human body with
an emphasis on the cardiovascular, respiratory, immune, digestive,
urinary, and reproductive systems. Three lectures and one two
hour laboratory per week. Prerequisites: GBIO-2010 Human
Anatomy and Physiology I. (Fee: $75)
GBIO-2210 Principles of Microbiology–Fa
4 hours
A study of the characteristics, culture, and control of bacteria,
viruses, and fungi. A major emphasis is placed on microorganisms
and disease. Laboratory techniques are emphasized. Three
lectures plus one lab each week. Corequisites or Prerequisites:
CHEM-1000 Principles of Chemistry; GBIO-1010 Basic of the Cell
or BIO-1115 Biology I: Cell Biology. (Fee: $100)
GBIO-3100 Pre-Health Professional Development II–Fa 1 hour
This course is designed to help students prepare for their
upcoming medical, dental, or optometry school application. As
part of the course, students draft personal statements, discuss
and categorize their extracurricular activities, consider secondary
application questions, create exam study plans (MCAT/DAT/
OAT), and practice interviewing skills. One meeting per week.
Additionally, students attend the 3-day annual Global Missions
Health Conference in Louisville, KY. Prerequisite: GBIO-1100
Pre-Health Professional Development I, and junior/senior status
with the intention of applying to medical, dental, or optometry
school during the upcoming application period; or instructor’s
permission. (Fee: $100)
GBIO-3350 Principles of Immunology–Sp
3 hours
Overview of the human immune system, including study
of the innate and adaptive immune systems, the mechanics
of an immune response, antibodies and antigens, and
immunopathology. This course is designed for pre–pharmacy and
non-biology major pre–medical students. Three lectures per week.
Prerequisite: BIO-1115 Biology I: Cell Biology.
Geography (GEO)
GEO-3040
3 hours
History and Politics of the British Isles and Canada–Sp
This course examines three countries: the United Kingdom,
the Republic of Ireland, and Canada. After an extensive topical
history along with a discussion of major prime ministers
who served in the 19th and 20th centuries, this course also
investigates contemporary issues including foreign policy, recent
political debates, secessionist problems in Scotland and Quebec,
membership in the European Union, and the ongoing structural
changes to government. Crosslisted as HIST, INTL, and POLS.
(odd years)
GEO-3080 History of Russia and Eastern Europe–Fa
3 hours
The course will cover not only Soviet history but also major
events of Russian history up to the Bolshevik Revolution. Soviet
history will be studied in detail, with attention given to the
development of non-Russian peoples in the empire. The political,
economic, social, and foreign policy aspects of Soviet history will
all be covered, emphasizing Perestroika and the Soviet collapse.
Crosslisted as GEO, HIST, INTL, or POLS (even years)
GEO-3200 History and Politics of Latin America–Fa
3 hours
Analysis of the major historical, political, geographical, social,
and diplomatic developments that have shaped contemporary
Latin America. Crosslisted as GEO, HIST, INTL, or POLS. (odd
years)
GEO-3210 History and Politics of East Asia–Sp
3 hours
This course provides an overview of the major historical,
political, economic, and social developments of China (Taiwan),
Japan, and the two Koreas (South Korea and North Korea). May
be credited to geography, history, international studies, or political
science. Crosslisted as GEO, HIST, INTL, or POLS. (even years)
GEO-3220 History and Politics of the Middle East–Sp
3 hours
Analysis of the major historical, political, geographical, and
social forces, such as religion and nationalism, that have shaped
the contemporary Middle Eastern states. Crosslisted as GEO,
HIST, INTL, or POLS.
GEO-3230 History and Politics of Western Europe–Sp
3 hours
This course will cover the development of Western European
history and politics from  the
present. Concentration will be on the great European powers,
but will include the smaller states. The political, economic, and
social histories of the nations of Europe will be covered, as well as
several macro-European issues. Crosslisted as GEO, HIST, INTL,
or POLS. (even years)


FREN-3940 – GEO-3230
GEO-3510
3 hours
World Regional Geography: Western Hemisphere–Fa
Spatial survey of various regions in the western hemisphere
with an emphasis on the cultural, economic, and political
developments in relation to the geographical environment.
GEO-3520
3 hours
World Regional Geography: Eastern Hemisphere–Sp
Survey of various regions in the eastern hemisphere with an
emphasis on the cultural, economic, and political developments in
relation to the geographical environment.
GEO-4440 Special Topics: Geography
1–3 hours
Investigation of specific topics in Social Science and History
that have intrinsic worth and engage student interest.
GEO-4920
1–3 hours
Independent Study in Geography
Provides the means whereby gifted and interested students
may explore, in a more in-depth and intensive manner, general
information acquired in the major courses. Further, independent
study provides a logical way to complete required hours not
obtained in normal sequencing. Prerequisite: Permission of the
instructor.
Geology (GEOL)
Except where noted, general education courses are designed
to meet the general education requirements for graduation. These
courses will not count toward graduation requirements for majors
found in the School of Science and Mathematics unless they
are specifically listed in the curriculum requirements for a major.
A student majoring in science or mathematics may take these
courses only as electives. However, any course listed for a science
or mathematics major or minor may also count toward fulfilling
general education requirements.
GEOL-1110 Introduction to Physical Geology–Fa
4 hours
An introductory study of the earth and its geological processes,
including various alternative interpretations of earth history.
Laboratory exercises will complement the lecture material and
will include local field trips. Three weekly lectures and one weekly
laboratory experience. This course satisfies the physical science
requirement of the general education requirements. (Fee: $150)
GEOL-1120 Historical Geology–Sp
4 hours
The earth’s geological history from  the present.
Topics of study include plate tectonics, biological evolution and
the meaning of the fossil record, correlation, dating methods,
and alternative views of earth history. Required field trips will
study local fossils. Three lectures and one laboratory per week.
Prerequisite: GEOL-1110 Introduction to Physical Geology. (Fee:
$150)
GEOL-2030
3.5 hours
Geology of the National Parks for Geology Majors–Su
This course will explore the geology of the national parks and
surrounding areas in specific regions of the United States. It is
a two week travel study course. Trip locations may vary from
year to year. Six or more major areas will be explored on each
trip. Students will be expected to complete a photographic atlas
with appropriate geological descriptions of each stop and a term
paper describing a particular feature of interest at one of the sites
visited. Special emphasis will be placed on how geologic history is
interpreted and placed into biblical and conventional frameworks.
Students will learn how to make geological observations and take
field notes. It is necessary for students to be in good physical
shape for occasional hiking in rough terrain and at high altitudes,
although requirements can be modified for students unable to do
so. Special equipment may be required. Prerequisite: Geology
major and at least one previous GEOL course. (Fee: will vary
from  cover lodging, car rental, gas
and other expenses. Transportation to and from the trip starting
location and food expenses will be covered by the students.)
GEOL-2100 Mineralogy–Fa
4 hours
The student will study the occurrence, associations,
characteristics, and crystal chemistry of common minerals.
Laboratory work will emphasize identification and recognition
of minerals. Prerequisites: GEOL-1110 Introduction to Physical
Geology; CHEM-1110 General Chemistry I (corequisite). (Fee:
$150) (even years)
GEOL-2810 Geology Field Work and Research–Su  1–4 hours
This course gives a student an opportunity to work alongside an
active geologist in the field and/or the laboratory. The student must
get approval from his advisor and submit a written description
of the work to be performed before the experience begins. The
student must submit notes and a summary of the work completed
when the experience is over. Hours are variable depending on the
length of the experience and the work completed. Prerequisites:
sophomore geology major and advisor approval of the proposal.
GEOL-3100 Geomorphology–Sp
4 hours
The student will study the formation, development, and
denudation of the earth’s surface features as a function of rates,
processes, and time. Landform analysis will be completed with
topographic maps, aerial photographs, and stereo photographs.
Prerequisites: GEOL-1110 Introduction to Physical Geology;
GEOL-1120 Historical Geology. (Fee: $150) (even years)
GEOL-3200 Invertebrate Paleontology–Fa
4 hours
Many aspects of the fossil record will be studied including
preservation, variation, and identification of fossils. Uses of
invertebrate fossils including biostratigraphy, paleoecology, and
biogeography will be discussed. Various evolutionary concepts
will be presented, including baraminology. Laboratory experiences
will include required field trips and identification and recognition
of North American fossil species. Prerequisites: BIO-1115 Biology
I: Cell Biology; GEOL-1120 Historical Geology. (Fee: $150) (odd
years)
GEOL-3300 Petrology–Sp
4 hours
Students will study the occurrence and origin of sedimentary,
igneous, and metamorphic rocks and learn how to identify them.
Required field trip. Prerequisite: GEOL-2100 Mineralogy; CHEM-
1120 General Chemistry II (corequisite). (Fee: $500) (even years)
GEOL-3400 Structural Geology–Fa
4 hours
Mechanics of rock deformation and the study of various
structures in all types of rocks. Required field trip. Prerequisite:
GEOL-3300 Petrology; GEOL-3100 Geomorphology and PHYS-
2120 General Physics II (corequisites). (Fee:$150) (odd years)
GEOL-3600 Readings in Geology–Fa
1 hour
Students will read and discuss a current text or series of papers.
The purpose is to help the student become more familiar with the
geological research and literature. Part of the course requirements
may include attending a national or regional GSA conference.
Course may be taken up to three times for credit. Prerequisite:
GEOL-1120 Historical Geology. (Fee:$150)
GEOL-3800
3 hours
Philosophy of Science and Research Methods in Geology–Sp
By its nature, geological research and its resultant
interpretations are heavily paradigm-driven. This course will
examine the scientific method and study the development of
various scientific paradigms, especially those within geology.
Students will learn productive ways to integrate their faith with
science and how to apply that to a research method that arrives
at conclusions without compromising data. The merits of various
models of earth history will be critiqued. Prerequisite: GEOL-1120
Historical Geology; 16 hours of geology courses and junior status.




GEO-3510 – GEOL-3800
GER- 2820 Intermediate German II
3 hours
Development of all four language skills through grammar review,
composition, conversation, and readings in German literature
and culture. Prerequisite: GER-2810 Intermediate German I or
equivalent.
GER-3800 Special Topics in German–Fa, Sp
1–3 hours
Topic chosen by the student and professor, based upon need
and interests. Prerequisite: GER-2820 Intermediate German II or
equivalent.
GER-3810 German Conversation and Composition–Sp
3 hours
Students will focus on the productive skills of the German
language, speaking and writing. Oral practice in German through
speeches and oral reports, along with a review of pronunciation,
will provide emphasis on speaking skills. Written versions of
speeches and reports, along with a review of grammar, will
provide emphasis on writing skills. Prerequisite: GER-2820
Intermediate German II or equivalent. (even years)
GER-3820 Germanic History and Culture–Sp
3 hours
This course is designed to introduce students to the history and
culture of Central Europe, specifically the region where German
is the native language of the inhabitants and where present-day
Germany, Austria and Switzerland are located. Students will
also learn how Germanic History influenced and played a role in
establishing modern-day western cultural norms. Course taught in
English. (odd years).
GER-3830 Survey of German Literature–Fa
3 hours
A survey of German literature from the Middle Ages through
the 20th century designed to provide the student with an
understanding of the literature and its reflection of the culture.
Readings in German and English. Prerequisite: GER-2820
Intermediate German or equivalent.
General Mathematics (GMTH)
Except where noted, general education courses are designed
to meet the general education requirements for graduation. These
courses will not count toward graduation requirements for majors
found in the School of Science and Mathematics unless they
are specifically listed in the curriculum requirements for a major.
A student majoring in science or mathematics may take these
courses only as electives. However, any course listed for a science
or mathematics major or minor may also count toward fulfilling
general education requirements.
GMTH-0900 Intermediate Algebra–Fa, Sp
2 hours
Review of algebraic principles, which are then extended
to the solution of polynomial equations, systems of linear
equations, rational and radical equations, functional notation,
exponential functions, and logarithmic functions with emphasis
on computational proficiency. This course is designed to provide
the student the opportunity to satisfy the mathematics proficiency
requirement. May not be applied toward the 128 semester hours
needed for graduation nor toward the science and mathematics
quantitative course General Education requirement.
GMTH-1010 Introduction to Mathematics–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Introduction to mathematical concepts including voting theory,
apportionment and fair division, models of population growth, and
graph theory. Prerequisite: Proficiency in mathematics.
GMTH-1020 College Algebra–Fa, Sp, Su
3 hours
Introduction to methods of algebraic analysis. Includes (but
may not be limited to) many topics of intermediate algebra: the
field axioms, linear functions, inequalities, systems of equations,
determinants, and quadratic functions. This course, in conjunction
with GMTH-1030 Precalculus, is designed to prepare the student
for calculus. Prerequisite: Proficiency in mathematics; two years of
high school mathematics; or permission of instructor.
GEOL-4100 Environmental Geology–Fa
4 hours
Application of geology to environmental problems such
as natural resource extraction, water supply, pollution, waste
disposal, landslides, floods, and land use planning. Required
field trip. Includes three lectures and one three-hour lab per week
Prerequisites: GEOL-1110 Introduction to Physical Geology and
junior status. (Fee:$150) (even years)
GEOL-4200 Stratigraphy and Sedimentology–Sp
5 hours
The student will be introduced to principles of sedimentary
rock correlation and structure. Emphasis will be placed on how
to interpret past rates and processes using clues gained from
sedimentary rocks. Required field trip(s). Prerequisite: GEOL-1120
Historical Geology; GEOL-3300 Petrology. (Fee: $500) (odd years)
GEOL-4400 Summer Field Camp–Su
6 hours
Five weeks of geologic mapping and problem solving in
structural geology and stratigraphy. Selected course must
be approved by the dean (the course will be sponsored by
another institution). The course will typically be taken following
the student’s junior or senior year. Prerequisites: GEOL-3100
Geomorphology; GEOL-3300 Petrology; GEOL-3400 Structural
Geology; and GEOL-4200 Stratigraphy and Sedimentology.
GEOL-4700 Professional Geologist Exam Prep–Sp
1 hour
A course for reviewing geologic topics in preparation for
taking the ASBOG geology-proficiency assessment examination.
The review and assessment exam also serves preparation for
taking many states’ Professional Geologist registration exam.
Prerequisite: Senior status in geology/geoscience.
GEOL-4800 Senior Project–Fa, Sp
1 hour
A capstone project including geological research, writing,
and presentation of results. To be completed during one of the
student’s last two semesters of coursework. Course may be taken
up to 2 times. Prerequisite: senior status; GEOL-3800 Philosophy
of Science and Research Methods in Geology. (Fee: $100)
GEOL-4830 Research in Geology–Fa, Sp
2–3 hours
Investigation of a geologic research project and its culmination
in a scholarly research report (oral and/or written). Submission and
approval of a research proposal must precede registration. May be
repeated once for credit. Prerequisites: Completion of 16 hours in
geology; junior status; and permission of instructor. (Fee:$200)
GEOL-4880 Topics in Geology–Fa, Sp
1–3 hours
Topics of special geological interest that are not in the existing
curriculum are selected by the faculty. The topic should provide a
logical extension of the student’s academic plan and enhance the
student’s educational experience. Prerequisite: Completion of 16
hours in geology; junior status; and permission of instructor.
GEOL-4900 Independent Study in Geology–Fa, Sp  1–3 hours
Supervised independent study of a particular geologic
phenomenon. Submission and approval of a research proposal
must precede registration. Prerequisite: Major in geology; approval
of research proposal.
German (GER)
GER-1810 Elementary German I–Fa
4 hours
Development of basic skills in reading, writing, speaking, and
listening in German, along with an introduction to German culture.
GER-1820 Elementary German II–Sp
4 hours
Development of basic skills in reading, writing, speaking, and
listening in German, along with an introduction to German culture.
Prerequisite: GER-1810 Elementary German I; or equivalent or
placement test.
GER-2810 Intermediate German I
4 hours
Development of all four language skills through grammar
review, composition, conversation, and readings in German
literature and culture. Prerequisite: GER-1820 Elementary German
II or equivalent.


GEOL-4100 – GMTH-1020
GMTH-1030 Precalculus–Fa, Sp
4 hours
Introduction to the principles of trigonometry and some
advanced topics in algebra. Coverage includes, but may not be
limited to, exponential, logarithmic, trigonometric, and circular
functions, triangle problems, and vectors. This course, in
conjunction with GMTH-1020 College Algebra, is designed to
help prepare the student for calculus. Prerequisites: Proficiency
in mathematics; GMTH-1020 College Algebra or equivalent; or
permission of instructor.
GMTH-1040
3 hours
Calculus for Business/Social Science–Fa, Sp
Introduction to the concepts of differential and integral calculus
for students of business. Numerous applications from these areas
will be considered. Does not apply toward major in mathematics.
Prerequisite: Proficiency in mathematics.
GMTH-2110 Introduction to Biostatistics–Fa,Sp
3 hours
An introduction to statistical methods that are of particular
interest to biologists for experimental design and interpretation.
Prerequisites: BIO-1115 Biology I: Cell Biology or MATH-1700
Calculus & Dynamical Systems for Life Sciences or MATH-1710
Calculus I.
GMTH-3010 Proof and Mathematical Modeling–Fa
3 hours
Proof by contradiction, contrapositive, and induction will be
explored along with direct proof in the verification of conjectures
and other mathematical propositions. Additionally, the formulation
of discrete, statistical, and algebraic mathematical models, along
with their use in solving problems, will be studied. Appropriate
educational technology, including graphing calculators,
spreadsheets, and geometric manipulation software will be
used throughout. Does not count toward the BA or BS majors
in mathematics or the BA in integrated mathematics education.
Prerequisites: EDUC-2800 Principles of Mathematics II; GMTH-
1020 College Algebra.
GMTH-3100 Theory of Interest–Sp
4 hours
This course is an introduction to the fundamental concepts
of financial mathematics and how these concepts are applied
in calculating present and future values for various streams of
cash flows. Applications to annuities, loans, stocks, and bonds
are covered. The learning outcomes of this course match those
specified by the Society of Actuaries for candidates taking Exam
FM. Prerequisites: MATH-1720 Calculus II; corequisite: FIN-3710
Principles of Finance. (even years)
General Music (GMUS)
GMUS-1000 Music Philosophy and Aesthetics–Fa
1 hour
Philosophical and scriptural foundation for the Christian
concepts of musical creativity, musical worship, and stewardship.
Understanding the unique teacher-student relationship in music.
A first attempt at codifying a coherent, personal, Christian
philosophy of music.
GMUS-1030 Recital and Program Attendance–Fa, Sp
0 hours
Music majors and minors must attend a prescribed number
of programs and recitals each semester. Majors must enroll
each semester. For a music minor, students must enroll for two
consecutive semesters.
GMUS-4980 Special Topics: General Music–Fa, Sp 1–3 hours
Study of selected topics in music.
General Science (GSCI)
Except where noted, general education courses are designed
to meet the general education requirements for graduation. These
courses will not count toward graduation requirements for majors
found in the School of Science and Mathematics unless they
are specifically listed in the curriculum requirements for a major.
A student majoring in science or mathematics may take these
courses only as electives. However, any course listed for a science
or mathematics major or minor may also count toward fulfilling
general education requirements.
GSCI-1010 Principles of Earth Science–Fa, Sp
3.5 hours
A survey of the sciences of geology, oceanography, and
meteorology. Major lecture topics include discussion of earth’s
geological history, minerals, rocks, dating, plate tectonics, glaciers,
volcanoes, ocean currents, marine life, waves, the atmosphere,
and weather systems. When appropriate, contrasting views of
these subjects will be examined. Laboratory experiences include
field trips to areas of local geological interest. Lecture three times
per week and laboratory on alternate weeks. Satisfies the physical
science requirement of the general education requirements. (Fee:
$75)
GSCI-1020 Principles of Physical Science–Fa, Sp
3.5 hours
A survey of the sciences of physics, chemistry, and astronomy.
Major lecture topics include motion, force, energy, heat, waves,
electricity, optics, quantum effects, periodic table, chemical bonds,
chemical reactions, astronomical measurements, and the origin
of the universe. Content of this course will be related to social and
philosophical issues to emphasize a Christian’s responsibility in a
technological society. Lecture three times per week and laboratory
on alternate weeks. This course satisfies the physical science
requirement of the general education requirements. (Fee: $75)
GSCI-1030 Geology of the National Parks–Su
3.5 hours
This course will explore the geology of the national parks and
surrounding areas in specific regions of the United States. It is a
two-week travel study course that fulfills the three and a half-hour
laboratory physical science requirement. Trip locations may vary
from  year. Six or more major areas will be explored on
each trip. Students will be expected to complete a photographic
atlas with appropriate geological descriptions of each stop. Special
emphasis will be placed on how geologic history is interpreted and
placed into biblical and conventional frameworks. Students will
learn how to make geological observations and take field notes.
No previous geological knowledge is required. It is necessary for
students to be in good physical shape for occasional hiking in
rough terrain and at high altitudes, although requirements can be
modified for students unable to do so. Special equipment may be
required. Special course fees apply and will vary from  year.
GSCI-1110
4 hours
Environment: Science, Sustainability, and Stewardship–Sp
An interdisciplinary study of the environment that considers
foundational understanding rooted in science, society, and
economy. We will explore the socio-ecological implications of
human activity, impacts, and responsibility for the environment.
Students from
develop and apply a biblical stewardship ethic. Three lectures and
one two-hour laboratory per week. Crosslisted with ENVS-1110.
(Fee: $100)
GSCI-2010 Physical Science for Teachers–Fa, Sp
3.5 hours
Introduction to a selection of core concepts of physics and
chemistry for preservice elementary education teachers. Students
will develop methods of learning science, with emphasis on
inquiry and the scientific method. In-class lab activities will
integrate common everyday objects and experiences with a view
toward cultivating the excitement of studying God’s creation. Does
not satisfy the physical science general education requirement.
(Fee: $75)




GMTH-1030 – GSCI-2010
GSCI-3010 Concepts in Middle School Science–Sp
4 hours
This lab course highlights key concepts in middle school
science by reviewing and extending concepts from previous
science courses with an emphasis on the integration of earth
sciences, physical sciences, and life sciences. Concepts
addressed include the nature of science, methods of science,
the history of science, biological and geological evolution, and
development of the DNA model and the role of DNA in the Modern
Synthesis Theory. Prerequisites: GBIO-1000 Principles of Biology;
GSCI-1010 Principles of Earth Science. CHEM-1000 Principles of
Chemistry (recommended) (Fee: $75) (even years)
GSCI-3060
4 hours
Environmental Science for Middle School Educators–Sp
Introduction to the interdisciplinary study of the dynamic
relationships that exist between the earth’s organisms and their
environment and how human activity affects these relationships.
Students will identify and analyze environmental problems both
natural and human-made and identify and explore sustainable
solutions to the problems. This course will include pertinent
pedagogy for teaching environmental science in a middle school
setting. Three lectures and one laboratory session per week. This
course does not satisfy the general education requirement for
biology. Prerequisites: GBIO-1000 Principles of Biology, GSCI-1010
Principles of Earth Science (Fee: $100) (odd years)
General Social Science (GSS)
GSS-1100 Politics and American Culture–Fa, Sp
3 hours
This course serves as an introductory study of America’s
constitution and political institutions, with emphases on political
participation, political culture, and public policy. (Fee: $5)
GSS-1350 Career Options–Sp
1 hour
The course is designed to help students understand the
connection between their chosen major and possible career
aspirations. Skills, interests, values, and an appreciation for a
biblical view of work are all critical parts of identifying a potential
vocation. To aid students as they create a Career Map, this course
will use valid, proven assessments and expose students to
professionals in a variety of fields. (Fee $60)
GSS-3630
4 hours
Data Analysis and Research Methodology–Fa, Sp
This course will train social science students in the use of
statistical techniques that range from central tendency through
bivariate regression, and it introduces students to the primary
issues of research methodology, which includes levels of
measurement, sampling, internal and external validity, and
reliability. Students must also master the use of one piece of
statistical software. Prerequisite: Students must have satisfied
Cedarville’s mathematics proficiency requirement before enrolling
in GSS-3630.
GSS-3640
3 hours
Qualitative Methodology and Reasoning–Fa, Sp
This is a course designed to introduce the students in the
social sciences to qualitative, nonstatistical research methods. It
includes qualitative, nonstatistical research methods. It includes
qualitative research design, literature review, the interpretation of
qualitative data, ethnographic methodology, proper methods of
observation, interviewing and coding, testing the reliability of data,
triangulation, and applying objective criteria to data. Included is an
actual research project based on the material in the course.
GSS-3650 Quantitative Methodology–Fa, Sp
3 hours
This course satisfies the statistics and research methodology
requirements for several social science majors at Cedarville
University. The goals of the course are to introduce students to
descriptive and inferential statistical concepts and methods and
to familiarize them with quantitative methodology within the social
sciences. Prerequisites: GSS-3640 Qualitative Methodology and
Reasoning.
GSS-3810,3820
1 hour each
Clinical Teaching in the Social Sciences–Fa, Sp
Practical, off-campus, formal education experience in which a
student is assigned to assist a secondary education instructor in
teaching responsibilities. A student will be expected to participate
for 30 clock hours for each semester hour of credit. A student
may arrange to do either of the following with the director of this
experience in their discipline:
1.
One 30-hour experience for two different semesters.
2.
A 60-hour experience for one semester.
Prerequisite: admission to the Teacher Education Program.
GSS-4810 Policy Formation–Fa
3 hours
A core course of the D.C. Semester focusing on policy formation
and encouraging appropriate appreciation for and analysis of
that process from a biblically informed perspective. Prerequisite:
Acceptance into the D.C. Semester program.
GSS-4820 Biblical Principles and Governance–Fa
3 hours
A core course of the D.C. Semester focusing on biblical
principles related to the role of government, the responsibilities
of citizens, and the evaluation of critical issues within the political
system. Prerequisite: Acceptance into the D.C. Semester program.
GSS-4900 Senior Research–Sp
3 hours
Senior capstone thesis course in which students engage in
original research and writing for the completion and defense of
thesis before a committee of professors. Course emphasizes
substantive cross-disciplinary and biblical integration within
research topic. Crosslisted with INTL. Prerequisite: GSS-3640
Qualitative Methodology and Reasoning; or permission of
instructor. (Fee: $80)
GSS-4990 Social Science/History Internship
1–16 hours
Majors who participate in government service, historical
research, public administration, international studies, criminal
justice, or other approved activities related to the social sciences
may earn up to 16 hours of credit.
History (HIST)
HIST-1110 United States History to 1877–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Survey and analysis of the development of the United States
from the colonial period through Reconstruction. The course
examines ethnic, social, military, political, economic, and
ideological themes in order to achieve a broad understanding of
American civilization to 1877. Attention is given to the dominant
Christian influences that have tended to shape our cultural, social,
and political development.
HIST-1120 United States History Since 1877–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Survey and analysis of the development of the United States
from  the present. The course examines
ethnic, social, military, political, economic, and ideological themes
in order to achieve a broad understanding of American civilization
since 1877. Attention is given to the dominant Christian influences
that have tended to shape our cultural, social, and political
development.
HIST-2010 History of Civilization to 1500–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Survey of human history and ideas from the advent of civilized
life in the Ancient Near East to the Reformation Era. It presents
religious, social, political, and general intellectual developments of
humans from a Christian interpretive perspective.
HIST-2020 History of Civilization Since 1500–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Survey of human history and ideas from the Reformation Era
to this century. It presents religious, social, political, and general
intellectual developments of humans from a Christian interpretive
perspective.


GSCI-3010 – HIST-2020
HIST-2100 Ohio History for Educators–Fa
2 hours
A survey of the history of the State of Ohio from pre-Colonial
background to the present. Examines the settlement of Ohio
by various Native American tribes, the early exploration and
settlement by European migration and the state’s place in national
development from the 19th through 21st centuries.
HIST-2620 Church and State–Fa
3 hours
A historical overview of the relationship between the Christian
church and government, ranging from the formation of the church
to the modern age, including both European and American
Developments. The course also exposes students to the most
recent controversies regarding the state, religious liberty, and
freedom of conscience. Prerequisite: GSS-1100 Politics and
American Culture.
HIST-3000 Introduction to Historiography–Fa
3 hours
Introduction to the history of historical writing, methods of
research, and the philosophy of history. Required of history majors.
Should be taken in the junior year.
HIST-3030
3 hours
History of Christianity: Pre-Reformation–Sp
Survey of ancient and medieval Church history with emphasis
given to doctrinal and institutional developments. (even years)
HIST-3040
3 hours
History and Politics of the British Isles and Canada–Sp
This course examines three countries: the United Kingdom,
the Republic of Ireland, and Canada. After an extensive topical
history along with a discussion of major prime ministers
who served in the 19th and 20th centuries, this course also
investigates contemporary issues including foreign policy, recent
political debates, secessionist problems in Scotland and Quebec,
membership in the European Union, and the ongoing structural
changes to government. Crosslisted as GEO, INTL, and POLS.
(odd years)
HIST-3050 Renaissance and Reformation Europe–Fa
3 hours
A survey of the period spanning the fourteenth through the
seventeenth centuries, focusing on the origins, rise, nature, and
waning of the Renaissance, especially humanism, and the origins,
development, and influence of the Protestant Reformations and
the Roman Catholic Counter-Reformation. A special emphasis will
be placed on the continuities and discontinuities between the two
movements. Crosslisted with BTHT. (even years)
HIST-3080 History of Russia and Eastern Europe–Fa
3 hours
This course will cover not only Soviet history but also major
events of Russian history up to the Bolshevik Revolution. Soviet
and Eastern European history will be studied in detail, with
attention given to the development of non-Russian peoples in
the empire. The political, economic, social, and foreign policy
aspects of Soviet Eastern European history will all be covered,
emphasizing Perestroika and the Soviet collapse. Crosslisted as
GEO, HIST, INTL, or POLS. (even years)
HIST-3110 Early American History–Sp
3 hours
Analysis of the development of American civilization from
colonization to 1820. Political, religious, social, economic, and
cultural institutions will be examined. Prerequisite: HIST-1110
United States History or permission of instructor.
HIST-3120
3 hours
History of Recent and Contemporary America–Fa
Intensive study of the domestic and foreign policies of the
United States since 1945. Particular emphasis is given to
American society in the 1950’s, the Cold War, the Civil Rights
Movement, the cultural revolution of the 1960’s, American
involvement in Vietnam, the Welfare State, Watergate, and the
Reagan Revolution.
HIST-3130 Civil War and Reconstruction–Fa
3 hours
Study of the sectional crisis, the military and nonmilitary
aspects of the Civil War, and the social and political phases
of Reconstruction. Prerequisite: HIST-1110, 1120 United States
History. Alternates with HIST-3400 History of American Foreign
Policy. (odd years) (Fee: $150)
HIST-3200 History and Politics of Latin America–Fa
3 hours
Analysis of the major historical, political, geographical, social,
and diplomatic developments that have shaped contemporary
Latin America. May be credited to geography, history, international
studies, or political science. Crosslisted as GEO, HIST, INTL, or
POLS. (odd years)
HIST-3210 History and Politics of East Asia–Fa
3 hours
This course provides an overview of the major historical,
political, economic, and social developments of China (Taiwan),
Japan, and the two Koreas (South Korea and North Korea). May
be credited to geography, history, international studies, or political
science. Crosslisted as GEO, HIST, INTL, or POLS. (even years)
HIST-3220 History and Politics of the Middle East–Sp
3 hours
Analysis of the major historical, political, geographical, and
social forces, such as religion and nationalism, that have shaped
the contemporary Middle Eastern states. Crosslisted as GEO,
HIST, INTL, or POLS.
HIST-3230 History and Politics of Western Europe–Sp
3 hours
This course will cover the development of Western European
history and politics from  the
present. Concentration will be on the great European powers,
but will include the smaller states. The political, economic, and
social histories of the nations of Europe will be covered, as well as
several macro-European issues. Crosslisted as GEO, HIST, INTL,
or POLS. (even years)
HIST-3300
3 hours
Modern Church History: Reformation to the Present–Sp
This course examines the institutional, intellectual and external
contextual aspects of the Church from the period immediately
following the Reformation to the present. Specifically the course
will study the external and internal developments of the Christian
Church in this period. (odd years)
HIST-3310 American Church History–Sp
3 hours
A survey of major trends, ideas and individuals in the history
of the Church in America from  the present, including
the theological roots of American theology. Special attention will
be given to the Puritans, Jonathan Edwards, the rise of the Social
Gospel and theological liberalism. Crosslisted with BTHT. (odd
years)
HIST-3400 History of American Foreign Policy–Fa
3 hours
American statesmen have defended the principles of their
government and the rights of American citizens in a world of
empires and nation-states. This course provides an overview
of controversies over independence and imperialism, modern
tyranny and regime change, which have marked U.S. foreign
policy from  the present day. Crosslisted as INTL
or POLS. Prerequisite: GSS-1100 Politics and American Culture.
(even years)
HIST-3710
3 hours
History of Political Thought I: Ancient Through Medieval–Fa
Study of the development of political thought in the ancient
and early medieval era with special attention given to the works
of Plato and Aristotle. Course may also explore topics in political
philosophy. Crosslisted as HIST or POLS.




HIST-2100 – HIST-3710
HIST-3720
3 hours
History of Political Thought II: Modern and Contemporary–Sp
Study of the development of political thought in the late
medieval era and modern era with special attention given to the
works of Thomas Hobbes and Friedrich Nietzsche. Course may
also explore topics in political philosophy.. Crosslisted as HIST
or POLS. Prerequisite: Major or minor in economics, history, or
political science or permission of instructor.
HIST-3730 American Political Thought–Sp
3 hours
Survey and examination of the course of political thought in
the American colonies and the United States from
current times. Includes special attention to American Founders and
the rise of political liberalism in the thought of Woodrow Wilson.
Crosslisted as POLS or HIST. Prerequisite: GSS-1100 Politics and
American Culture. (even years)
HIST-3750 Social Movements–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Study of the influence of ideas and institutions upon social
movements in America. Crosslisted as HIST or SOC.
HIST-4050 Diplomacy of the Major Powers–Sp
3 hours
Examines diplomatic relations among the world’s most powerful
nations, focusing on 20th century diplomacy and the future of
international relations in the 21st century. Crosslisted as HIST,
INTL, or POLS. Prerequisite: POLS/INTL-3650 International
Relations or permission of instructor.
HIST-4440 Special Topics: History
1–3 hours
Investigation of specific topics in social science and history that
have intrinsic worth and engage student interest.
HIST-4500 Seminar–Fa, Sp
3 hours
This course exposes students to the academic literature and
major concepts in a historical field or subject in a seminar setting.
The topic will vary by the professor’s expertise, but will be in some
area of American history, European history, non-Western history,
or the history of Christianity.
HIST-4700 Research in History–Sp
3 hours
All history majors are required to take HIST-4700, the senior
capstone course. Each student will prepare a formal monograph.
Prerequisite: Major or minor in history. (Fee: $80)
HIST-4900
1–3 hours
Independent Study in History
Provides the means whereby gifted and interested students
may explore, in a more in-depth and intensive manner, general
information acquired in the major courses. Further, independent
study provides a logical way to complete required hours not
obtained in normal sequencing. Prerequisite: Permission of the
instructor.
Music History (HLMU)
HLMU-2100
2 hours
Jazz History: Music of the Multi-Culture–Fa
Survey of jazz as an American art form, as a representative
of both Western and non-Western practices, that now make up
our American multi-culture, and as the primary vehicle for the
realization of improvisation within that multi-culture. Acquaints
the student of music with jazz styles and the major figures in jazz
history and assists in the discovery of jazz influence upon all other
American music, both classical and popular. Prerequisites: THMU-
1220 Music Theory II; THMU-1320 Aural Skills II. (even years)
HLMU-2310 Introduction to Music Literature–Sp,Su
3 hours
Study of music by genre and chronology. Focuses on art
traditions in music. Students become familiar with a wide variety
of music literature and learn to listen analytically. Serves as the
introductory music history course for sophomore music majors.
HLMU-3120 Vocal Literature–Sp
3 hours
Survey of literature for the solo voice from the onset of
thoroughbass to the 21st century. Includes major repertoire in
Italian, French, English, and German, along with important works
in other languages. Analysis of song and aria scores will be
complemented by recordings and live performance. Crosslisted
with CLMU. (even years)
HLMU-3130 Opera and Oratorio Literature–Sp
3 hours
Survey of opera and oratorio literature from Monteverdi’s Orfeo
and Carissimi’s Jephte to works of the 21st centry. Analysis of
scores will be complemented by recordings, live performance,
libretti studies, and historical background. (odd years) Crosslisted
with CLMU.
HLMU-3310 Music History I–Fa, Su
3 hours
Study of the music of Western civilization traced from its
primitive sources and giving special attention to Medieval,
Renaissance, Baroque, and Classical music as demonstrated
through the vocal and instrumental music of composers from each
period. Prerequisites: HLMU-2310 Introduction to Music Literature;
THMU-2210 Music Theory III; permission of instructor.
HLMU-3320 Music History II–Sp, Su
3 hours
Study of the music of Western civilization traced from
the present time, giving special attention to romantic, 20th century,
and contemporary music as demonstrated through the vocal and
instrumental music of composers from each period. Prerequisites:
HLMU-2310 Introduction to Music Literature; THMU-2210 Music
Theory III; permission of instructor.
HLMU-3400 Global Music–Fa
3 hours
A socio-anthropological approach to the study of the world’s
music. Surveying music of cultures of Africa, the Americas, and
Asia as well as European folk music. Music traditions are studied
from a perspective that emphasizes music as an integral part of
society and culture, helping students discover the influence of
culture on music, and the subsequent role of music within the
culture. (Fee: $50) (odd years)
HLMU-3410 Traditional Irish Music–Fa
2 hours
This course introduces students to the practice of traditional
Irish music through study of primary tune forms, experience of
the social context of Irish music-making, and acquaintance with
leading performers within the tradition. The class culminates in
an Irish music festival held at a local coffee shop. Crosslisted with
CLMU-3410 Traditional Irish Music. Prerequisite: Permission of
instructor. (Fee: $30)
HLMU-3420 Music of the Church–Fa
3 hours
An in-depth review of the past, present, and future of music in
the church and its use in worship. The course provides tools that
students can use to evaluate the quality and usefulness of various
musical styles within the context of different worship traditions.
(odd years)
HLMU-3910 Writing and Research in Music I
1 hour
This is the first of two courses designed to develop the writing
and research skills in music that are necessary for professional
success. Prerequisite: Junior status or permission of instructor.
HLMU-4910 Writing and Research in Music II
1 hour
This is the second of two courses designed to develop the
writing and research skills in music that are necessary for
professional success. Prerequisite: HLMU-3910 Writing and
Research in Music I or permission of instructor.
HLMU-4110 Choral Literature–Sp
3 hours
An historical overview of choral music from  the present.
Attention is given to primary genres of choral composition: motet,
madrigal, mass, anthem, oratorio, passion, cantata, and orchestral
works with choir. This course will serve as an elective for majors
in choral music education, church music, vocal performance, and
composition. (even years)

HLMU-4990 Independent Study in Music History
1–3 hours
Independent and intensive study in a particular area of music
history for individual students who demonstrate special interests
and abilities. Prerequisites: HLMU-3310, 3320 Music History I and
II.
HLMU-4980 Special Topics: Music History–Fa, Sp
1–3 hours
Study of selected topics in music. Prerequisites: HLMU-3310
Music History I and HLMU-3320 Music History II or permission of
instructor.
Honors (HON)
Freshman Humanities Sequence: HON-1010,1020
The Making of the Modern Mind
10 hours
HON-1010 The Classical and Medieval Ages
5 hours
This course explores the development of historical, religious,
philosophical, and artistic movements from  the
16th century. Emphasis is given to historical influence between
intellectual eras and biblical evaluation of historical worldviews.
HON-1020
5 hours
Renaissance, Reformation, and Revolutions
This course explores the development of historical, religious,
philosophical, and artistic movements from
the present. Emphasis is given to historical influence between
intellectual eras and biblical evaluation of historical worldviews.
HON-3020 Honors Seminar
2 hours
Investigation of special topics that have intrinsic worth and
engage student interest. Seminars are focused on the liberal
arts from an interdisciplinary perspective. Past offerings include:
C.S. Lewis; Biblical Canon; Music and Nationalism; Change,
Emergence, or Design?; and Human Personhood. This course is
repeatable. Prerequisites: HON-1010 The Classical and Medieval
Ages; HON-1020 Renaissance, Reformation, and Revolutions.
HON-4900 Independent Study in Honors
1–3 hours
Independent and intensive study in a particular area for
individual students who demonstrate special interests and ability.
Prerequisites: HON-1010 The Classical and Medieval Ages;
instructor approval.
HON-4910 Honors Senior Colloquium I
1 hour
Development of a generic understanding of the integration of
faith, learning, and life.
HON-4920 Honors Senior Colloquium II
1 hour
Development of a disciplinary understanding of the integration
of faith, learning, and life.
HON-4950 Honors Senior Project
1–2 hours
The writing of an interdisciplinary research project.
Humanities (HUM)
HUM-1400 Introduction to the Humanities–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Historical study of the relationship of music, art, and literature to
the dominant cultural, religious, and philosophical trends and their
relationship to Christian theism. (Fee:$75)
HUM-2430 Enjoyment of Music–Fa
3 hours
This course is designed to present a study of music by genre
and chronology. It will focus on the art traditions in music. Students
will become familiar with a wide variety of music literature and
will learn to listen analytically. The primary goal will be to bring
students as far as possible along the road to being music lovers.
(Fee: $50) (even years)
HUM-4980 Special Topics: Humanities–Fa, Sp
1–3 hours
Study of selected topics in humanities.
Industrial and Innovative Design (IDES)
IDES-2000 History and Influences of Design–Sp
3 hours
Survey of design from  the present. The
course highlights significant stages in the development and pivotal
influences of design including technological advances, individual
works, key movements, schools of thought, and approaches
relative to time(s) and culture(s). Crosslisted with VCD.
IDES-3110 Drawing in Dynamic Perspective I–Fa
3 hours
This hands-on course includes lecture, demonstration,
progressive hand-generated drawing exercises, and project work,
all designed to reveal the hidden keys to training our creativity to
perceive space and the geometry of space with greater authority.
The principles of one-point and two-point perspective and related
visual systems will be presented in a bold problem-solving
format ranging in scale from  the complex in order
to accurately express our conceptual capabilities. Prerequisites:
ART-2230 Three-Dimensional Design; VCD-1050 Applied Design;
Tech Tools I.
IDES-3120 Drawing in Dynamic Perspective II–Fa
3 hours
Building on the visual authority and refined hand-drawing
skills developed in Drawing in Dynamic Perspective I, this course
explores in greater depth the application of advanced perspective
principles in problem-solving scenarios for a diverse range of
“core content” industrial design exercises. Prerequisite: IDES-3110
Drawing in Dynamic Perspective I.
IDES-3210 Language of Line–Fa
4 hours
Rapid visualization (Power Drawing) skills will be presented
in lecture, demonstration, progressive hand-generated drawing
exercises, and project work in an in-depth study of the “language
of line” and how it generates visual confidence. The course
analyzes the three keys to drawing authority: form, position and
texture. Further, the course will place these elements into a
process that will produce and solve design problems ranging from
understanding basic volumes to successfully illustrating complex
volumes through study of applied science, ergonomics, and ethics.
Prerequisite: IDES-3120 Drawing in Dynamic Perspective II.
IDES-3220 Innovative Media Systems–Fa
4 hours
Through the use of the latest digital and traditional design tools,
students will develop and demonstrate their previously learned
skills and knowledge in industrial design, creative problem-solving,
and visual communication techniques by way of market-relevant
studio exercises, hands-on design labs, and experiential-
learning projects. Prerequisite: IDES-3120 Drawing in Dynamic
Perspective II.
IDES-3310
3 hours
Fundamentals of Surface Development I–Sp
This study will introduce the principles of creating innovative
shapes, forms, and volumes, and explore how they in turn
influence manufacturing systems. Students will engage in using a
variety of materials such as paper, structural foam, plastics, glass,
wood, etc., to successfully convey a three-dimensional model
interpretation. Prerequisite: IDES-3220 Innovative Media Systems.
IDES-3320
3 hours
Fundamentals of Surface Development II–Sp
The principles of this course will expand the model-building
skill base by working with an advanced palette of materials
to successfully illustrate a set of three-dimensional models.
Prerequisite: IDES-3310 Fundamentals of Surface Development I.
IDES-3410 Three-Dimensional Composition–Sp
4 hours
This course will lay the foundations for “finishing techniques”
for modeling and act as an overview for the various software,
hardware, hand-crafted, and artisan techniques required to gain
a deeper appreciation of the visual impact potential of a finished
model and/or prototype, and various presentation practices.
Prerequisite: IDES-3320 Fundamentals of Surface Development II.




HLMU-4990 – IDES-3410
IDES-3420 Three-Dimensional Presentation–Sp
4 hours
This course is the natural extension of three-dimensional
composition. The course focuses on the critical importance of
creating, defining, and implementing a series of two-dimensional
sketch rendering ideas and converting those ideas into successful
three-dimensional model series. Prerequisite: IDES-3410 Three-
Dimensional Composition.
IDES-4010 Consumer Product Design–Fa
4 hours
This course is designed to focus on the development of the
designer’s personal vision and preparation for careers in the area
of product design. Completed solutions will be created by the
candidates through concept sketches, renderings, layout studies,
3-D models, and a final, scale foam study. Prerequisite: IDES-3420
Three-Dimensional Presentation.
IDES-4020 Interior Space Design–Fa
3 hours
This course is designed to focus on the development of the
designer’s personal vision and preparation for careers in the area
of interior design. Completed solutions will be created by the
candidates through the understanding of human scale, consumer
product trends, human interaction, interface, ergonomics, traffic
patterns, interior design materials, etc. Prerequisite: IDES-3420
Three-Dimensional Presentation.
IDES-4030 Transportation Design–Fa
4 hours
This course is designed to focus on the development of the
designer’s personal and client visions and for preparation with the
career choice of transportation design. Completed solutions will be
created through concept sketches exploring the world of mobility
(aircraft, watercraft, automobile, etc.) Prerequisite: IDES-3420
Three-Dimensional Presentation.
IDES-4040 Architectural/Exterior Space Design–Fa
4 hours
Architectural exterior space design concentrates on the
discipline of developing the designer’s expertise in utilizing
structural materials to create the next generation of architectural
design systems. Projects will include glass, metals, stone, and a
diverse vocabulary of other materials that integrate the creative
process to build confidence for this vocational choice. Prerequisite:
IDES-3420 Three-Dimensional Presentation.
IDES-4200
4 hours
Professional and Ethical Practices in Design–Sp
Based on the previous semester’s exposure to various
disciplines within the industrial and innovative design degree,
the candidate will focus on an area of specialization and, with
staff assistance, develop a thesis statement. Further, candidates
will receive coaching from professionals and staff in the areas of
design business ethics. Prerequisite: IDES-4040 Architectural/
Exterior Space Design.
IDES-4300
3 hours
Design Project: Selection Statement, Research,
and Scope–Sp
With staff and professional support, the candidates will embark
on a research journey to discover real-world, market-applicable
design solution research within a selected area of specialization.
Prerequisite: IDES-4200 Professional and Ethical Practices in
Design.
IDES-4400 Design Project and Presentation–Sp
10 hours
In this capstone course, candidates will be assisted in
completing their portfolio presentation skills, business case
development, professional practices, and receive a professional
written and oral critique of their work. Prerequisite: IDES-4300
Design Project: Selection Statement, Research, and Scope.
International Studies (INTL)
INTL-2100 Global Issues–Sp
3 hours
Analysis of the international issues that are shaping our
contemporary and future world, ranging from terrorism, the
environment, international crime, disease, and collapsing states to
the digital revolution and the global economy. Prerequisite: GSS-
1100 Politics and American Culture.
INTL-3040
3 hours
History and Politics of the British Isles and Canada–Sp
This course examines three countries: the United Kingdom,
the Republic of Ireland, and Canada. After an extensive topical
history along with a discussion of major prime ministers
who served in the 19th and 20th centuries, this course also
investigates contemporary issues including foreign policy, recent
political debates, secessionist problems in Scotland and Quebec,
membership in the European Union, and the ongoing structural
changes to government. Crosslisted as GEO, HIST, and POLS.
(odd years)
INTL-3080 History of Russia and Eastern Europe–Fa
3 hours
See course description for GEO-3080 History of Russia and
Eastern Europe. (even years)
INTL-3200 History and Politics of Latin America–Fa
3 hours
See course description for GEO-3200 History and Politics of
Latin America. (odd years)
INTL-3210 History and Politics of East Asia–Fa
3 hours
See course description for GEO-3210 History and Politics of
East Asia. (even years)
INTL-3220 History and Politics of the Middle East–Sp
3 hours
See course description for GEO-3220 History and Politics of the
Middle East.
INTL-3230 History and Politics of Western Europe–Sp
3 hours
See course description for GEO-3230 History and Politics of
Western Europe. (even years)
INTL-3400 History of American Foreign Policy–Fa
3 hours
American statesmen have defended the principles of their
government and the rights of American citizens in a world of
empires and nation-states. This course provides an overview
of controversies over independence and imperialism, modern
tyranny and regime change, which have marked U.S. foreign
policy from  the present day. Crosslisted as HIST
or POLS. Prerequisite: GSS-1100 Politics and American Culture.
(even years)
INTL-3650 International Relations–Fa
3 hours
A survey of contemporary international affairs and principles
of interstate relations, focusing on forces that unite and divide our
world. Crosslisted as INTL or POLS.
INTL-3790 Comparative Politics–Fa
3 hours
This course will familiarize students with major historical
developments, political debates, and scholarly research in the
subfield of comparative politics. Particular emphasis will be
placed on topics of the modern state, nationalism, economic
development, political culture and ideology, identity structure,
regime types, regime transitions, and comparative political
economy. Crosslisted as POLS or INTL.
INTL-4050
[0-9] hours
Diplomacy of the Major Powers–Sp
See course description for HIST-4050 Diplomacy of the Major
Powers. Crosslisted as HIST, INTL, or POLS
INTL-4160 International and Domestic Terrorism–Sp
3 hours
In-depth study of terrorism, focusing worldwide and
domestically. An intensive examination of ongoing international
conflicts, narco-terrorism, eco-terrorism, cyber-terrorism, weapons
of mass destruction, geographical trouble spots, enemies of the
United States, terrorism-counter-terrorism theory and options,
terrorism history, law, civil liberties, and Homeland Security.
Crosslisted as CRJU and INTL.


IDES-3420 – INTL-4160
INTL-4440 Special Topics: International Studies
1–3 hours
Investigation of specific topics in Social Science and History
that have intrinsic worth and engage student interest.
INTL-4800 Seminar in International Studies–Fa
3 hours
A seminar/readings course intended to prepare senior
students for graduate study. Through readings and discussion,
students explore classical writings on international relations and
international issues that are shaping our contemporary and future
world. Crosslisted as INTL or POLS.
INTL-4900 Senior Research–Sp
3 hours
Senior capstone thesis course in which students engage in
original research and writing for the completion and defense of
thesis before a committee of professors. Course emphasizes
substantive cross-disciplinary and biblical integration within
research topic. Crosslisted with GSS. Prerequisite: GSS-3640
Qualitative Methodology and Reasoning; or permission of
instructor. (Fee: $80)
INTL-4980
1–3 hours
Independent Study in International Studies
Provides the means whereby gifted and interested students
may explore, in a more in-depth and intensive manner, general
information acquired in the major courses. Further, independent
study provides a logical way to complete required hours not
obtained in normal sequencing. Prerequisite: Permission of the
instructor.
Information Technology Management (ITM)
ITM-1510 Software Tools for Business–Fa, Sp
2 hours
This course emphasizes the use of software in a business
environment. Students will develop a working knowledge of
spreadsheet, database, and other software packages appropriate
to the current business environment. (Fee: $10)
ITM-1900 Fundamentals of IT Management–Sp
3 hours
This course is an introduction to the field of Information
Technology Management (ITM) in the context of managing IT
projects. Students will be introduced to computer programming
concepts using a visual, software development environment. The
course will then guide students through the process of managing
a software development project from  final
implementation. Specific topics covered in the course include:
project planning, writing vision statements, identifying software
requirements, prototyping, visual programming, and software
testing.
ITM-2100 Database Management–Fa
3 hours
This course covers database fundamentals while providing
a broad survey of the field’s major topics. Students learn about
the critical nature of databases within Information Technology
Management (ITM) contexts. Topics include data storage and
retrieval, data modeling, logical and physical design, concurrency
and security issues, stored procedures, and triggers. Students
apply those topics by creating and managing databases in a SQL
Server environment. Prerequisite: ITM-1510 Software Tools for
Business. (Fee: $20)
ITM-2300 Introduction to Programming–Sp
3 hours
Intended as the first programming course for Information
Technology Management (ITM) majors, this course will introduce
the student to the process of programming and to the syntax
and usage of the C# programming language. The programming
assignments will encourage students to analyze problems in
a logical, intentional, and structured manner so that they can
develop well-constructed programs using structured and object-
oriented programming techniques. Prerequisite or Corequisite:
ITM-1900 Fundamentals of IT Management (Fee: $20)
ITM-3300
3 hours
Advanced Topics in Programming Languages–Fa
This course covers advanced concepts in programming
and programming languages using one or more programming
languages. Topics include theories of program design and
implementation, distributed architectures, business object
frameworks, generics, collections, reflection, data binding, and
web services. Students will apply course topics in a team project
through the development of a distributed information system.
Prerequisite: ITM-2300 Introduction to Programming. (even years)
(Fee: $20)
ITM-3400 Data Communications and Networking–Fa
3 hours
This course provides a study of the basic concepts of data
communications and current networking technology. Topics
include discussion of physical-layer considerations, higher-layer
implications, and network operating systems. The concepts
will be applied through a hands-on project of network design,
implementation, and documentation. Prerequisite: ITM-1900
Fundamentals of IT Management or permission of instructor. (Fee:
$50)
ITM-3410
1–3 hours
Topics in Information Technology Management–Fa, Sp, Su
A variety of courses are covered under this heading on an
experimental basis to meet the changing needs of the students.
(crosslisted with ENTR-3410 Topics in Entrepreneurship)
ITM-3450 IT Security and Risk Management–Sp
3 hours
This course provides an introduction to the fundamental
principles and topics of information technology security and
risk management at the organizational level. Students will learn
critical security principles that enable them to plan, develop,
and perform security tasks. The course will address hardware,
software, processes, communications, applications, and policies
and procedures with respect to organizational IT security and risk
management. Prerequisites: CY-3420 Cyber Defense; or ITM 3400
Data Communications and Networking.
ITM-3500 Web Development–Fa
3 hours
This course will expose students to the process of developing
information systems for the World Wide Web using the ASP.
NET and C# programming languages. The focus will be on the
creation of web applications to support business processes.
Topics include HTML, CSS, Model-View-Controller (MVC) design
paradigm, LINQ, AJAX, and web services. Prerequisite: ITM-2300
Introduction to Programming. (even years) (Fee: $20)
ITM-3550 Enterprise Architecture–Sp
3 hours
This course explores the design, selection, implementation,
and management of enterprise IT solutions. The focus is on
applications and infrastructure and their fit within the business.
Students learn frameworks and strategies for infrastructure
management, data/information architecture, distributed
computing, middleware, legacy system integration, and emerging
technologies. Prerequisite: ITM-2300 Introduction to Programming.
ITM-3600 Business Process Management–Fa, Sp
3 hours
In this course students will be introduced to key concepts and
approaches to business process management and improvement.
The course focuses on both understanding and designing
business processes. Students will learn how to identify, document,
model, assess, and improve core business processes. Students
will be introduced to process design principles. The way in which
information technology can be used to manage, transform, and
improve business processes is also discussed.




INTL-4440 – ITM-3600
ITM-3650 Enterprise Systems–Sp
3 hours
This course is designed to provide students with an
understanding of the theoretic and practical issues related to the
application of enterprise systems within organizations. The main
focus of this course is to demonstrate how enterprise systems
integrate information and organizational processes across
functional areas with a unified system comprised of a single
database and shared reporting tools. The course includes an
integrated project, which requires the application of conceptual
and technical skills of students. Prerequisite: ITM-2100 Database
Management. (even years)(Fee: $50)
ITM-4150
3 hours
Advanced Business Analytics and Visualization
This course will explore the field of data analytics by covering
state-of-the-art modeling, analysis, and visualization techniques.
The course will emphasize the importance of understanding
the underlying data, validating the data, applying a meaningful
analytic to the data, and only then visualizing the data. The course
will discuss practical challenges involving complex real-world
data and include several case studies and hands-on work with a
modern data analysis and visualization package. Crosslisted with
BUS. Prerequisite: BUS-2170 Introduction to Business Analytics.
(odd years)
ITM-4300 Advanced Topics in IT Management–Sp
3 hours
This course heading covers a variety of Management
Information Systems courses offered on a temporary basis.
The dynamic nature of the field of MIS gives rise to the need to
address recent changes in technologies, methods, and systems.
(even years)
ITM-4400 Systems Analysis and Design–Fa
3 hours
This course provides an understanding of the duties of the
systems analyst along with a presentation of philosophies,
terminology, and techniques commonly used in the Systems
Development Life Cycle. Topics such as business case
development, project management, requirements modeling, data
design, and user-interface design will be discussed. Students will
apply their skills in the completion of an integrated, analysis and
design project. Prerequisite: ITM-2100 Database Management.
ITM-4450 IT Audit and Controls–Fa
3 hours
This course introduces the fundamental concepts of the
information technology audit and control function. The main
focus of this course is on understanding information controls,
the types of controls, and their impact on the organization, and
how to manage and audit them. The concepts and techniques
used in information technology audits will be presented. The
challenge of dealing with best practices, standards, and regulatory
requirements governing information and controls is addressed.
Prerequisite: ITM-3400 Data Communications and Networking.
(odd years) (Fee: $50).
ITM-4500 System Development–Sp
3 hours
Students hone their skills of project management, analysis,
design, database development, web development, end-user
training, and documentation, as they work in teams to develop
the project that was designed in the Systems Analysis and
Design course. Test-driven development is introduced and
used throughout the development process. This course is the
second course in a two-course sequence that forms the senior
capstone experience for IT Management majors in the Application
Developer track. Prerequisites: ITM 3500-Web Development; ITM-
4400 System Analysis and Design. (even years)
ITM-4900 IT Strategy–Sp
3 hours
This course explores the issues and approaches in managing
the information technology function in organizations and how
the IT function integrates, supports, and enables various types
of organizational capabilities. The course focuses on developing
an intellectual framework that will allow leaders of organizations
to critically assess existing IT infrastructures and emerging
technologies as well as how these enabling technologies might
affect organizational strategy. Critical analysis of the alignment
between IT and organizational strategies is discussed. Open
only to seniors in information technology management. Capstone
course. Prerequisites: Open only to seniors in ITM who have
completed all 1000–3000 level business courses.
Journalism (JOUR)
JOUR-1000 Multiplatform Journalism I–Fa
3 hours
This intensive writing course prepares students to write news
copy for print, online, and broadcast video and radio. Students
learn basic journalistic practices and writing formats and will
progress from  original reporting. (Fee: $75)
JOUR-2000 Multiplatform Journalism II–Sp
3 hours
This course builds on the primary journalistic skills and theories
learned in JOUR-1000. Students will begin to polish interviewing,
writing, and reporting skills for print, video, audio, and social media
through original reporting of stories in deadline and non-deadline
situations. Prerequisite: JOUR-1000 Multiplatform Journalism I.
(Fee: $75)
JOUR-2500 Introduction to Public Relations–Fa
3 hours
This course acquaints students with the foundations of public
relations as a profession. The course includes discussion of key
individuals and events in its development. It provides an overview
of the theoretical aspects of public relations practices and
techniques. The media relationship of public relations practitioners
to the mass media is examined. Codes of ethics for practitioners
are also explored.
JOUR-3150 Media Ethics–Fa
3 hours
This course examines the rights and responsibilities of the
journalist in American society. It examines and applies federal
and state laws and regulations associated with the media. Topic
areas will include the journalist and the first amendment, access
to government information, libel, and privacy. Special attention
will be given to legal issues related to new media. Crosslisted with
BRDM-3150. Prerequisite: Junior or Senior status.
JOUR-3350 Television News Production–Sp
3 hours
This course teaches broadcast journalism students to produce
stories for TV news and understand the components of studio
production of TV news programs. Prerequisite: BRDM-2110 Video
Production. (even years) (Fee: $75)
JOUR-3420 Editing and Design–Sp
3 hours
This course will teach students the methods to edit news stories
for publication. In this course, students will learn the role of the
editor in the news process and the editorial skills to prepare news
stories for publication. The course will also cover the development
of appropriate headlines and methods of designing story layout in
ways that are clear and appealing to a target audience. Students
will be taught to bring both a detailed and holistic approach to
the development of the news story for printed media. Current
developments in the field of editing and design will be applied to
contemporary news events to facilitate application of the principles
of the course. Prerequisites: JOUR-1000 Multiplatform I and
JOUR-2000 Multiplatform II or permission of instructor. (even
years) (Fee: $50)


ITM-3650 – JOUR-3420
JOUR-3500
3 hours
Public Relations Principles and Writing–Sp
This course provides instruction in effective public relations
communication both within organizations and to various media
outlets. Students develop problem-solving approaches to PR
challenges and apply appropriate written, visual, and spoken
messages to audiences using different media of communication.
Prerequisite: JOUR-2500 Introduction to Public Relations.
JOUR-3550
3 hours
Advanced Public Relations Writing–Sp
Building on the basics of public relations principles and writing,
this course provides the opportunity to focus on particular
writing techniques employed in specialized public relations
contexts. This includes writing for internal publics in the form
of reports, proposals, backgrounders, and position papers. In
addition, students will learn to write for external publics in print,
broadcasting, and online media contexts, developing proficiency
in presentational and speech communication, news, feature
and advertising copy. Prerequisite: JOUR-3500 Public Relations
Principles and Writing.
JOUR-3605
3 hours
Writing and Design for Web and Mobile Media–Sp
The purpose of this course is to introduce students to the
special design and writing necessary for emerging new media,
including the web, mobile media, and social networking sites and
services.
JOUR-3650 Networked Audience–Fa
3 hours
What is happening to the audience for media content and
how is that likely to change over the next five years? That is the
question that this course seeks to answer. Students will develop
a framework for understanding the audience by looking at the
intersection of a wide variety of factors that shape the media
environment. The students will then project current trends to
anticipate where the audience will be in the next five years.
Crosslisted as BRDM. (Fee:$10)
JOUR-3900 Practicum in Journalism–Fa, Sp
1 hour
Development of news stories for transmission to print,
broadcasting and online media outlets within the University
(Cedars, In the Loop, Resound Radio, Cedars Online) either
individually or as a member of a team under the supervision of
a faculty mentor. The practicum is organized in a news agency
format with a rotating editorial board. Repeatable up to 3 times.
Prerequisites: JOUR-1000 Multiplatform Journalism I; JOUR-2000
Multiplatform Journalism II.
JOUR-4420 Feature Reporting–Fa
3 hours
Students will study feature storytelling styles with an emphasis
on narrative. Freedom will be given to produce stories on platforms
that fit career goals. Blogging will also be an important exercise.
Prerequisites: JOUR-1000 Multiplatform Journalism I; JOUR-2000
Multiplatform Journalism II; or permission of the instructor. (even
years) (Fee: $50)
JOUR-4500 Public Relation Campaigns–Sp
3 hours
Uses case studies to examine the role of public relations in
organizational communication campaigns. Incorporates a problem-
solving approach that enables students to apply various public
relations techniques to real-world situations. Prerequisite: JOUR-
3550 Advanced Public Relations Writing.
JOUR-4550 Practicum in Public Relations–Sp
1 hour
Development of public relations campaigns and products,
such as brochures, videos, news releases, press kits, and feature
stories either individually or as a member of a team under the
supervision of a faculty mentor. Prerequisite: JOUR-3500 Public
Relations Principles and Writing; or by permission of instructor.
JOUR-4600 Magazine Writing–Sp
3 hours
This course covers the techniques of writing in-depth articles
for mass circulation and specialized magazines. Students will
learn the process of writing and submitting feature articles as well
as analysis of markets for freelance magazine articles. Students
will prepare and submit professional quality manuscripts for
publication. Prerequisites: JOUR-1000 Multiplatform Journalism
I; JOUR-2000 Multiplatform Journalism II; or permission of the
instructor.
JOUR-4610 Photojournalism–Sp
3 hours
This course focuses on the techniques and aesthetics of
reporting the news as a photojournalist. It emphasizes recognition,
development and creation of news photographs and the skills
of the photo editor. As part of this course, students will gain
experience in shooting, developing, printing, and editing the
images for a variety of news media. The course will emphasize
how public relations and journalism professionals can use
photographs for publication in traditional media, websites,
company brochures, and digital slide-show presentations. (Fee:
$50)
JOUR-4620 Data and Investigative Reporting–Sp
3 hours
This course teaches the tools and techniques to use data
and other investigative tools and resources to produce in-depth
stories. The content will focus on serving the public interest by
acting as a watchdog on government, business, education,
health, environment, safety, and other organizations. Freedom
will be given to produce stories on platforms that fit career goals.
Prerequisites: JOUR-1000 Multiplatform Journalism I I; JOUR-
2000 Multiplatform Journalism II; or permission of instructor. (odd
years) (Fee: $50)
JOUR-4650
3 hours
Designing Solutions for New Audiences–Sp
Because of the ongoing changes in the communication system,
media companies and businesses are in constant reinvention
of the ways in which they meet the needs of their audiences by
innovations in programming, products and services. In this course
students will be presented with a current problem in the use of
new and emerging media to connect a client with its audience.
Teams will then design a solution to meet the needs of both
client and audience. Prerequisite: JOUR/BRDM-3650 Networked
Audience.
JOUR-4810 Special Topics in Journalism–Fa
3 hours
Available to advanced students who desire in-depth study of
special areas of journalism. Topics of current interest in the field of
journalism will be offered to cover in-depth areas of specialization.
Topics may include photojournalism, sports journalism,
international news, news and religion, news media management,
magazine, editing, opinion writing, and business and financial
reporting. Prequisities: Permission of instructor. (even years) (Fee:
$50)
JOUR-4820 Special Topics in Public Relations–Sp
3 hours
Available to advanced students who desire intense study of
special areas of public relations. Topics of current interest in the
field of public relations will be offered to cover in-depth areas of
specialization. Topics may include crisis communication, agency
management, event planning, and international public relations.
Prerequisites: JOUR-3550 Advanced Public Relations Writing; or
permission of instructor. (even years)
JOUR-4910 Multiplatform Seminar–Sp
3 hours
This senior-level class will tie together the students’ reporting
and news presentation skills, resulting in a reporting project that
will use text, visuals, and audio. The project will align with career
goals, putting emphasis on the each student’s preferred platform
of reporting. Studentw will also study the work of professionals
and industry trends. (Fee: $50)




JOUR-3500 – JOUR-4910
Korean (KOR)
KOR-1510 Elementary Korean I–Fa
4 hours
Introduction to Korean language and culture with emphasis
on developing skills in listening, speaking, reading, and writing in
Korean.
KOR-1520 Elementary Korean II–Sp
4 hours
Introduction to Korean language and culture with emphasis
on developing skills in listening, speaking, reading, and writing in
Korean. Prerequisites: KOR-1510 Elementary Korean I, instructor
approval, or placement by exam.
Keyboard Pedagogy (KPMU)
KPMU-2010 Keyboard Pedagogy I–Fa
3 hours
Study of techniques and literature for the teaching of beginning
and intermediate piano students both in private and class settings.
Includes study of graded teaching materials and participation in
a supervised teaching setting. Prerequisites: THMU-1210,1220
Music Theory I and II; THMU1310,1320 Aural Skills I and II.
KPMU-2020 Keyboard Pedagogy II–Sp
3 hours
Discussion of pedagogical problems involving intermediate
students; evaluations of piano literature and investigation of
specific aspects of piano pedagogy through readings and
discussion. Survey of piano literature and its predecessors—
clavichord, harpsichord, and pianoforte—from the early English
virginal music to the present time. Prerequisite: KPMU-2010
Keyboard Pedagogy I.
KPMU-3110, 3120 Directed Teaching–Fa, Sp
1 hour each
Supervised teaching experience in a private or class format
with beginning to intermediate-level piano students. Prerequisites:
KPMU-2010, 2020 Keyboard Pedagogy I and II. (Fee: $50)
KPMU-4110, 4120 Directed Teaching–Fa, Sp
2 hours each
Supervised teaching experience in a private or class format
with beginning to intermediate-level piano students. Prerequisites:
KPMU-2010, 2020 Keyboard Pedagogy I and II. (Fee: $50)
KPMU-3150 Keyboard Pedagogy Seminar I–Fa
2 hours
Designed to develop critical and creative teaching approaches
for students of varying personality and learning styles with
application to theory, technique, and music concepts needed
by primary and elementary-level piano students in both private
and group settings. Prerequisites: KPMU-2010,2020 Keyboard
Pedagogy I and II.
KPMU-3160 Keyboard Pedagogy Seminar II–Sp
2 hours
Survey of representative Baroque through 20th century
literature for the advanced pre-college pianist. The course
is enhanced with videos, required readings, and discussion
relative to topics such as performance anxiety, technique, and
performance style. Prerequisites: KPMU-2010,2020 Keyboard
Pedagogy I and II.
KPMU-4150 Keyboard Pedagogy Seminar III–Fa
2 hours
Pedagogical methods and techniques using electronic studio
in-class teaching. The course is enhanced with videos, required
readings, and discussion relative to group teaching. Prerequisites:
KPMU-2010,2020 Keyboard Pedagogy I and II.
KPMU-4160 Keyboard Pedagogy Seminar IV–Sp
2 hours
Continued application of various learning styles with application
to developing musical performance in intermediate and advanced-
level piano students in both private and group settings. The
course also includes an introduction to business practices for the
independent piano teacher.
Liberal Arts (LART)
LART-1000 Introduction to Liberal Arts–Fa
1 hour
An introduction to the liberal arts and the Liberal Arts program.
LART-4940 Senior Research Methodology–Fa, Sp
1 hour
This course prepares students for the senior capstone project
and guides them through the completion of their capstone
proposal. Prerequisites: LART-1000 Introduction to Liberal Arts;
permission of instructor.
LART-4950 Senior Project–Fa, Sp
2 hours
Students select a topic of interest and then research and write a
paper under the direction of a research mentor. Students present
findings before faculty and peers. Prerequisites: LART-4940 Senior
Research Methodology; acceptance in the BA of Liberal Arts
degree program and senior status.
Linguistics (LING)
LING-2070 Introduction to Linguistics–Sp
2 hours
This introduction to the study of linguistics provides an
opportunity for students to become familiar with the tenets,
concepts, and theories of the field of study. It additionally
acquaints students with the practical side of the study of linguistics
in disciplines such as philosophy and biblical languages, English
and writing, cultural studies, mathematics, information technology,
computer science, education and psychology, electronic media,
and teaching English to speakers of other languages.
LING-3080 Linguistics for Language Learning–Fa
3 hours
An analytical approach of language functioning applicable
to learning any second language. Using theoretical-based
approaches, the emphasis is on English language variations,
phonology, morphology, and syntax. The student is also introduced
to various theories of second (new) language acquisition at
different age/grade levels. Second (new) language study as a
means of personal development and the importance of second
(new) language learning in modern society are addressed.
Prerequisite: Degree-seeking students only; sophomore, junior, or
senior status only.
LING-3082 Phonetics–Sp
3 hours
Phonetics is the study and classification of speech sounds,
within the broader study of phonology, the study of the sound
system of language. This course builds on the theories of
phonology and provides opportunities for practical application of
the theories. Students will work with the International Phonetic
Alphabet (IPA) in classifying sounds in standard and nonstandard
forms of English and will consider and classify the sounds of other
languages. Prerequisites: LING-2070 Introduction to Linguistics;
LING-3080 Linguistics for Language Learning.
LING-3090 Sociolinguistics–Fa
3 hours
An overview of the relationship between language and
society. Topics covered include ethnicity, social contact, change,
and issues related to minority students such as education,
immigration, migration, demographics, and historical and legal
precedents. The student will also gain knowledge and cultural
understanding of minority groups in Ohio. Prerequisite: Degree
seeking students only.
LING-3100 Principles of Language Acquisition–Sp
3 hours
The practical side of the study of linguistics is the study of how
language is acquired, both by children learning to speak and
by adults learning a second language. This course will present
the basic theories of both types of language acquisition and will
provide students the opportunity to do original research in the
field. Prerequisite: Degree-seeking students only; sophomore,
junior, or senior status only. LING-3080 Linguistics for Language
Learning.
LING-3200 Special Topics in Linguistics–Fa, Sp, Su 1–3 hours
Independent study in a selected field for students with special
interests and demonstrated ability in the field of Linguistics.
Prerequisites: LING-2070 Introduction to Linguistics; LING-
3080 Linguistics for Language Learning; LING-3082 Phonetics;
LING-3090 Sociolinguistics; LING-3100 Principles of Language
Acquisition.


KOR-1510 – LING-3200
LING-3500
3 hours
Methods of Teaching Foreign Language–Fa
Designed around ACTFL’s Standards of Foreign Language
learning, this course prepares students to teach in the K–12 world
language classroom and also to teach English as a new language.
In this course, students will examine the purposes and objectives
along with the methods and curricular models appropriate for
the K–12 world language classroom, as well as adult-level
language teaching. This course addresses theories of second
language acquisition and how language learning looks different
at the various stages of a language learner’s life. Using theory to
inform practice, students will learn to plan and assess for student
learning, including the creation of learning activities, assessments,
lesson plans, and thematic unit plans, as well as evaluating and
providing feedback to maximize student learning. Students will
also gain insight into the importance of understanding one’s own
language, culture, and worldview as a means to understanding
the language, culture, and worldview of the target peoples and the
important role that cultural understanding plays in communication.
This course will prepare students to plan, teach, and assess
effectively in today’s rapidly changing classroom. Open to students
majoring in multi-age Spanish education or linguistics, and those
minoring in TESOL. Prerequisites: Degree-seeking students only;
sophomore, junior, or senior status only; LING-3100 Principles
of Language Acquisition; permission of instructor or advisor.
(crosslisted with SPAN-3500)
LING-3610
2 hours
TESOL Practicum for Education Majors–Sp
Independent teaching of ESL students under the general
supervision of a master teacher. In a K–12 placement under the
supervision of a qualified ESL teacher, the student will practice
teaching in a formal classroom situation. During this 50-hour
experience, the student will be provided opportunities to establish
goals and objectives and design curricula that reflect Ohio’s
grade level learning outcomes in content areas. The student
will also be given opportunities to select, adapt, create, and use
varied resources appropriate to age, cultural groups, and different
learning styles. Activities should include integrating technology
in planning and delivering instruction and strategies for creating
and maintaining communication with families. Practicum will also
provide the student with knowledge and skills in assessment.
Prerequisites: ENG-3060 The English Language; ENG-3070
English Grammar; LING-3080 Linguisitics for Language Learning;
LING-3100 Principles of Language Acquisition; and LING-3500
Methods of Teaching Foreign Language. (Fee: $50)
LING-3710
2 hours
TESOL Practicum for Non-Education Majors–Sp
Practice teaching of ESL under general supervision of
master teacher for non-education majors who are completing
TESOL minor or concentration requirements. During this 60-
hour experience, the student will be provided opportunities to
establish goals and objectives and design curricula appropriate
to age, cultural groups, and different learning styles. Prerequisite:
degree-seeking students only; sophomore, junior, or senior
status only; ENG-3070 English Grammar; LING-3080 Linguistics
for Language Learning; LING-3100 Principles of Language
Acquisition; LING-3500 Methods of Teaching Foreign Language.
LING-4210 Senior Research in Linguistics I–Fa
2 hours
This course is the first of two components (LING 4210, LING
4220) of the capstone experience for the major in linguistics. In
these courses, students will acquire skills for conducting research
in linguistics and will put into practice the theories and concepts
learned while completing independent research in the field.
This course focuses on the research and design of the study.
Prerequisites: LING-2070 Introduction to Linguistics; LING-
3080 Linguistics for Language Learning; LING-3082 Phonetics;
LING-3090 Sociolinguistics; LING-3100 Principles of Language
Acquisition.
LING-4220 Senior Research in Linguistics–Sp
1 hour
This course is the second of two components (LING-4210,
LING-4220) of the capstone experience for the major in linguistics.
In these courses, students will acquire skills for conducting
research in linguistics and will put into practice the theories and
concepts learned while completing independent research in the
field. This course focuses on completing the study and writing the
findings in preparation for professional publication or presentation.
Prerequisites: LING-2070 Introduction to Linguistics; LING-
3080 Linguistics for Language Learning; LING-3082 Phonetics;
LING-3090 Sociolinguistics; LING-3100 Principles of Language
Acquisition; LING 4210 Senior Research in Linguistics I.
Literature (LIT)
LIT-1990 First-Year Seminar–Fa, Sp
3 hours
This course will provide instruction in the close reading of and
the analytical writing about literary texts. Prerequisites: ENG-1400
Composition.
LIT-2090 Literary Analysis–Fa, Sp
[0-9] hours
Introductory study of contextual analysis. This course is
primarily intended for adolescent and young adult integrated
language arts and English majors as preparation for upper-division
literature courses. Prerequisite: LIT-1990 First-Year Seminar
LIT-2130 Dramatic Literature–Sp
3 hours
Study of the historical development of dramatic styles, theory,
criticism, and construction. Can be applied to meet English or
speech requirements, but not both. Crosslisted with THTR. (even
years)
LIT-2300 Introduction to Literature–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Emphasis on developing the ability to read critically and
analytically representative examples of literary genres through use
of appropriate criteria. Prerequisite: ENG-1400 Composition.
LIT-2330 World Mythology–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Study of selected world mythologies and the role of myth and
myth making, with an emphasis on non-Greco-Roman cultures, to
increase the student’s ability to read mythologies analytically and
appreciatively. Prerequisite: ENG-1400 Composition.
LIT-2340 Western Literature–Fa, Sp, Su
3 hours
Survey of major works of Western literary tradition from Homer
to T.S. Eliot. Prerequisite: ENG-1400 Composition.
LIT-2390
3 hours
Survey of American Literature to 1900–Fa, Sp
Study of prominent American authors from
1900. Although this course may be taken for general education
credit, it is primarily designed for majors. Prerequisite: ENG-1400
Composition
LIT-2430 Survey of British Literature to 1800–Fa
3 hours
Study of various English authors from
1800. Although this course may be taken for general education
credit, it is primarily designed for majors. Prerequisite: ENG-1400
Composition.
LIT-2440
3 hours
Survey of British Literature from  Present–Sp
Study of noteworthy English authors from  the present.
Although this course may be taken for general education credit,
it is primarily designed for majors. Prerequisite: ENG-1400
Composition.
LIT-3090 Literary Research and Recovery–Sp
3 hours
This course will introduce students to current trends in literary
scholarship that emphasize the (re)discovery, evaluation, and
recovery of formerly marginalized writers and genres. The course
could include, but is not limited to, an introduction to primary
research related to 19th and early 20th-century periodicals, literary
biographies, literary bibliographies, and original manuscripts or
previously published texts maintained in the Cedarville University
archives. Prerequisite: ENG-1400 Composition. (odd years)
LIT-3100
3 hours
Contemporary Young Adult Literature–Sp
A study of contemporary young adult literature, addressing
issues of interpretation, analysis, and personal response with an
emphasis on literature that reflects a diversity of gender, race, and
ethnicity. Prerequisite: ENG-1400 Composition.
LIT-3170
3 hours
Studies in American Literature: 1820–1865–Sp
Intensive study of American authors who wrote within the
historical context of years 1820–1865. Authors may include
Emerson, Thoreau, Fuller, Whitman, Dickinson, Douglass, Jacobs,
Stowe, Poe, Hawthorne, Melville, and others. Prerequisite: ENG-
1400 Composition. (even years)
LIT-3180
3 hours
Studies in American Literature: 1865–1914–Sp
Intensive study of American authors who wrote within the
historical context of the years 1865–1914. Authors may include
Twain, Howells, James, Wharton, Hopkins, Jewett, Freeman,
Chesnutt, Crane, Johnson, DuBuis, Wells, Dreiser, Norris, Alcott,
Zitkala-Sa, and others. Prerequisite: ENG-1400 Composition. (odd
years)
LIT-3230 Directed Readings–Fa, Sp
1–3 hours
Selected readings designed to strengthen the major by
providing primary and secondary material in preparation for an
independent study of a major writer, literary genre, or literary
period. Upper-level literature courses cannot be used as a
substitution for the general education literature requirement.
Prerequisite: ENG-1400 Composition.
LIT-3310 The English Novel–Fa
3 hours
Reading and critical analysis of representative novels written in
English. Authors include Fielding, Barnes, Rushdie, Gordimer, and
Greene. Prerequisite: ENG-1400 Composition. (odd years)
LIT-3320 Renaissance Literature–Sp
3 hours
A study of Metaphysicals, Milton, and other selected
Renaissance writers. Prerequisite: ENG-1400 Composition. (odd
years)
LIT-3350 Shakespeare–Fa
3 hours
Representative comedies, history plays, tragedies, and sonnets.
Prerequisite: ENG-1400 Composition.
LIT-3380 Contemporary British Literature–Fa
3 hours
Study of representative and significant 20th century British
writers, especially those reflective of modern ideologies.
Prerequisite: ENG-1400 Composition. (even years)
LIT-3400
[0-9] hours
Contemporary Studies in World Literature–Fa
Study of contemporary literature outside the American and
British traditions. Writers may include Chinua Achebe, Nadine
Gordimer, Duong Thu Huong, Gabriel Garcia Marquez, Haruki
Murakami, V.S. Naipaul, Moniru Ravanipur, Jose Saramago,
Tatyana Tolstoya, Luisa Valenzuela, Gao Xingjian, and others.
Prerequisite: ENG-1400 Composition. (even years)
LIT-3420 American Novel–Sp
3 hours
Study of the historical development of the American novel
and an analysis of the writings of major American novelists from
Cooper to Roth. Prerequisite: ENG-1400 Composition. (even
years)
LIT-3440 Multiethnic American Literature–Fa
3 hours
A survey of literature produced by writers from diverse ethnic
groups, including (but not limited) to Native American, African
American, Chicano, Jewish, and Asian American. Prerequisite:
ENG-1400 Composition. (odd years)
LIT-3460 Contemporary East Asian Literature–Fa
3 hours
This course introduces students to contemporary literature from
East Asia focusing primarily on works in translation from China,
Japan, and Korea. Prerequisite: ENG-1400 Composition. (odd
years)
LIT-3510 Modern American Literature–Fa
3 hours
Study of major American authors of the 20th century.
Prerequisite: ENG-1400 Composition. (odd years)
LIT-3520 C.S. Lewis and The Inklings–Sp
3 hours
Study of Lewis’ contributions in the fields of literature, criticism,
and apologetics. Special attention will be placed on understanding
Lewis’ personal and intellectual development, his relationships with
contemporary scholars and writers, and his continuing influence.
Prerequisite: ENG-1400 Composition. (odd years)
LIT-3530 Graphic Novel–Fa
3 hours
This course will focus on the emerging literary form of the
graphic novel. Students will be introduced to the history and
development of sequential art as well as the narrative techniques
and conventions used in graphic novels, manga, bandes
dessinees. Students will read a broad selection of representative
works. Upper-level literature courses cannot be used as a
substitution for the general education literature requirement.
Prerequisites:ENG-1400 Composition; major status or permission
of the instructor. (even years)
LIT-3540 American Women Writers–Sp
3 hours
Study of American Women writers between 1790 and 1940,
covering diverse women writers, genres, themes, and current
scholarship. Authors may include, but are not limited to Murray,
Rowson, Child, Sedgwick, Kirkland, Fuller, Farnham, Cary,
Cooke, Sara Payson Willis Parton (Fanny Fern), Cummins,
Warner, Beecher, Keckley, Stowe, Wilson, Alcott, Jacobs,
Southworth, Davis, Evans, Ruiz de Burton, Phelps, Stoddard,
Harper, Freeman, Winnemucca Hopkins, Jackson, Woolson,
Jewett, Chopin, Pauline Hopkins, Austin, Zitkalla-SA, Sui Sin Far,
Wharton, Larsen Fauset, Cather, and Hurston. Prerequisite: ENG-
1400 Composition. (even years)
LIT-4100 Studies in Integrated Language Arts–Sp
3 hours
This course is designed to explore the various methods and
theories essential to the teaching of English language arts. In
this course, students will discuss and practice with theories of
Backward Design, Long-term Planning and Assessment, 21st
Century Skills, and High-leverage practices as they are specifically
demonstrated in writing, reading, speaking, listening, and
language development. Prerequisites: ENG-1400 Composition;
EDUC-2050 Teaching Diverse Learners, currently enrolled in
LIT-3100 Principles of Teaching Adolescent and Young Adult, or
permission of instructor.
LIT-4220 English Seminar–Sp
3 hours
Research seminar designed to help the student synthesize
the skills emphasized in the English major. Required of all senior
English majors. Upper-level literature courses cannot be used as
a substitution for the general education literature requirement.
Capstone course. Prerequisite: ENG-1400 Composition.


LIT-2440 – LIT-4220
LIT-4230 Independent Study in Literature–Fa, Sp
1–3 hours
Independent study in a selected field for students with special
interests and demonstrated ability. Upper-level literature courses
cannot be used as a substitution for the general education
literature requirement. Prerequisite: ENG-1400 Composition.
LIT-4310 Literary Theory–Fa
3 hours
A study of theoretical literary contexts. Special consideration
will be given to economic, political, psychological, linguistic and
cultural contexts. Prerequisite: ENG-1400 Composition.
LIT-4420 European Novel–Sp
3 hours
Study of the 19th- and 20th-century influences on the novel
from  Camus. Prerequisite: ENG-1400 Composition.
(even years)
LIT-4450 Milton: Poetry and Selected Prose–Fa
3 hours
A study of Milton’s early poetry, Paradise Lost, Paradise
Regained, Samson Agonistes, and selected prose works.
Prerequisite: ENG-1400 Composition. (even years)
LIT-4490 Special Topics–Fa, Sp
1–3 hours
Investigation of such literary phenomena that have intrinsic
worth and engage student interest. Upper-level literature courses
cannot be used as a substitution for the general education
literature requirement. Prerequisite: ENG-1400 Composition.
LIT-4510
3 hours
Recent American Literature 1945–Present–Fa
A study of the social, political, economic, and religious issues
that defined the American experience in the last half of the 20th
century. Diverse poetry, short stories, drama, novels, and films
will be analyzed to give students an understanding of the myriad
subjectivities that have shaped American values and attitudes
since World War II. Prerequisite: ENG-1400 Composition. (even
years)
Multi-Age Health Education (MAHE)
MAHE-3030 Nutrition–Fa, Sp
3 hours
A study of the science of nutrition, together with the study of
eating habit formation and modification for optimal wellness,
fitness, and performance, presented from a Christian perspective.
MAHE-3070 Current Issues in Health–Fa
1 hour
Designed to explore, from a Christian perspective, health-
related issues that challenge our society. This course recognizes
the reality that there are “no easy answers” as ethics, technology,
and economics merge to generate new dilemmas of increasing
complexity every day.
MAHE-3130 School Health Program–Sp
3 hours
Analysis of the scope of the school health program, including
health services, healthful school living, and health instruction.
MAHE-3150 Health Concepts for the Educator–Sp
3 hours
This course is intended to prepare students to understand the
role of the health educator in the comprehensive school health
education program. Nutrition, drug education, sexuality education,
mental and emotional health unit content areas will be addressed
from a biblical perspective.
MAHE-4610 Teaching Health–Fa
3 hours
The teacher’s role in comprehensive school health education
including an introduction to the health status of youth, at-risk
students, objectives from Healthy People 2020, components of
comprehensive school health education, the role of the teacher
in school health services, and special health concerns of today’s
children and youth. As well, curriculum review, behavioral
objectives, life skills, scope and sequence of learning, teaching
strategies, responsible decision-making, resistance skills, health
behavior contracts, health resources, student-learner evaluation,
and assessment concepts and procedures will be presented.
Prerequisite: Admission to the Teacher Education Program. (Odd
years)
MAHE-4850
1–3 hours
Independent Study in Health Education–Fa, Sp
Independent study in the area of health education by students
pursuing multi-age health education teaching licensure or a health
promotion minor. Prerequisite: Departmental approval is required.
Multi-Age Physical Education (MAPE)
MAPE-1000 Foundations of Physical Education–Fa
1 hour
Orientation to the history, philosophy, and scope of modern
exercise and sport science from a theistic perspective.
MAPE-1500 Teaching Sport Concepts and Skills–Fa
1 hour
This course is an introduction to the tactical games approach
in teaching physical education. Preparing students for learning
games and important principles of game teaching will be
addressed. The course will include the concept of tactical
transfer and the process of teaching within a game. The course
will promote an interest in the game-learning process, an
understanding of playing a game, and the ability to play a game.
The course is presented from the biblical perspective of the
teaching profession as it relates to physical education.
MAPE-2000 Recreational Games–Fa
2 hours
Theory and practice in frisbee games (disc golf, ultimate), flag
football, softball, and spikeball with attention given to various
teaching methods, skills, and rules. Prerequisite: MAPE-1500
Teaching Sport Concepts. (Fee: $25)
MAPE-2300 Net Games–Fa
2 hours
Theory and practice in volleyball, tennis, badminton, and
pickleball with attention given to various teaching methods, skills,
and rules. Prerequisite: MAPE-1500 Teaching Sport Concepts.
(Fee: $25).
MAPE-2600 Invasion Games–Sp
2 hours
Theory and practice in basketball, soccer, team handball, and
speedball with attention given to various teaching methods, skills,
and rules. Prerequisite: MAPE-1500 Teaching Sport Concepts and
Skills. (Fee: $25).
MAPE-2900 Lifetime Physical Fitness–Sp
2 hours
Fundamentals in improving cardiorespiratory endurance,
muscular strength and endurance, flexibility, balance, and
circuit training with attention given to various teaching methods,
exercises and drills. (Fee: $25)
MAPE-3600
5 hours
Physical Education in the Elementary School–Sp
An overview of the place of physical education in the
elementary school curriculum with an emphasis on the study of
current program content design, teaching techniques, assessment
concepts and procedures, as well as modifying activities for
the purpose of inclusion for the physically challenged. SHAPE
standards aligned with assessment and the analysis of student
learning are a vital part of this course.
MAPE-4500
2 hours
Curriculum Development in Physical Education–Fa
Overview of the curriculum process in physical education,
specifically giving attention to the theoretical base, process of
curriculum design, and curriculum development for elementary
through high school educational programs. Prerequisite: MAPE-
3600 Physical Education in the Elementary School; Corequisite:
MAPE-4950 Methods of Secondary Physical Education.
MAPE-4850
1–3 hours
Independent Study in Physical Education–Fa, Sp
Independent study by major students of advanced standing
toward the understanding and appreciation of problems in physical
education. This course gives students an opportunity to develop
skills in the use of literature and in the appropriate techniques of
problem solving. Prerequisite: Departmental approval is required.




LIT-4230 – MAPE-4850
MAPE-4950
3 hours
Methods of Teaching Secondary Physical Education–Fa
This course provides the study of methods of instruction and
practice and the study of planning and implementing units of
instruction, as well as evaluating the effectiveness of various
teaching strategies for teaching physical education at the
secondary level. Also included is the study of understanding and
developing assessment techniques in physical education and
developing strategies for working with handicapped students.
Prerequisite: Admission to the Teacher Education Program.
MAPE-4960 Field Experience–Fa
4 hours
A field experience within the MAHPE and MAPE majors in
conjunction with MAPE-4950 Methods of Teaching Secondary
Physical Education and MAPE-4970 Field Experience in Physical
Education-Special Populations. This course requires a current
Ohio FBI Background Clearance Report to be on file in the School
of Education for the duration of the field experience. Prerequisite:
Admission to the Teacher Education Program. Credit/no credit.
(Fee: $100)
MAPE-4970
2 hours
Field Experience in Physical Education–Special

Populations–Fa
An adapted physical education teaching field experience taken
in conjunction with MAPE-4950 and MAPE 4960 that seeks
to provide the opportunity for application of adapted physical
education content and theory studied in MAPE-4950 Methods of
Teaching Physical Education. This course requires a current Ohio
FBI Background Clearance Report to be on file in the School of
Education for the duration of the field experience. Prerequisites:
Admission to the Teacher Education Program; MAPE-4950
Methods of Teaching Physical Education; MAPE-4960 Field
Experience. (Fee: $35)
Mathematics (MATH)
MATH-1700
4 hours
Calculus and Dynamical Systems for the

Life Sciences–Fa, Sp
An introductory calculus and dynamical systems course for
majors in the life sciences. Discrete and continuous dynamical
systems, limits and derivatives, including derivatives of
trigonometric, exponential, logarithmic and inverse trigonometric
functions, applications of derivatives and dynamical systems,
including related rates and optimization, differential equations,
integrals - both definite and indefinite - and their applications,
and possibly analysis of autonomous differential equations.
Prerequisite: GMTH-1030 Precalculus or equivalent; or permission
of instructor.
MATH-1710 Calculus I–Fa, Sp
5 hours
First course of a two-course sequence covering basic concepts
of analytic geometry and single variable calculus. Includes limits
and single variable calculus. Includes limits and derivatives
of algebraic and transcendental functions, applications of the
derivative, single variable integration, including the Fundamental
Theorem of Calculus and integration by substitution, and
applications of integration, including solving differential equations
and finding volumes of revolution. Prerequisite: GMTH-1030
Precalculus or equivalent; or permission of instructor.
MATH-1720 Calculus II–Fa, Sp
5 hours
The second course of a two-course sequence covering the
basic concepts of analytic geometry and single variable calculus.
Includes techniques of integration such as integration by parts,
trigonometric substitution and partial fractions, improper integrals
and L’Hopital’s rule, sequences, series, expansion of functions into
Taylor and power series, conic sections, plane curves, calculus
of parametric equations and polar coordinates, vectors and
geometry in three-space, vector-valued functions and curvature.
Prerequisite: MATH-1710 Calculus I or equivalent or permission of
instructor.
MATH-1880 Topics in Calculus–Fa, Sp, Su
1–3 hours
This course is for students who are attempting to transfer
credit for MATH-1710 or MATH-1720 Calculus I and II when those
transferred courses lack some of the topics contained in MATH-
1710 or MATH-1720. It requires full participation in a MATH-1710
or MATH-1720 course during the sections in which the student’s
transferred course is found to be deficient or in a stand-alone
course offered during Summer School I. Prerequisite: GMTH-1030
Precalculus or equivalent; permission of instructor. Corequisite:
partial transfer credit for MATH-1710 and/or MATH-1720 or
approved transient credit for a Calculus I or II course that will
provide less than full credit for MATH-1710 or MATH 1720.
MATH-1990
3 hours
Beautiful Math Structures and Thinking–Fa
This course introduces freshmen math majors to interesting
mathematical ideas and applications beyond the usual scope
of standard math courses. Topics include an introduction to
propositional logic, function theory, and infinite sets. Other
topics will be chosen from elementary number theory, modular
arithmetic, error-correcting codes, Fibonacci numbers and the
golden ratio, fractals, discrete dynamical systems and chaos, Euler
and Hamilton Circuits, democracy and impossibility theorems,
game theory, the Platonic solids, n-dimensional space, and other
topics up to the discretion of the instructor.
MATH-2210 Logic and Methods of Proof–Fa
3 hours
Introduction to formal mathematical logic; emphasis on
preparing students for the abstraction of upper-division courses.
Special attention is given to the development of students’
skills with a variety of methods of proof, using examples from
numerous areas. Prerequisites: MATH-1720 Calculus II; MATH-
1990 Beautiful Math Structures and Thinking; or permission of
instructor.
MATH-2510 Discrete Math for Computer Science–Sp
3 hours
An introduction to mathematical foundations of computer
science, including propositional and predicate calculus, methods
of proof, sets and relations, recurrences, graphs and trees, and
program correctness and proofs. This course does not satisfy
any requirements for the BA or BS in mathematics or the BA
in integrated mathematics education. Prerequisite: MATH-1710
Calculus I.
MATH-2520
3 hours
Discrete Math and Probability Principles for
Computer Science–Sp
An introduction to mathematical foundations of computer
science, including propositional and predicate calculus, methods
of proof, sets and relations, recurrences, program correctness
and proofs, probability models, random variables, probability
distributions, estimation, and hypothesis testing. This course does
not satisfy any requirements for the BA or BS in mathematics or
the BA in integrated mathematics education Prerequisites: MATH-
1720 Calculus II; EGCP-1010 Digital Logic Design.
MATH-2710 Calculus III–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Introduction to differential and integral calculus of several
variables, multiple integrals, vector analysis, line integrals,
and surface integrals. Prerequisite: MATH-1720 Calculus II or
equivalent or permission of instructor.


MAPE-4950 – MATH-2710
MATH-2740 Differential Equations–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Study of the standard techniques employed in the solution of
differential equations with emphasis on those arising from physical
problems. Prerequisite: MATH-1720 Calculus II or equivalent.
MATH-2800 LaTeX for Technical Documents–Sp
1 hour
In this course students will be introduced to the typesetting
language of LaTeX through the use of tutorials, example
documents, and homework assignments. They will learn to easily
prepare professional-looking theses, conference papers, and
journal papers. They will also learn how to create professional-
looking presentations, homework, quizzes, examinations, syllabi,
resumés, and curriculum vitae.
MATH-3050
4 hours
Algebraic Structures for Secondary Education Majors–Fa
An introduction to the basic ideas of number theory,
abstract algebra, and linear algebra. Factorization of integers,
congruence modulo m, Fermat’s Theorem, groups, rings, integral
domains, fields, vector spaces, systems of linear equations,
determinants and inverses, linear transformations, eigenvalues,
and eigenvectors. Does not count toward BA or BS majors in
mathematics. Prerequisites: MATH-2210 Logic and Methods of
Proof. (even years)
MATH-3110 Probability and Statistics–Sp
3 hours
Probability models, random variables, probability distributions,
estimation, and hypothesis tests are studied from theoretical and
practical viewpoints. Prerequisite: MATH-1720 Calculus II.
MATH-3120 Theory of Probability–Sp
3 hours
Topics include combinatorial analysis, axioms of probability,
conditional probability, independent events, Bayes’ Formula,
random variables, expected value, variance, discrete distributions,
continuous distributions, joint distributions, the Law of Large
Numbers, and the Central Limit Theorem. Prerequisites: MATH-
2710 Calculus III; MATH-2210 Logic and Methods of Proof
MATH-3240 Introduction to Operations Research–Fa
3 hours
Formulation and analysis of mathematical models for the
optimal solution of decision-making problems under certainty.
Course content includes linear programming; the simplex method,
duality and sensitivity analysis. This course applies probabilistic
analysis to such nondeterministic models as queueing models,
elements of dynamic programming, and Markov decision analysis.
Prerequisites: MATH-3610 Linear Algebra; or permission of the
instructor. (even years)
MATH-3500 Number Theory–Fa
3 hours
Introduction to most of the topics of elementary number
theory such as modular arithmetic, prime factorizations, linear
diophantine equations, the Chinese remainder theorem, quadratic
reciprocity, Pythagorean triples, number theoretic functions, and
related topics. Concrete examples will illustrate the concepts and
abstract reasoning will develop the theories considered in the
course. Prerequisite: MATH-2210 Logic and Methods of Proof.
(odd years)
MATH-3550 Discrete Math: Graph Theory–Fa
3 hours
Introduction to the basic concepts of graph theory and discrete
mathematics problem-solving. Topics covered include elements
of graph theory, covering circuits, graph coloring, trees and
searching, and network algorithms. Prerequisite: MATH-2210
Logic and Methods of Proof. (odd years)
MATH-3560 Discrete Math: Combinatorics–Sp
3 hours
Study of combinatorial reasoning, focusing on enumeration.
Intended to develop a proficiency in methods of enumerative
problem solving. Topics chosen from areas such as counting
methods for arrangements and selections, permutations and
combinations, generating functions, partitions, and recurrence
relations. Prerequisite: MATH-2210 Logic and Methods of Proof
or MATH-2520 Discrete Math and Probability Principles for
Computer Science.(odd years)
MATH-3610 Linear Algebra–Sp
3 hours
Introduction to the algebra of linear equations, including
determinants, matrices, vector spaces, eigenvalues, eigenvectors,
and linear mappings. Prerequisite: MATH-1720 Calculus II or
equivalent.
MATH-3710 Advanced Calculus–Sp
3 hours
Topics in function theory, vector analysis, differential calculus of
several variables, vector differential calculus of several variables,
integral calculus of several variables, vector integral calculus of
several variables, and infinite series. Prerequisite: MATH-2710
Calculus III or equivalent or permission of instructor. (even years)
MATH-3740 Complex Variables–Sp
3 hours
Introduction to complex arithmetic, differentiation: analytic
functions, Cauchy-Riemann equations, harmonic functions,
elementary functions and their mapping properties, integration:
Cauchy’s Theorem, Cauchy’s Integral Formula, Taylor and Laurent
series, poles, residues, and the residue theorem. Prerequisite:
MATH-1720 Calculus II. (odd years)
MATH-3750 Introduction to Dynamical Systems–Sp
3 hours
Topics include one-dimensional flows and bifurcations, phase
portraits, linearization and classification of equilibrium points, limit
cycles, chaos, one-dimensional maps, and fractals. Prerequisite:
MATH-2740 Differential Equations. (even years)
MATH-3760 Numerical Analysis–Sp
3 hours
Analysis of computational error, solutions of equations of one
variable, interpolation, numerical differentiation and integration,
finite difference methods for solving ordinary differential
equations, solving linear algebraic systems, and least squares
approximations. Prerequisites: CS-1210 C++ Programming;
MATH-2710 Calculus III; MATH-2740 Differential Equations. (odd
years)
MATH-3800 Research Methods–Sp
1 hour
This course will introduce the mathematics major to the
various resources and methods available for researching topics
in mathematics. This could include the use of library resources at
Cedarville University, use of Internet resources, WWW searches,
and a tour of the library at a larger university, where journals
and indices of importance can be referenced. Prerequisites:
MATH-2210 Logic and Methods of Proof; ENG-1400 English
Composition. (Fee: $50)
MATH-4130 Mathematical Statistics–Fa
3 hours
Topics include random variables, normal sampling theory,
likelihood-based and Bayesian approaches to point estimation,
confidence intervals, tests of hypotheses, and an introduction to
regression and the analysis of variance. Prerequisites: MATH-2210
Logic and Methods of Proof; MATH-2710 Calculus III; MATH-3110
Probability and Statistics or MATH-3120 Theory of Probability;
MATH-3610 Linear Algebra. (odd years)
MATH-4210 Mathematical Methods for Physicists–Fa
3 hours
Advanced mathematical methods used in the solution of
physics problems. Topics include curvilinear coordinates, vector
analysis, and solutions to partial differential equations using
Fourier, Bessel and Legendre functions. Prerequisites: MATH-
2710 Calculus III; MATH-2740 Differential Equations. (odd years)
MATH-4410
3 hours
Euclidean and Non-Euclidean Geometry–Sp
Rigorous treatment of the foundations of Euclidean geometry;
an introduction to hyperbolic geometry with emphasis on its
Euclidean models. Prerequisites: MATH-2210 Logic and Methods
of Proof.




MATH-2740 – MATH-4410
MATH-4450 Topology–Fa
3 hours
An introduction to elementary point set topology with
emphasis on illustrating how the familiar concepts of closed and
open intervals, continuity of functions, distances, and various
geometrical properties have been generalized from classical
mathematics. Topics include: metric spaces, topological space
theory, separation axioms, covering properties, compactness,
connectedness, metrizability, and complete metric spaces.
Prerequisite: MATH-2210 Logic and Methods of Proof. (even
years)
MATH-4610, 4620 Abstract Algebra I and II–Fa, Sp
3 hours /sem
Introduction to and development of the basic ideas of algebraic
systems, groups, rings, integral domains, fields, and other
advanced topics. Prerequisite: MATH-2210 Logic and Methods of
Proof. (even years)
MATH-4710, 4720 Real Variables I and II–Fa, Sp
3 hours /sem
Introduction to the real number system’s algebraic order,
completeness, and cardinality properties, the topology of
Cartesian spaces Rn and functions including continuity and
uniform continuity, connectedness, convexity, compactness,
various types of convergence, limits, differentiability, and Riemann
integration, measurability, and Ln. Prerequisites: MATH-2210
Logic and Methods of Proof. (odd years)
MATH-4800
3 hours
Capstone Experience in Mathematics–Fa, Sp
The course will allow students to deeply research an important
topic in mathematics, both individually and collectively, and to
present their findings from library research as well as personal
work. Prerequisites: MATH-3800 Research Methods in
Mathematics; 15 hours of MATH courses 2XXX-level or above;
permission of instructor. (Fee: $20)
MATH-4880 Topics in Mathematics–Fa, Sp
1–3 hours
Some typical topics are linear programming, numerical analysis,
stochastic calculus, non-parametric statistics, partial differential
equations, or mathematical modeling. This course is intended to
be a topic not in the current curriculum that is a logical extension
and development of the student’s academic plan. Prerequisite:
permission of instructor.
MATH-4900
1–3 hours
Independent Study in Mathematics–Fa, Sp
Independent research in the various branches of mathematics
and allied fields of application. Submission and approval of a
research proposal must precede registration. Prerequisite: Major
in mathematics or permission of research advisor.
Molecular Biology (MBIO)
MBIO-3210 Advanced Cell Biology–Sp
4 hours
In-depth study of the cell will include the following topics:
biochemical and electrical properties of membranes, the
endomembrane system, molecular machines and cellular
organization, normal cell physiology and division, differentiation,
signaling pathways and gene regulation, and programmed cell
death. Three lectures and one three-hour laboratory per week.
Prerequisites: BIO-1115 Biology I: Cell Biology; CHEM-1120
General Chemistry II or permission of the instructor. (Fee $100)
MBIO-4220 Signal Transduction–Fa
4 hours
Study of major cellular signaling pathways and their
physiological functions in homeostasis and disease. Applications
to development, organ and tissue homeostasis, and conditions
arising from aberrant signaling, such as cancer. Emphasis
upon current discoveries and analysis of current, peer-reviewed
literature in the field. Three (50-minute) lectures per week and one
laboratory per week. Prerequisites: MBIO-3210 Advanced Cell
Biology or permission of instructor. (odd years)
MBIO-4250 Biology of Cancer–Fa
4 hours
Study of cancer including classification of cancer,
pathophysiology of the disease in terms of signal transduction
and gene regulation, and mechanisms behind current and
experimental treatments for the disease. Three (50-minute)
lectures per week and one laboratory per week. Prerequisites:
MBIO-3210 Advanced Cell Biology or permission of instructor.
(even years)
MBIO-4300 Molecular Biology–Fa
4 hours
Study of the molecules that make up the living cell with an
emphasis on nucleic acid biology. Three lectures and one (three-
hour) laboratory per week. Prerequisites: BIO-3300 Genetics;
BIO-3710 Biochemistry. (Fee: $100)
MBIO-4310 Eukaryotic Gene Regulation–Sp
3 hours
This course covers eukaryotic gene regulation, which
encompasses the knowledge of both basal and regulated
transcriptional machinery, how these proteins are regulated,
how they regulate gene expression, and their role in cancer
progression. Emphasis is placed on the role of chromatin structure
and epigenetics in gene expression. Prerequisite: MBIO-4300
Molecular Biology.
MBIO-4370 Virology–Sp
3 hours
The concepts and methods of virology are covered, with
emphasis on animal viruses, within the framework of cell
biology, genetics, molecular biology, immunology, pathology, and
epidemiology. Viral replication will be examined in detail. The
effects that viruses inflict on host cells will also be examined, as
will some of the host cell responses generated by such virus-cell
interactions, including interferon induction, the antiviral response
generated by interferon, and oncogenic transformation. In addition,
an overview of procedures used for prevention and treatment of
viral diseases via vaccines and antiviral drugs, respectively, will be
presented. Prerequisite: BIO-3300 Genetics. (even years)
Management (MGMT)
MGMT-3500
3 hours
Principles of Organization and Management–Fa, Sp
An examination of the policies, principles, practices, and
problems involved in the management of organizations as they are
currently being applied in the United States and around the world
to meet or exceed customer’s expectations.
MGMT-3510
3 hours
Entrepreneurship and Small Business Management–Fa
This course will introduce students to business innovation
and entrepreneurship in small and large organizations. The
basics of envisioning, evaluating, starting, and running a brand
new business and/or a new business unit within an existing
organization will be explored. (crosslisted with ENTR-3510
Entrepreneurship and Small Business Management)
MGMT-3525 Service and Production Operations–Fa
3 hours
This course introduces management concepts, methodologies,
and application to service and production operations. The
course develops an understanding of the role of OM and how
management decisions in product or service design, analysis
and development of processes bring value to both the customer
and the organization. Prerequisites: ACCT-2120 Principles of
Accounting II; BUS-2150 Statistics for Business; MGMT-3500
Principles of Organization and Management; or permission of
instructor. (Fee: $50)
MGMT-3530 Human Resources Management–Fa
3 hours
An analysis of the principle functions, processes, and problems
involved in the management of personnel policies; selection,
training, promotion, compensation, and discharge of personnel;
labor turnover, safety, health, and recreation. Prerequisite: MGMT-
3500 Principles of Organization and Management or permission
of instructor.


MATH-4450 – MGMT-3530
MGMT-4560
3 hours
Organizational Change and Development–Sp
This course focuses on the theories, concepts, processes,
and tools of leading successful organizational change, as
changes involve sensitivity to issues that arise at the individual,
interpersonal, and institutional levels as well as building the
organization’s capacity to both adapt to change and generate
innovation. Prerequisite: MGMT-3500 Principles of Organization
and Management or permission of instructor.
MGMT-4570 Lean Operations Management–Sp
3 hours
This course expands on critical topics in the field of operations
management, including the operations management strategy and
tools and contemporary topics such as “Lean” techniques, value-
stream mapping, and Fundamentals of Six Sigma. Prerequisite:
MGMT-3525 Service and Production Operations; or permission of
instructor. (Fee: $50)
MGMT-4580
3 hours
Construction Planning and Scheduling–Sp
This course introduces students to theory and application of
construction scheduling to control the acquisition, movement,
storage, and utilization of workers, material, and equipment with
emphasis given to the Critical Path Method (CPM). (even years)
MGMT-4590 Construction Estimating–Fa
3 hours
This course introduces students to advanced concepts in
estimating including but not limited to labor and equipment
calculations, the use of price databases, direct and indirect cost,
bid preparation and computer applications. (odd years)
Army ROTC (MIL)
Army ROTC courses are offered through Cedarville University in
collaboration with the Army ROTC detachment located at Central
State University. While Army ROTC courses are included in the
Cedarville University course schedule for registration purposes,
classes, labs, and physical training are usually conducted on the
campuses of Central State University and Cedarville University.
Cedarville University provides transportation for off-site classes.
MIL-1000 Leadership Lab I
0 hours
Applied Army ROTC training. Taken concurrently with 1000-level
MIL courses.
MIL-1010,1020 Military Science I
2 hours/sem
Introduction to the history, role, and organization of the Army
and ROTC, as well as the U.S. Army Reserve and U.S. Army
National Guard, and the available career options. Introduces
officership, military customs and traditions, map reading, land
navigation, field training, first-aid procedures, and physical fitness
training. Familiarize with rank structure, drill and ceremony, military
courtesies, weapons, marksmanship, and communications
equipment. Discuss styles and fundamentals of leadership and
develop leadership skills.
MIL-2000 Leadership Lab II
0 hours
Applied Army ROTC training. Taken concurrently with 2000-level
MIL courses.
MIL-2010,2020 Military Science II
2 hours/sem
Course of study includes emergency first-aid procedures, field
survival practices, physical fitness, orienteering, and small-unit
leadership training. Explores the various career management
fields within the Army. Students will begin to receive leadership
assignments and responsibility within the cadet battalion.
Introduction to advanced course of study.
MIL-3000 Leadership Lab Ill
0 hours
Applied Army ROTC training. Taken concurrently with 3000-level
MIL courses.
MGMT-3560 Project Management–Fa
3 hours
This course will lay a foundation for an understanding of project
management principles. It will examine principles, processes, and
tools project managers have developed to effectively manage and
lead projects.
MGMT-3580
3 hours
Compensation and Benefits Management–Sp
An introduction to the concepts, methodologies, and application
of compensation and benefit programs within human resources.
Designed to develop problem-solving and decision-making
skills in the area of compensation and benefits. Students will
also learn to develop “lean” thinking necessary to create value
for stakeholders in organization through this human resources
function. Prerequisites: MGMT-3500 Principles of Organization
and Management; MGMT-3530 Human Resources Management;
or permission of instructor. (even years)
MGMT-3650 Construction Materials and Methods–Sp
3 hours
This course introduces students to construction materials
and methods. The following concepts are presented: (a) site
investigation, (b) construction material characteristics, (c)
construction methods, (d) equipment types and uses, and (e)
equipment production rates and costs. (Fee: $50) (odd years)
MGMT-3690
3 hours
Construction Contracts and Delivery Methods–Fa
This course introduces students to the various aspects of
construction contracts and documentation procedures including
contract delivery methods and selection criteria. The course
includes issues involving contract law and ethics. (even years)
MGMT-4510 Strategic Management–Fa, Sp
3 hours
This capstone course requires the synthesis of the knowledge
and skills gained through your previous business courses. Your
group will complete a comprehensive situation analysis (SWOT),
and then develop eight possible strategies for a publicly traded
company–finally selecting one rationalized strategy, using an M&A
tactic, and present to the class. Open only to seniors in business
administration within 2 semesters of graduation. Must be taken
at Cedarville University; transfer or transient credit for this course
will generally not be accepted. Capstone course. Prerequisites:
FIN-3710 Principles of Finance; MGMT-3500 Principles of
Organization and Management; MRKT-3600 Principles of
Marketing. (Fee:$50)
MGMT-4520 Supply Chain Management–Sp
3 hours
Introduces students to key concepts in supply chain design,
planning, and operations. Typical content includes the supply chain
strategic environment, designing appropriate networks, forecasting
demand and supply, planning and managing inventories, sourcing
and transporting products, supply chain coordination, and the
impact of technology on supply chain management. Course
methodology emphasizes application of concepts through case
study, plant tours, and presentations. Prerequisites: BUS-2150
Statistics for Business; MGMT-3525 Service and Production
Operations. (Fee: $50)
MGMT-4530 Industrial Relations Management–Sp
3 hours
The interplay between market forces and institutional rules that
determine the employment relationship. Labor history, the effects
of changing public policies, trade unions, and collective bargaining
are viewed from various international perspectives. Prerequisites:
MGMT-3500 Principles of Organization and Management. (odd
years)
MGMT-4550 Applied Leadership–Fa, Sp
3 hours
This is an advanced course about managing people and
organizations in the 21st century. It is intended for seniors who
will soon face the challenge of leadership and influence in the
workplace, in business and other disciplines. This course will
integrate and apply what students need to meet the leadership
challenge. Prerequisite: MGMT-3500 Principles of Organizational
Management; or permission of instructor.




MGMT-3560 – MIL-3000
MIL-3010,3020 Military Science Ill
3 hours/sem
The junior year of military science is completely dedicated to
developing leadership skills and preparing students for the six-
week Advanced Camp in the summer of the junior year. Subjects
covered are drill, leadership, marksmanship training, squad and
team tactics with leadership exercises and advanced navigation
training on day and night courses. Students learn to inspect
soldiers’ equipment, draft and issue orders, and plan and conduct
training as a small-unit leader. Prerequisite: Approval of professor
of military science.
MIL-4000 Leadership Lab IV
0 hours
Applied Army ROTC training. Taken concurrently with 4000-level
MIL courses.
MIL-4010,4020 Military Science IV
3 hours/sem
The senior year of military science provides senior cadets with
advanced managerial leadership skills. Army staff procedures and
functions are taught. These staff skills are put into practice through
the assignment of seniors to major leadership positions within the
cadet battalion. Seniors learn to command, lead, manage, plan,
and supervise as they prepare for commissioning as officers in
the United States Army. Senior students will receive instruction
on military professionalism and ethics. Prerequisite: Approval of
professor of military science.
Marketing (MRKT)
MRKT-3410 Topics in Marketing–Fa, Sp, Su
1–3 hours
A variety of topics are covered under this heading on an
experimental basis. This allows the department to meet the
changing needs of the students without formally adding or
dropping courses.
MRKT-3600 Principles of Marketing–Fa, Sp
3 hours
This course examines the marketing processes of businesses
and other types of organizations from an analytical perspective.
Special attention is placed on the marketing environment and
the needs and behaviors of market segments as key drivers of
marketing planning for positioning, product, pricing, distribution,
and communication strategies and tactics. Prerequisite: Junior
status or permission of instructor.
MRKT-3610 Sales/Sales Management Systems–Sp
3 hours
Principles employed in the development, administration, and
strategy of a sales force. Professional selling from a Christian
perspective along with training, managing, compensating, and
motivating a sales force. Prerequisites: MGMT-3500 Principles
of Organization and Management; MRKT-3600 Principles of
Marketing.
MRKT-3630 Marketing Research–Sp
3 hours
This course examines marketing research methods to
understand how they generate different types of information
relevant to the identification and solution of problems in marketing.
Students will complete a research project that will teach them
how to formulate marketing problems, design relevant studies,
collect and analyze data, draw appropriate conclusions, and
make recommendations that lead to sound marketing actions.
Prerequisites: BUS-2150 Statistics for Business; MRKT-3600
Principles of Marketing; MRKT-3650 Consumer Behavior.
MRKT-3650 Consumer Behavior–Fa
3 hours
This course examines behavioral concepts and theories from
psychology, sociology, anthropology, and economics. Primary
focus is on identifying and/or creating consumer behavior models
that inform marketing research and produce insights that guide
appropriate marketing decision-making and strategy development.
Prerequisite: MRKT-3600 Principles of Marketing.
MRKT-3660 Integrated Marketing Communications–Fa
3 hours
This course represents the various ways in which an
organization “voices” appropriate messages in response to the
needs of the market. This course prepares students to create,
implement, and assess effective communication strategies that
coordinate traditional communication tools (advertising, sales,
public relations, publicity, sales promotion, packaging) with more
contemporary tools (electronic and social media) to accomplish
specific communications and  marketing objectives. Prerequisite:
MRKT-3600 Principles of Marketing.
MRKT-3670 Business-to-Business Marketing–Fa
3 hours
Business-to-Business Marketing represents a much larger
sector of economy and a greater number of jobs than consumer
marketing. This course prepares students to effectively manage
the unique strategic challenges of marketing goods and services
to businesses, governments, and institutions. Prerequisite: MRKT-
3600 Principles of Marketing.
MRKT-3680 Nonprofit Marketing–Sp
3 hours
Designed to acquaint the student with skills, abilities, and
attitudes necessary to effectively implement marketing practice
in nonprofit organizations. Prerequisite: MRKT-3600 Principles of
Marketing or permission of instructor.
MRKT-3690 Services Marketing–Sp
3 hours
The vast majority of the global economy is based on service
organizations that perform tasks on behalf of their customers. As
compared to physical goods, services are uniquely challenging
to market because the product 1) is largely intangible, 2) varies
more in quality, 3) often involves customers in the production
process, and 4) cannot be inventoried for future sale. This class is
designed to help students prepare to meet those challenges in the
marketplace. Prerequisite: MRKT-3600 Principles of Marketing
MRKT-4610 Marketing Strategy–Sp
3 hours
This is the culminating course for marketing majors. Its
purpose is to build on what has been learned in prior marketing
and business coursework in order to form a comprehensive
and integrated perspective of strategic marketing management.
Students will apply their knowledge in broad-based contexts in
order to deepen their ability to develop cohesive and effective
strategic and tactical marketing plans. Must be taken at Cedarville
University; transfer or transient credit for this course will generally
not be accepted. Prerequisites: Senior status; twelve hours
of marketing including MRKT-3600 Principles of Marketing,
MRKT3630 Marketing Research, and MRKT-3650 Consumer
Behavior.
MRKT-4620 International Marketing–Fa
3 hours
The challenges of discovering and pursuing opportunities
for effectively marketing goods and/or services globally are
immense. This course involves an intensive investigation of the
environmental factors (economic, financial, cultural, political and
legal) that must be thoroughly understood and factored into the
development of global marketing strategies. Prerequisite: MRKT-
3600 Principles of Marketing.
Mathematics Education (MTED)
MTED-3110 Clinical Teaching in Mathematics–Fa, Sp
1 hour
Students are assigned to assist a college instructor in
classroom and laboratory teaching, evaluation, and related
responsibilities. The student must complete 40 clock hours of
clinical involvement in each teaching field for which licensure is
desired. Prerequisite: Completion of Introduction to Education
Block.
MTED-3120 Teaching Mathematics–Fa
3 hours
Designed to introduce prospective secondary school
mathematics teachers to the curriculum, materials, and methods
of classroom teaching. Prerequisite: Admission to the Teacher
Education Program.


MIL-3010 – MTED-3120
Music Education (MUED)
MUED-1000 NAfME–Fa, Sp
0 hours
The National Association for Music Education exists to advance
music education by encouraging the study and making of music
by all. NAfME is the primary professional organization for music
educators. The campus chapter provides informative seminars
including a focus on Value Added Assessment along with
service activities. NAfME offers music educators a connection
to the professional world of music education and increased
understanding of the role of NAfME in the field of music teaching.
All music education majors are required to enroll in this course as
part of their professional development and career preparation. A
minimum of 8 semesters of satisfactory participation is required.
(Fee: $60)
MUED-2730
2 hours
Wind and Percussion Methods for Music Educators–Sp
Class instruction in basic playing and teaching of all band
instruments. Required for the vocal major pursuing the Bachelor
of Music Education degree and instrumental performance majors;
open to others by permission of the instructor. (Fee: $40) (even
years)
MUED-2870 Brass Methods for Music Educators–Fa
2 hours
Class instruction in basic playing and teaching of the brass
instruments – trumpet, horn, trombone, baritone, tuba. (Fee: $40)
(even years)
MUED-2900 Guitar Methods for Music Educators–Sp
1 hour
Class instruction in basic playing and teaching of guitar.
Required of music education majors pursuing the choral track.
Open to other students by permission of instructor. (Fee: $40)
MUED-2910
2 hours
Woodwind Methods for Music Educators–Sp
Class instruction in basic playing and teaching of the woodwind
instruments – flute, oboe, clarinet, saxophone, and bassoon. (Fee:
$40) (even years)
MUED-2930 String Methods for Music Educators–Fa
2 hours
Class instruction in basic playing and teaching of the string
instruments – violin, viola, cello, string bass. (Fee: $40) (odd
years)
MUED-2950
2 hours
Percussion Methods for Music Educators–Sp
Class instruction in basic techniques, playing and teaching of
the snare drum, tympani, and other tuned percussion instruments.
(Fee: $40) (odd years)
MUED-3710 Music for Early Childhood–Fa
3 hours
Music literature and teaching aids for children, including basic
music theory, development of skills on keyboard, classroom
instruments, and voice; music in the curriculum; and teaching
music concepts. (Fee: $30)
MUED-3720 Music for Adolescent/Young Adults–Sp
3 hours
The history of and basis for music in the secondary curriculum,
administration of the music program, methods of teaching music in
groups, and sources of materials for instruction. (Fee: $30)
MUED-3730 Vocal Pedagogy–Fa
2 hours
Philosophy, objectives, and techniques of offering vocal
instruction at all levels with emphasis on vocal production and
pedagogical approaches. Prerequisite: CLMU-1860 Voice Class or
completion of sophomore vocal review.
MUED-3750 Instrumental Pedagogy–Fa
2 hours
The study of techniques and literature for the teaching of
wind, percussion, brass, and string students in the private studio.
Investigation of studio teaching through readings, interaction and
discussion. Prerequisite: PLMU 1000 and 2000-levels. (odd years)
MUED-3910 Instrumental Administration–Fa
3 hours
A course designed to present the philosophy, learning
process, and organizational problems associated with beginning,
intermediate, and advanced bands. Along with classroom
instruction, students will be involved in marching band field
experiences and hands-on instruction in the basic repair of band
instruments. (Fee: $50) (even years)
MUED-4990
1–3 hours
Independent Study in Music Education
Independent and intensive study in a particular area of music
education for individual music education majors who demonstrate
special interests and ability.
Nursing (NSG)
NSG-1000 Member of Nursing Profession–Fa, Sp, Su
2 hours
An introduction to and application of professional nursing roles
within the U.S. and global healthcare systems. Includes discussion
of ways of thinking, professional ethics, Christian values, and
factors that motivate and influence Christian nurses. As members
of the profession, students are introduced to the use of information
management skills, concepts of care, and the culture of the
profession from a biblical and Christian framework. (Fee: $150)
NSG-1050 Health Promotion and Wellness–Fa, Sp, Su
3 hours
Through course content, theories of health and wellness are
explored as foundational concepts of the professional nursing role.
Students are introduced to the principles of nutrition, culture and
diversity, development across the lifespan, and multi-dimensional
nursing care. The development of a biblical worldview related to
health and wholeness is emphasized. Prerequisite: NSG-1000
Member of Nursing Profession or by permission of instructor;
corequisite: NSG-1055 Experiences in Health Promotion.(Fee:
$150)
NSG-1055 Experiences in Health Promotion–Sp, Su
1 hour
Clinical and laboratory experiences provide the student with
opportunities to apply concepts of health promotion, wellness,
nutrition, communication, hygiene, sleep, exercise, and safety
to the care of patients and families. Prerequisites: NSG-1000
Member of Nursing Profession; corequisite: NSG-1050 Health
Promotion and Wellness; or permission of instructor. (Fee $150)
NSG-1170 Cross-Cultural Motivation–Fa, Sp, Su
1 hour
This course is designed to have students explore and
understand their own cultural beliefs and values, in order to begin
the process of becoming culturally responsive nurses in a variety
of healthcare settings. Students will learn how to articulate their
worldview of nursing, the constructs of the nursing metaparadigm,
and how to begin viewing nursing as a ministry for Christ.
NSG-2000 Roles in Disease Prevention–Fa
4 hours
Principles of disease prevention are explored as foundational
concepts of the professional role, emphasizing safety,
communication, infection control, nutrition, stress, coping, anxiety,
and grief. The course focuses on the development of systematic
approaches to individual health and physical assessment, and
documentation of findings using appropriate technology in both
laboratory and clinical settings. Prerequisite: GBIO-2010 Human
Anatomy and Physiology or by permission of instructor. (Fee:
$300)




MUED-1000 – NSG-2000
NSG-2050 Roles in Disease Management–Sp
4 hours
An introduction to the concepts of pathophysiology and disease
management as they are used to provide nursing care to patients
across the lifespan. Focus is on the use of a broad range of
psychomotor skills required to intervene on behalf of clients with
pathophysiologic imbalances in health. Students begin to develop
the professional role of provider of care within the contexts of
disease, ethics, diversity, evidence, personal values, and critical
reasoning both in the laboratory and clinical settings. Prerequisite:
GBIO-2210 Principles of Microbiology; CHEM-1000 Principles
of Chemistry; GBIO-2015 Anatomy and Physiology II; NSG-2000
Roles in Disease Prevention; or by permission of instructor. (Fee:
$300)
NSG-2170 Cross-Cultural Awareness–Fa, Sp, Su
1 hour
This course is designed to explore the nursing metaparadigm’s
concept of culture; developing the student’s ability to observe,
engage, and connect with a culture other than a student’s own.
The students will learn how to, with beginning proficiency, assess
and explore their own cultural biases in order to better understand
both their and other culture’s nuisances, values, and beliefs.
NSG-2800 Special Topics in Nursing–Fa, Sp
1–3 hours
Selected topics in nursing at the 2000-level that will complement
existing 1000- and 2000-level courses to expose students to topics
not taught in previous course work. The specifics of the course are
determined by the faculty of the School of Nursing at the request
of the student. Prerequisites: Permission of associate dean for
undergraduate nursing program and instructor. (Fee: $50 if lab
component)
NSG-3000 Care of Ill Adults–Fa, Sp
6 hours
Focus is on common physiological imbalances of adults and
nursing care required to restore or promote health balances
across the five dimensions. Critical thinking, assessment, and
communication skills consistent with biblical principles will be
utilized to manage information and provide culturally appropriate
care. Students will demonstrate competency in technical skills
and the professional nursing role within the clinical setting.
Prerequisite: Junior nursing major status. (Fee: $300)
NSG-3010 Care of Women and Newborns–Fa, Sp
6 hours
Course content and clinical experiences provide the student
with the opportunity to facilitate the health balance of women
and the childbearing family across the five dimensions. Students
interact to support family members in their changing roles as
they manage resources in response to new demands. Cultural
implications for care of the childbearing family are presented.
Prerequisite: Junior nursing major status. (Fee: $300)
NSG-3030 Care of Children–Fa, Sp
6 hours
The research process is studied as an evidence-based
approach to the investigation of nursing and healthcare problems.
Basic elements of the research process, including ethical issues,
are included and applied to research, research summaries, and
clinical practice guidelines. Students evaluate strength of evidence
for application to nursing practice. Prerequisite: Junior nursing
major status. (Fee: $300)
NSG-3050
6 hours
Behavioral and Mental Healthcare–Fa, Sp
Introduces aspects of developing therapeutic relationships
involving one-to-one and group interactions to achieve
client-focused and professional goals. Focus is on effective
communication as a member of the profession and provider of
care. Using a Christian worldview, students analyze frameworks
for promoting and restoring healthy relationships. Students
participate in integration of care with other members of the
interdisciplinary healthcare team in a variety of settings. Emphasis
is on imbalances in thinking, emotions, and behaviors that
interfere with individual and group processes and require external
intervention to promote balance. Prerequisite: PYCH-1600 General
Psychology; Junior nursing major status. (Fee: $300)
NSG-3110 Pharmacology–Sp
3 hours
Pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and
pharmacotherapeutics of major drug categories are discussed
as they are used to restore health balance. Special emphasis is
given to the ways in which pharmacological agents may create
new health demands. Nursing actions to prevent or minimize these
demands are discussed. Prerequisites: GBIO-2210 Principles of
Microbiology; CHEM-1000 Principles of Chemistry; GBIO-2015
Human Anatomy and Physiology II; NSG-2000 Roles in Disease
Prevention;  permission of instructor. (Fee: $150)
NSG-3170 Culture and Health–Fa, Sp, Su
3 hours
This course is designed to investigate principles of medical
and cultural anthropology in the context of population health. The
students will learn by examining situations in which cross-cultural
dilemmas emerge from the intersection of culture and health
and analyze these situations to derive models for resolution.
Prerequisite: Junior/Senior status or permission of instructor.
NSG-3270
1 hour
Cross-Cultural Nursing Internship–Fa, Sp, Su
Students actively participate in health-related activities in a
facility established to provide care for persons in cultures different
from the student’s culture. The length of time involved in the
internship may vary according to the student’s need for cross-
cultural nursing credit hours. Prerequisites: Completion of all junior
level nursing courses or permission of instructor.
NSG-3800 Nursing Externship–Su
1–4 hours
The focus is on exploration of nursing roles within precepted
clinical experiences. Students apply critical thinking to promote
and restore health using the Cedarville University School of
Nursing Curricular Model. Emphasis is given to application of
biblical truth in healthcare delivery and in addressing common
ethical and legal issues encountered by nurses. Prerequisites:
Completion of all junior-level nursing courses.
NSG-3930
3 hours
Nursing Research and Evidence-Based Practice–Fa, Sp
The research process is studied as an evidenced-based
approach to the investigation of nursing and healthcare problems.
Basic elements of the research process, including ethical issues,
are included and applied to research, research summaries, and
clinical practice guidelines. Students evaluate strength of evidence
for application to nursing practice. Prerequisites: Junior nursing
major status; PYCH-2610 Statistics. (Fee: $150)
NSG-4000 Care of Populations–Fa
6 hours
Students focus on contemporary health issues of populations
and communities using theoretical models of epidemiology,
health promotion, primary healthcare, and public health practice.
Students integrate knowledge from the health, social, and nursing
sciences to population and community health nursing through
targeted assessment, interventions, programs, and advocacy.
Prerequisite: Senior nursing major status. (Fee: $300)
NSG-4020 Leadership and Management–Sp
6 hours
The focus is on the development of leadership and
management knowledge and behaviors required for the
baccalaureate prepared nurse. Special emphasis is given to the
biblical framework for leadership and management. Simulated
experiences in leadership labs provide opportunities to apply
leadership and management principles and theories as providers,
managers, and coordinators of nursing care. Prerequisite: Senior
nursing major status. (Fee: $250)
NSG-4030 Complex Care Management–Fa
6 hours
Focuses on the nursing management of individuals or groups
experiencing complex multidimensional health imbalances.
Special emphasis is placed on the growth of personal and
professional development with respect to biblical character
qualities. Students assume professional nursing roles in a variety
of critical care settings working under the supervision of faculty.
Prerequisite: Senior nursing major status. (Fee: $300)


NSG-2050 – NSG-4030
NSG-4060 Transition Into Practice–Sp
6 hours
Students assume professional nursing roles (member of
profession, provider of care, and manger of care) working under
the supervision of faculty, RN preceptors, clinical specialists, and/
or various levels of nurse managers in an assigned clinical area.
Students work full time during the course following the preceptor’s
schedule and shift, including nights, weekends, and holidays.
Prerequisite: Completion of all other clinical nursing courses. (Fee:
$300)
NSG-4170 Cross-Cultural Response–Fa, Sp, Su
1 hour
This course is designed to be a culmination course for the
cross-cultural nursing minor. Students will learn to connect
their personal vision/calling, knowledge, skills, and desire to
provide culturally responsive nursing care. Additionally, they will
re-examine the Christian worldview of nursing using a biblical
foundation and incorporating what they have learned throughout
the program.
NSG-4800 Independent Study in Nursing–Fa, Sp
1–3 hours
Independent learning to secure an extensive background in a
specialized area of nursing. May be repeated once. Prerequisite:
signed contract between student and instructor in which work to
be completed is described.
NSG-4950 Seminar in Nursing–Sp
3 hours
Capstone course requiring synthesis of previous curricular
programming. Students are challenged to integrate a Christian
philosophy of nursing as they adopt the role of professional nurse.
Students investigate the interplay among political, legal, economic,
social, and ethical factors as it affects healthcare. Capstone
course. Prerequisite: NSG-4030 Complex Care Management.
Corequisite: NSG-4020 Leadership and Management, NSG-4060
Transition into Practice. (Fee: $250)
Physical Education Activity Courses (PEA)
PEA-1240 through PEA-2100 Courses
1–2 hours each
Each course is designed to develop knowledge and skills
in the respective activity area. Course requirements include
examinations covering the activity subject, skills tests, class
participation, and aerobics requirements. Grading options include
letter grades or credit/no credit. If taken for letter grades, majors
may use these courses to satisfy specific curricular requirements.
 PEAE-1400 Weight Training: Coed–Fa, Sp
1 hour
 PEAI-1600 Racquetball: Coed (Fee: $15)–Fa
1 hour
 PEAL-1610 Rock Climbing: Coed (Fee: $25)–Fa, Sp
1 hour
 PEAR-2100 Rhythmics: Coed–Fa
1 hour
Physical Education Fitness (PEF)
PEF-1990
2 hours
Physical Activity and Healthy Living–Fa, Sp, Su
Study of the role of physical activity in the Christian life from
a scriptural, physiological, and psycho-sociological perspective.
Emphasis is placed upon developing and continuing active,
healthy, Christian life practices. Letter-graded course. (Fee: $5)
Music Performance (PFMU)
PFMU-3100 Piano Ensemble–Fa, Sp
0–1 hours
The Piano Ensemble is an organization of advanced pianists
that meets weekly to perform duet and duo piano literature. The
Ensemble performs publicly on a regular basis.
PFMU-3210 Jubilate–Fa, Sp
0–1 hours
Ministry team of 40 select voices; open to all students by
audition. Repertoire is selected from a wide spectrum of musical
styles in evangelical traditions. Meets twice a week. Annual tour
spring semester.
PFMU-3220 Worship Ensemble–Fa, Sp
0–1 hours
Ministry team of 8–10 singers, instrumentalists, and technicians;
open to all students by audition. Repertoire is contemporary
Christian and praise and worship music. Group will tour on behalf
of the University throughout the school year and during breaks.
Prerequisite: Admission by audition only.
PFMU-3650 Chamber Ensemble–Fa, Sp
0–1 hours
The performance of representative literature in a variety of
instrumental and vocal settings. Groups are normally student-
formed and faculty-led and can be either homogenous (all strings,
all brass, etc.) or heterogeneous. NOTE: An instructor must be
designated for a group before any of its members register for this
course. Prerequisites: Permission of instructor; approval of the
chair.
PFMU-3800 Concert Chorale–Fa, Sp
0–1 hours
The Concert Chorale is a group of 60 select voices. Repertoire
is chosen from a wide spectrum of musical styles, including choral
masterpieces, sacred classics, anthems, spirituals, and tasteful
contemporary works. Numerous concerts are presented each year
on campus as well as in churches, schools, and other venues.
PFMU-3820 Men’s Glee Club–Fa, Sp
0–1 hours
The Men’s Glee Club has a membership of 50 voices, selected
by audition. Literature includes traditional sacred and secular
music from the Renaissance throughout the 20th century. Several
concerts are presented each year on campus as well as in
churches, schools, and other venues.
PFMU-3840 Women’s Choir–Fa, Sp
0–1 hours
The Women’s Choir consists of 50 treble voices, selected by
audition. Repertoire embraces all historical periods and styles with
performances on campus, in schools, in churches, and in civic
meetings.
PFMU-3850 Opera Ensemble–Fa
0–1 hours
The coaching, staging, and performance of operatic literature in
scenes, recitals, or full-scale productions.
PFMU-3880 Brass Choir–Fa, Sp
0–1 hours
The Brass Choir of select instrumentation consists of 20 to
25 members. It serves the University and its constituency by
performing concerts featuring the highest quality brass choir
literature. Major concerts are performed each semester.
PFMU-3940 University Orchestra–Fa, Sp
0–1 hours
The Orchestra is composed of string, wind, brass, and
percussion players selected by audition. The group performs
challenging, high-quality literature in concerts on campus and has
opportunities to minister in local churches.
PFMU-3970 Wind Symphony–Fa, Sp
0–1 hours
The wind symphony is composed of 50–60 members, selected
by audition. The ensemble performs a wide variety of wind
literature and participates actively in the commissioning and
performance of new music. The ensemble presents two concerts
per semester and performs additional concerts and events both
on and off campus.
PFMU-3980 Jazz Band–Fa, Sp
0–1 hours
The Jazz Band has a membership of approximately 16
musicians, selected by audition. The group performs Big Band
music and contemporary jazz standards. The band is active in
both campus and off-campus activities.




NSG-4060 – PFMU-3980
Physics: General Education (PHYS)
Except where noted, general education courses are designed
to meet the general education requirements for graduation. These
courses will not count toward graduation requirements for majors
found in the School of Science and Mathematics unless they
are specifically listed in the curriculum requirements for a major.
A student majoring in science or mathematics may take these
courses only as electives. However, any course listed for a science
or mathematics major or minor may also count toward fulfilling
general education requirements.
PHYS-1010 College Physics I–Fa
4 hours
Basic concepts of mechanics using algebra and trigonometry.
This is the first of a two course sequence intended for students
in the life sciences and pre-professional programs. Topics include
kinematics, motion in two dimensions, force and motion, torque
and rotation, work and energy, momentum, circular motion,
gravitation, oscillation, waves and fluid. Three lectures and
one two-hour laboratory per week. Prerequisite: High school
trigonometry; or GMTH-1030 Precalculus or equivalent. (Fee: $75)
PHYS-1020 College Physics II–Sp
4 hours
Basic concepts of electricity, magnetism and modern physics
using algebra and trigonometry. This is the second of a two
course sequence intended for students in the life sciences and
pre-professional programs. Topics include electricity, magnetism,
circuits, and geometrical and physical optics, relativity theory,
quantum theory and nuclear physics topics. Three lectures and
one two-hour laboratory per week. Prerequisite: PHYS-1010
College Physics I or equivalent. (Fee: $75)
Physics: Major (PHYS)
PHYS-2010 Introductory Physics Lab I–On Demand
1 hour
This course is for students who are attempting to transfer credit
for physics classes with no hands-on lab experience. PHYS-2010
will substitute for PHYS-1010 College Physics I or PHYS-2110
General Physics I. Upon approval of this course, the student will
register for this course and be assigned to a lab section of the
corresponding course being approved. (Fee: $100)
PHYS-2020 Introductory Physics Lab II–On Demand
1 hour
This course is for students who are attempting to transfer credit
for physics classes with no hands-on lab experience. PHYS-2020
will substitute for PHYS-1020 College Physics II or PHYS-2120
General Physics II. Upon approval of this course, the student will
register for this course and be assigned to a lab section of the
corresponding course being approved. (Fee: $100)
PHYS-2110 General Physics I–Fa, Sp
4 hours
Basic concepts of mechanics using calculus. This is the
first of a three-course sequence intended for students in the
physical sciences and engineering programs. Topics include
linear and rotational motion in three dimensions, oscillatory
motion, gravitation, fluid mechanics, and basic concepts of wave
motion. Three lectures and one two-hour laboratory per week.
Prerequisites: MATH-1710 Calculus I; Corequisite: MATH-1720
Calculus II. (Fee: $100)
PHYS-2120 General Physics II–Fa, Sp
4 hours
Basic concepts of electricity and magnetism, light, and optics
using calculus. This is the second of a three-course sequence
intended for students in the physical sciences and engineering
programs. Topics include electricity, magnetism, Maxwell’s
equations, DC and AC circuits, geometrical and physical
optics. Three lectures and one two-hour laboratory per week.
Prerequisites: MATH-1720 Calculus II; PHYS-2110 General
Physics I. (Fee: $100)
PHYS-2130 General Physics III–Fa
2 hours
Basic concepts of thermodynamics and modern physics using
calculus. This is the third of a three-course sequence intended for
students in the physical sciences programs. Topics include heat
and thermodynamics, relativity theory, quantum theory, atomic
and nuclear physics. Prerequisites: MATH-1720 Calculus II; PHYS-
2120 General Physics II; PHYS-2120 may be co-enrolled with
permission of instructor.
PHYS-3110 Intermediate Physics Laboratory–Sp
2 hours
Designed to reinforce concepts of the advanced physics
courses and develop critical research and analysis skills. This
course will focus on library, research, and laboratory skills for
planning, setup, documentation, analysis using the scientific
method. Selected software will be introduced and used to
collect data, analyze results, and document findings. Laboratory
experience includes such topics as oscillatory motion and waves,
mechanics, electricity and magnetism, thermodynamics, and
quantum mechanics. Prerequisite: PHYS-2130 General Physics III.
(Fee: $100)
PHYS-3310 Theoretical Mechanics–Sp
3 hours
Derivation of the motion of a point object through three-
dimensional space. Topics include an advanced treatment
of Newtonian mechanics in three dimensions, oscillatory
motion, accelerated frames of reference, central forces, and an
introduction to Lagrangian mechanics. Prerequisites: PHYS-2120
General Physics II; MATH-2740 Differential Equations; MATH-2740
may be co-enrolled with permission of instructor. (even years)
PHYS-3330 Acoustics–Fa
3 hours
This course will study the generation, transmission and
reception of sound. Topics include wave propagation through the
air, resonance conditions for strings, bars, membranes and air
cavities, acoustic filters, measurement and human perception of
sound. Applications will be made to musical instruments, room
acoustics, microphones, and speakers. Prerequisites: MATH-2710
Differential Equations; PHYS-2110 General Physics I. (even years)
PHYS-3350 Thermal Physics–Sp
3 hours
Study of the relationship between energy and matter through
the use of thermodynamics and statistical mechanics. Topics
include the laws of thermodynamics, heat, work, entropy, phase
transformations, statistical distributions, and kinetic theory.
Prerequisite: PHYS-2130 General Physics III. (odd years)
PHYS-3410 Electromagnetic Theory–Fa
3 hours
Electricity and magnetism from an advanced viewpoint using
the methods of vector calculus. Includes electrostatics, Gauss’
Law, Poisson’s equation, Laplace’s equation, dielectric media,
electric currents, and magnetostatics. Prerequisites: PHYS-2120
General Physics II; MATH-2710 Calculus III. (odd years)
PHYS-3510 Modern Physics–Sp
3 hours
Introduction to relativity theory, quantum theory, including
Schrodinger’s Equation, and its basic applications, and atomic
structure. Prerequisite: PHYS-2130 General Physics III.
PHYS-3810 Research in Physics–Fa
1 hour
Students participate in research projects under the direction
of a faculty member. The projects could be experimental or
computational depending on the instructor’s expertise. Students
will learn fundamentals of the methodology, collect data in the
lab or by running programs, then analyze results, and present
their findings. Prerequisite: PHYS-3110 Intermediate Physics
Laboratory, and 3 hours of another 3000- or 4000-level physics
course; Corequisite: If the 3000- or 4000-level prerequisite course
is not satisfied, a corequisite course of the same level would be
satisfactory. (Fee: $150)

PHYS-4110 Advanced Physics Laboratory–Sp
2 hours
The advanced laboratory experience is designed to
reinforce concepts of the advanced physics courses and to
develop critical research design, documentation, analysis, and
presentation skills. The advanced laboratory provides additional
experience in optical, radiation, wave, advanced mechanics,
advanced electromagnetism, advanced thermodynamics, and
quantum mechanics. During this semester the students will be
conducting their advanced laboratory project, collecting data,
and documenting results. Laboratory skills for planning, setup,
documentation, analysis, and briefing using the scientific method
will be emphasized. Prerequisite: PHYS-3110 Intermediate Physics
Laboratory
. (Fee: $100)
PHYS-4210 Mathematical Methods for Physicists–Fa
3 hours
Advanced mathematical methods used in the solution of
physics problems. Topics include curvilinear coordinates, vector
analysis, and solutions to partial differential equations using
Fourier, Bessel and Legendre functions. Prerequisites: MATH-2710
Calculus III; MATH-2740 Differential Equations. (odd years)
PHYS-4520 Quantum Mechanics–Fa
3 hours
An introduction to the principles and theory of quantum
mechanics including: the wave function, the time-independent
Schrodinger’s Equation, mathematical formalism of quantum
mechanics, quantum mechanics in three dimensions, and systems
of identical particles. Prerequisite: PHYS-3510 Modern Physics.
(even years)
PHYS-4800 Senior Seminar–Physics–Fa, Sp
1 hour
A presentation of the basic principles of the major disciplines
of the sciences with a focus on the interrelationships of the
science disciplines to each other. Students present a paper from
library or laboratory research in their area of physics with a focus
on integration. Each student must obtain approval of the topic
from their advisor and seminar instructor and must set the date
of presentation before enrolling in the course. A paper and oral
presentation are required that include the background, setup,
data collection, analysis, and conclusions from their research. The
student must also attend a minimum of 10 seminars during the
senior year. Guest lecturers and faculty members may present
papers at the invitation of the instructor. Prerequisite: Senior
status; PHYS-3110 Intermediate Physics Laboratory; attendance
of a minimum of 10 seminars during the sophomore and junior
years; permission of instructor.
PHYS-4880 Topics in Physics
1–3 hours
Study of topics of interest from modern and classical physics
such as quantum theory, relativity, statistical mechanics,
lasers, solid state physics, advanced classical mechanics, and
atmospheric physics. Prerequisites: PHYS-2130 General Physics
III; MATH-2710 Calculus III.
PHYS-4900 Independent Study in Physics
1–3 hours

Independent research in the various branches of physics
and allied fields of application. Submission and approval of
a research proposal must precede registration. Prerequisite:
Permission of instructor. (Fee: $25/hour)
Music Private Study (PLMU)
Private instruction for credit in piano, voice, guitar, orchestral
and band instruments, and composition is available to all music
majors. Private lessons are open to non-majors, also. Inquiries
about non-major lessons should be directed to the administrative
assistant in the Department of Music and Worship.
Credit in performance lessons is based on a minimum of six
hours of practice and one half-hour lesson per week for one hour
of credit. An audition is required for initial registration. Continued
registration is based on satisfactory progress as determined each
semester by the instructor. (Fees: private lesson fee $300 and
practice room fee $100 per credit hour)
PLMU-1000, 2000, 3000, 4000 Organ
1–2 hours
PLMU-1100, 2100, 3100, 4100 Piano
1–2 hours
PLMU-1200, 2200, 3200, 4200 Voice
1–2 hours
PLMU-1300, 2300, 3300, 4300 Trumpet
1–2 hours
PLMU-1310, 2310, 3310, 4310 Trombone/Baritone Horn

1–2 hours
PLMU-1320, 2320, 3320, 4320 French Horn
1–2 hours
PLMU-1330, 2330, 3330, 4330 Tuba
1–2 hours
PLMU-1400, 2400, 3400, 4400 Clarinet
1–2 hours
PLMU-1410, 2410, 3410, 4410 Flute
1–2 hours
PLMU-1420, 2420, 3420, 4420 Saxophone
1–2 hours
PLMU-1430, 2430, 3430, 4430 Oboe
1–2 hours
PLMU-1440, 2440, 3440, 4440 Bassoon
1–2 hours
PLMU-1500, 2500, 3500, 4500 Violin
1–2 hours
PLMU-1510, 2510, 3510, 4510 Viola
1–2 hours
PLMU-1520, 2520, 3520, 4520 Cello
1–2 hours
PLMU-1530, 2530, 3530, 4530 Bass
1–2 hours
PLMU-1550, 2550, 3550, 4550 Harp
1–2 hours
PLMU-1600, 2600, 3600, 4600 Guitar
1–2 hours
PLMU-1700, 2700, 3700, 4700 Percussion
1–2 hours
PLMU-1800 Private Lessons in Composition–Fa, Sp
1 hour
PLMU-1810, 2810, 3810, 4810
1–2 hours
Contemporary Piano–Fa, Sp
Prerequisites: Music or worship student, or instructor approval.
PLMU-1820, 2820, 3820, 4820
1–2 hours
Contemporary Voice–Fa, Sp
Prerequisites: Music or worship student, or instructor approval.
PLMU-1830, 2830, 3830, 4830
1–2 hours
Contemporary Guitar–Fa, Sp
Prerequisites: Music or worship student, or instructor approval.
PLMU-2800, 3800, 4800 Music Composition
1–2 hours
PLMU-3900 Junior Recital
1 hour
Music major performance emphasis students should register
for this course the semester they are ready to present their junior
recital. Program is presented in a half recital format. (Fee: $50)
PLMU-3920 Junior Composition Project–Fa, Sp
1 hour
The culminating project for juniors majoring in musical
compositon. This project is akin to a half-recital and will consist of
a substantial compositon for a large ensemble. Prerequisite: Junior
status. Corequisite: PLMU-3800 Private Lessons in Composition.
PLMU-4900 Senior Recital
1 hour
Music majors should register for this course the semester in
which their recitals are to be presented. Capstone course.

(Fee: $50)
PLMU-4920 Senior Project–Sp
1 hour
The capstone project for the BA in Music degree. Students may
register for this course at the same time as Senior Seminar. (Fee:
$75)
Political Science (POLS)
POLS-2100 Topics–Fa, Sp
2 hours
Culturally oriented, topical classes designed to introduce
students to political thinking from an academic perspective.
Possible topics could include: Politics and Film, Politics & Sport,
Politics & Music, The War on Terror, Jane Austen, From Media
to Social Media, Dictators & Demagogues, Scalia v. Ginsburg,
Campaign 2020.
POLS-2620 American State and Local Government–Sp
3 hours
The organization and function of states and their political
subdivisions form the basis of study in this course.




PHYS-4110 – POLS-2620
POLS-3040
3 hours
History and Politics of the British Isles and Canada–Sp
This course examines three countries: the United Kingdom,
the Republic of Ireland, and Canada. After an extensive topical
history along with a discussion of major prime ministers
who served in the 19th and 20th Centuries, this course also
investigates contemporary issues including foreign policy, recent
political debates, secessionist problems in Scotland and Quebec,
membership in the EU, and the ongoing structural changes to
government. Crosslisted as GEO, HIST, and INTL. (odd years)
POLS-3080
3 hours
History of Russia and Eastern Europe–Fa
See course description for GEO-3080 History of Russia and
Eastern Europe. (even years)
POLS-3100 Public Budgeting–Fa
3 hours
See course description for PUAD-3100 Public Budgeting. (odd
years)
POLS-3200 History and Politics of Latin America–Fa
3 hours
See course description for GEO-3200 History and Politics of
Latin America. (odd years)
POLS-3210 History and Politics of East Asia–Fa
3 hours
See course description for GEO-3210 History and Politics of
East Asia. (even years)
POLS-3220
3 hours
History and Politics of the Middle East–Sp
See course description for GEO-3220 History and Politics of the
Middle East.
POLS-3230
3 hours
History and Politics of Western Europe–Sp
See course description for GEO-3230 History and Politics of
Western Europe. (even years)
POLS-3360 American Judicial System–Fa
3 hours
Federal and state court systems, duties and responsibilities of
the prosecutor, defense counsel, jury, and judge including related
topics ranging from  sentencing. Crosslisted as
CRJU. Prerequisite: CRJU-1310 Introduction to Criminal Justice.
POLS-3400 History of American Foreign Policy–Fa
3 hours
American statesmen have defended the principles of their
government and the rights of American citizens in a world of
empires and nation-states. This course provides an overview
of controversies over independence and imperialism, modern
tyranny and regime change, which have marked U.S. foreign
policy from  the present day. Crosslisted as HIST or
INTL. Prerequisite: GSS-1100 Politics and American Culture. (even
years)
POLS-3600 Public Administration–Fa
3 hours
See course description for PUAD-3600 Public Administration.
POLS-3650 International Relations–Fa
3 hours
A survey of contemporary international affairs and principles
of interstate relations, focusing on forces that unite and divide our
world. Crosslisted as INTL or POLS.
POLS-3690 Public Policy–Sp
3 hours
See course description for PUAD-3690 Public Policy.
Prerequisite: GSS-1100 Politics and American Culture
POLS-3710
3 hours
History of Political Thought I: Ancient Through Medieval–Fa
See course description for HIST-3710 History of Political
Thought I: Ancient Through Medieval.
POLS-3720
3 hours
History of Political Thought II: Modern and Contemporary–Sp
See course description for HIST-3720 History of Political
Thought II: Modern and Contemporary.
POLS-3730 American Political Thought–Sp
3 hours
Survey and examination of the course of political thought in
the American colonies and the United States from
current times. Includes special attention to American founders and
the rise of political liberalism in the thought of Woodrow Wilson.
Crosslisted as POLS or HIST. Prerequisites: GSS-1100 Politics
and American Culture. (even years)
POLS-3760 Jurisprudence: Philosophy of Law–Fa
3 hours
A survey of historical and contemporary theories of law,
including natural law, Yoderian theories, Theonomy, positivism,
critical legal studies, historical jurisprudence, and others, as well
as crucial legal concepts such as justice, due process, and current
issues. Prerequisite: GSS-1100 Politics and American Culture.
(even years)
POLS-3790 Comparative Politics–Fa
3 hours
This course will familiarize students with major historical
developments, political debates, and scholarly research in the
subfield of comparative politics. Particular emphasis will be
placed on topics of the modern state, nationalism, economic
development, political culture and ideology, identity structure,
regime types, regime transitions, and comparative political
economy. Crosslisted as POLS or INTL.
POLS-4050
3 hours
Diplomacy of the Major Powers–Sp
See course description for HIST-4050 Diplomacy of the Major
Powers. Crosslisted as HIST, INTL, or POLS.
POLS-4440 Special Topics: Political Science
1–3 hours
Investigation of specific topics in Social Science and History
that have intrinsic worth and engage student interest.
POLS-4500 Seminar–Fa,Sp
3 hours
This course exposes students to the literature in a political
science field or subject in a seminar setting. The topic will vary by
the professor’s expertise, but will be in some area of American
politics, international studies, or political thought.
POLS-4630
3 hours
American Constitutional Law: Civil Liberties and Rights–Sp
The United States Constitution defines the powers and scope
of the American government and delineates the rights and
liberties retained by the American people. This course focuses
on the supreme Court’s interpretation of those rights and liberties
by examining the Court’s decisions in their legal and historical
contexts. Crosslisted as CRJU. Prerequisites: GSS-1100 Politics
and American Culture
POLS-4640
3 hours
American Constitutional Law: Government Powers and
Federalism–Fa
This course provides an in-depth analysis of landmark Supreme
Court decisions pertaining to the power struggles between
the three branches of government at the national level and the
power struggles between the national government and state
governments. In addition, this course will analyze how Supreme
Court Justices interpret the Constitution and construct their
opinions. Prerequisite: GSS-1100 Politics and American Culture
(even years)
POLS-4800 Seminar in International Studies–Fa
3 hours
A seminar/readings course intended to prepare senior
students for graduate study. Through readings and discussion,
students explore classical writings on international relations and
international issues that are shaping our contemporary and future
world. Crosslisted as INTL or POLS.


POLS-3040 – POLS-4800
POLS-4930
1–3 hours
Independent Study in Political Science
Provides the means whereby gifted and interested students
may explore, in a more in-depth and intensive manner, general
information acquired in the major courses. Further, independent
study provides a logical way to complete required hours not
obtained in normal sequencing. Prerequisite: Permission of the
instructor.
Prepharmacy (PPHR)
PPHR-1011
1 hour
Profession of Pharmacy–Introduction to Public Health–Sp
This course will introduce students to basic public health
concepts as they relate to pharmacy. Emphasis will be on
understanding the factors that impact community and behavioral
health as well as how to effectively plan health promotion activities
within a pharmacy setting.
PPHR-1012
1 hour
Profession of Pharmacy–History and Issues–Fa
The profession of pharmacy has a long history. It is believed to
have started in the 9th century around Baghdad, then spreading
to Europe as alchemy. This course will explore the history of
pharmacy as it diverged from the practice of medicine and how
this impacts the practice of pharmacy today and the future of the
profession. The course also discusses current issues in pharmacy
including ethical research, drug development, introductory practice
skills, foundational pharmacy calculations, legal issues, and
innovation in pharmacy practice. (Fee: $20)
PPHR-2013
1 hour
Profession of Pharmacy–Careers I–Fa
The profession of pharmacy has experienced tremendous
growth in recent history, both in terms of numbers in the profession
as well as opportunities. In this course, the student will learn
of many career options available to the pharmacist. Practicing
pharmacists within different career paths facilitate discussions
regarding their areas of expertise and field of practice. (Fee: $50)
PPHR-2014
1 hour
Profession of Pharmacy–Careers II–Sp
Focusing on careers different from those discussed in PPHR-
2013, this course introduces the students to additional career
options available to the pharmacist. Students will be exposed to
current practicing pharmacists to gain a more personal perspective
of pharmacy today. Practicing pharmacists within different career
paths will facilitate discussions regarding their areas of expertise
and field of practice. (Fee: $50)
PPHR-3460 Advanced Physiology for Pharmacy–Sp
3 hours
This course will address the structure and function of major
organ systems of the human body. Organ systems covered include
muscular, nervous, endocrine/reproductive, cardiovascular,
respiratory, digestive, and renal. Prerequisites: GBIO-2010 Human
Anatomy and Physiology I; GBIO-2015 Human Anatomy and
Physiology II; or equivalent.
PPHR-4280
2 hours
Introduction to Health Behaviors and Beliefs
This course provides an introduction to concepts of patient
health behaviors and cultural health beliefs. In the first half of the
semester, students will examine the theories explaining health
behaviors and complete in-class activities utilizing the theory
to influence health behavior change. In the second half of the
semester, students will examine health beliefs in cultures around
the world and the implications of these beliefs with regard to
modern healthcare systems.
Public Administration (PUAD)
PUAD-3100 Public Budgeting–Fa
3 hours
Analysis of public sector budgeting at all levels of government
in the United States with an emphasis on budgets as reflectors of
priority, power, and control. Crosslisted as POLS or PUAD. (odd
years)
PUAD-3390 Public Finance–Fa
3 hours
A consideration of the financing of local, state, and federal
governments. Much attention is given to three functions of
government: stabilization, distribution, and allocation. All major
taxes that are present in the United States are studied as to
structure, revenue gained, and present status. Crosslisted as
ECON. Prerequisite: ECON-2340 Macroeconomics. (even years)
PUAD-3600 Public Administration–Fa
3 hours
Introduction to public administration both as a discipline and
profession, including organization theory, budgeting, public
policy analysis and evaluation, and public sector administration.
Crosslisted as POLS or PUAD.
PUAD-3690 Public Policy–Sp
3 hours
Focus on decision-making, problem solving, and methods of
program analysis. Crosslisted as POLS or PUAD. Prerequisite:
GSS-1100 Politics and American Culture
PUAD-4440 Special Topics: Public Administration
1–3 hours
Investigation of specific topics in Social Science and History
that have intrinsic worth and engage student interest.
PUAD-4640 Strategies for Public Administration–Fa
3 hours
Designed to acquaint the advanced student in public
administration or international studies with some of the policy
decisions facing American government. All three levels of
American government, federal, state, and local, will be examined
in light of their particular relationships with foreign governments.
(odd years)
PUAD-4800 Applied Public Administration–Sp
3 hours
Capstone course for public administration majors, involving the
research of issues related to public administration in the United
States from a normative and/or empirical perspective. (Fee: $80)
PUAD-4970
1–3 hours
Independent Study in Public Administration
Provides the means whereby gifted and interested students
may explore, in a more in-depth and intensive manner, general
information acquired in the major courses. Further, independent
study provides a logical way to complete required hours not
obtained in normal sequencing. Prerequisite: Permission of the
instructor.
Professional Writing and Information Design (PWID)
PWID-2130 Introduction to Professional Writing–Fa
3 hours
Students will study the discipline and profession of professional
writing. They will learn core skills that will help them succeed
in the program and workplace. The class focuses on improving
students’ writing ability and allowing them to explore the job
market in professional writing.
PWID-3010 Style and Mechanics for Writers–Fa, Sp, Su
3 hours
Students will learn to apply reliable principles to make writing
clear, concise, coherent, and cohesive. Crosslisted with ENG
3010 Style and Mechanics for Writers. Prerequisite: ENG-1400
Composition.
PWID-3020 Professional Portfolio Development I–Fa
1 hour
Students will develop a professional portfolio and learn to use it
effectively as a tool to obtain an internship. (Fee: $50)




POLS-4930 – PWID-3020
PWID-3050 Writing for the User Experience–Sp
3 hours
Students will learn to conduct formative and summative user
research that will help them make critical decisions about content,
structure, and layout of online publications, including websites,
blogs, and magazines. They will study principles of usability,
user experience, and information architecture in order to gain
a comprehensive view of how to arrange, structure, and write
content for online publications.
PWID-3090 Copywriting–Fa
3 hours
Students will learn to write for brands identifying the mission
and values of organizations and writing to support them. The
class explores how to create effective marketing materials
through writing, editing, and designing copy and related graphics.
Prerequisite: PWID-3010 Style and Mechanics for Writers.
PWID-3170
2 hours
The Professional Writer in a Corporate Culture–Sp
Students will discuss issues beyond intellectual ability and
technical know-how that are crucial to a successful career. They
will discover guidelines to assist them in improving their emotional
intelligence capabilities. (Fee: $50)
PWID-3180
3 hours
Visual Rhetoric for Information Designers–Fa
Students will learn to understand the rhetoric of visual language
and to adapt visual language to specific audiences, purposes, and
contexts — just as they do written texts. As a result, they should
be able to respond flexibly to design problems in all professional
documents.
PWID-3210 Professional Editing–Fa
3 hours
Students will learn both copyediting and comprehensive editing
skills. These skills include editing for grammar, punctuation,
syntax, sentence structure, content development, and visual
design. Students will learn to edit paper and electronic copy and
will also explore editing in both publishing houses and corporate
environments.
PWID-3250 Writing and Designing Documentation–Sp
3 hours
Students will learn to plan, design, and create user
documentation through systematic user analysis, task
identification, effective writing, and effective visual design.
PWID-3320 Editing in Publishing Contexts–Sp
3 hours
Students will learn to edit in publishing contexts. They will
identify the purposes of manuscripts and practice editing to help
authors accomplish their goals. Students will gain knowledge of
publishing contexts and the various kinds of genres, styles, and
documents they may edit for a publisher. Prerequisites: PWID-3010
Style and Mechanics for Writers; PWID-3210 Professional Editing
PWID-4010 Report Writing–Sp
3 hours
Students will learn to design and write effective technical
reports and presentations that purposefully convey clear,
concise, and accurate information to a targeted audience while
using an appropriate level of technicality and supporting data or
information.
PWID-4020 Professional Portfolio Development II–Fa
1 hour
Students will maintain a professional portfolio and learn to use it
effectively to obtain employment after graduation. (Fee: $50)
PWID-4050 Writing and Strategy for the Web–Fa
3 hours
Students will learn how to write effective web content and
manage that content throughout its life cycle. They will engage
with content strategy principles and study how to write for the
interactive web.
PWID-4120 Writing for Industries–Sp
3 hours
Students will learn to write and design deliverables specific to a
set of relevant industries. Prerequisites: PWID-3210 Professional
Editing; PWID-3250 Writing and Designing Documentation.
PWID-4130 Instructional Design I–Fa
[0-9] hours
Teaches technical communicators how to employ technology
and learning theory in developing adult training courses.
PWID-4140 Instructional Design II–Sp
[0-9] hours
This course provides students with the opportunity to delve
deeper into the art and science of instructional design by
focusing on educational technology in general and e-learning
tools, techniques, and practices specifically in use in today’s
corporate environment. The course also investigates the topics of
knowledge management, performance support and human capital
management in order to give students a well-rounded introduction
to the contemporary practice of non-traditional instructional
design. Prerequisites: PWID-4130 Instructional Design I or
permission of instructor.
PWID-4150 Writing for Publications–Sp
3 hours
Writing for Publications prepares students to manage a
publication from conception until it is published. Students will
develop an editorial strategy, write content, edit content from other
writers, and manage the process until the document is published.
Students will also explore how to market the publication.
Prerequisite: Senior status or permission of instructor.
PWID-4160 Professional Writing Internship–Su
3 hours
Students will participate in a work-study program approved and
administered by the department in which advanced Professional
Writing and Information Design students receive a variety of job-
related experiences in a communication environment. Prerequisite:
Permission of instructor.
PWID-4170 Professional Writing Capstone–Sp
3 hours
The Professional Writing Capstone explores trends in the
writing, editing, and design disciplines while also allowing students
to bring together their skills and knowledge from throughout the
program through various pedagogical means and assessments.
Prerequisites: PWID-2130 Introduction to Professional Writing;
PWID-3010 Style and Mechanics for Writers Capstone course.
PWID-4230
 1–3 hours
Independent Study in Professional Writing and
Information Design–Fa, Sp, Su
Independent study for junior and senior-level PWID majors with
special interests and demonstrated ability.
Psychology (PYCH)
PYCH-1000 Orientation to Psychology–Fa, Sp
1 hour
Acquaints the psychology major with various areas and issues
in the field of psychology. Included will be its specialties, graduate
school information, vocational opportunities, and legal and ethical
matters. Should be taken during the freshman year.
PYCH-1010 Writing in APA–Fa, Sp
1 hour
Students in the course will learn and practice the standards
of writing for the behavioral and social sciences as set forth by
the American Psychological Association (APA) and the ethical
standards for research and scholarship.
PYCH-1020
1 hour
Graduate School and Career Preparation–Fa, Sp
Information and guidance is provided for students to make
informed decisions regarding postbaccalaureate career options
in the human services. Students explore field options comparing
non-graduate school, preprofessional jobs as well as professional
career opportunities in psychology, counseling, and marriage and
family therapy.
PYCH-1600 General Psychology–Fa, Sp, Su
3 hours
Designed to provide a survey of modern scientific psychology.
The course content centers on such topics as the foundations of
psychology, development over the life span, how we experience
the world, learning and thinking, motivation and emotion,
personality, and social behavior. (Fee: $5)
PYCH-1800 Cross-Cultural Psychology–Fa, Sp
3 hours
A survey course designed to make students sensitive to the
impact of culture on life.


PWID-3050 – PYCH-1800
PYCH-2600 Human Development: Life Span–Fa, Sp
3 hours
An analysis of the physiological, social, and psychological
development of the individual from tal life
span.
PYCH-2610 Statistics–Fa, Sp, Su
3 hours
Designed to provide an elementary coverage of descriptive and
sampling statistics commonly used in the behavioral sciences.
Includes problems of measurement, measures of central tendency
and dispersion, linear correlation, prediction, and simple tests of
significance. (Fee: $5)
PYCH-2640 Abnormal Psychology –Fa, Sp
3 hours
Focus upon etiology, symptomatology, and prognosis of
psychological disturbance. Prerequisite: PYCH-1600 General
Psychology.
PYCH-2650 Learning and Memory–Fa, Sp
3 hours
A survey of theories in the field of learning and memory.
Emphasis will be placed on the relationship between brain and
behavior. Computer laboratory exercises are used to enhance
understanding of the concepts presented. Prerequisite: PYCH-
1600 General Psychology.
PYCH-2725 Child Development–Fa, Sp
2 hours
A study of the physiological, social, and spiritual growth of the
child from conceptual through preadolescence. Emphasis on the
developmental research on family systems theory, the importance
of developmentally appropriate learning objectives including
play, and the influence of cultural practice and beliefs on family
systems.
PYCH-2735 Child-Adolescent Development–Fa, Sp
3 hours
A study of the physiological, social, and spiritual growth of the
child from conceptual through adolescence. Emphasis on the
developmental research on family systems theory, the importance
of developmentally appropriate learning objectives including
play, and the influence of cultural practice and beliefs on family
systems.
PYCH-2750 The Parent and the Child
3 hours
Designed to explore the basic value requisites for effective
family living. Basic concepts such as love, communication, and
parental modeling will be stressed.
PYCH-2840
3 hours
Concepts of Chemical Dependency–Fa
Available to all students. This course presents an overview
of the social, economic, political, legal, spiritual, and ethical
considerations concerning the use and abuse of alcohol and other
drugs in our culture. A primary emphasis of the course includes
application of a biblical perspective to assess use of various
philosophies and perspectives on drugs and abuse. Treatment and
prevention options for individuals and families will be discussed.
Crosslisted as CRJU, PYCH, SOC, or SWK.
PYCH-2850 Psychology of Adjustment
3 hours
The systematic process of applying psychological principles
to everyday issues of human life. Biblical perspectives are
integrated into problem-solving paradigms for the development of
a psychologically healthy personality.
PYCH-3000 Addictions–Sp
3 hours
This course examines a variety of addictions, including alcohol,
drugs, food, sex, gambling, computer games, Internet (including
pornography), and codependency. The course will focus on
causes, symptoms, diagnosis, treatment, and impact on society.
Students will be challenged to develop a biblical perspective.
PYCH-3130 Intimate Relationships–Fa
3 hours
Explores friendship, love, and romance from historical,
theoretical, and philosophical perspectives. Prerequisite: PYCH-
1600 General Psychology or permission of instructor.
PYCH-3380 Health Psychology–Sp
3 hours
Designed to investigate the research and theory of many
disciplines to understand how psychology and health are
interconnected. The focus is on the major topics and problem
areas in health psychology. (Fee: $5)
PYCH-3420 Human Sexuality–Sp
3 hours
Study of biblical content regarding human sexuality and
an analysis of contemporary concepts within a framework of
Christian thought. Crosslisted with SOC-3420 Human Sexuality.
Prerequisite: PYCH-1600 General Psychology or permission of
instructor.
PYCH-3520 Counseling and Mentoring Women–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Study of the distinctives of biblical counseling specifically
applied to counseling women, the mandate and skill of mentoring
woman to woman, and biblical responses to life struggles that are
specific to women. Crosslisted as BTCM.
PYCH-3610
3 hours
History and Systems of Psychology–Fa, Sp
Major trends in the development of psychology from its
beginning to the present. Emphasis is placed upon contemporary
theory. Prerequisite: PYCH-1600 General Psychology or
permission of instructor. (Fee: $10)
PYCH-3620 Psychology and Christianity–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Students will examine the historical and contemporary
discussions that have surrounded the boundaries and interface of
psychology and Christianity.
PYCH-3630 Testing and Measurement–Fa
3 hours
Emphasis on measurement theory and its applications,
including concepts of validity, reliability, and test construction and
selection. Prerequisite: PYCH-2610 Statistics. (Fee: $20)
PYCH-3640
3 hours
Industrial/Organizational Psychology–Sp
Psychology applied to the work world. Emphasis is on
methodology and activities of industrial/organizational
psychologists. Prerequisite: PYCH-1600 General Psychology or
permission of instructor.
PYCH-3660 Professional Counseling–Fa, Sp
3 hours
An introductory course emphasizing the underlying
philosophies, current theories, and accepted procedures of
counseling. Prerequisite: PYCH-1600 General Psychology.
PYCH-3670 Group Dynamics–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Group processes in a variety of group settings are the focus
as this course explores the interaction of individuals and groups.
Each student participates in a growth group as part of the course.
PYCH-3680 Counseling Couples and Families–Fa
3 hours
Students will explore the dynamics of marriage and family
relationships, and the means to help couples and family members
reconcile or enhance their relationships. Scriptural, psychological,
and Christian-life issues spanning family life cycles are studied.
PYCH-3690 Social Psychology–Fa, Sp
3 hours
The study of the behavior of individuals as it is influenced by
past and/or present interactions with social factors. Prerequisite:
PYCH-1600 General Psychology, or permission of instructor.
PYCH-3700 Adolescent Development
3 hours
Recent research dealing with adolescents will be emphasized.
Emphasis is placed on the interaction of cultural, social, and
personal family variables. Spiritual variables are integrated into
the developmental process. Prerequisite: PYCH-1600 General
Psychology, or permission of instructor.
PYCH-3701 Counseling Adolescents–Sp
3 hours
This course introduces students to counseling interventions
for helping adolescents who are struggling with common
developmental and adjustment problems. Prerequisite: PYCH-1600
General Psychology, or permission of instructor.




PYCH-2600 – PYCH-3701
PYCH-3710 Adult Development and Aging–Fa
3 hours
The study of physical, psychological, social, and spiritual
development and experience in the adult years. Prerequisite:
PYCH-1600 General Psychology, or permission of instructor.
PYCH-3720 Psychology of Personality–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Contemporary theories of the development, organization, and
dynamics of personality. (Fee: $5)
PYCH-3730 Research Methods–Fa, Sp
3 hours
An introduction to methods utilized in behavioral science
research; emphasis upon experimental methodology and research
design. Prerequisite: PYCH-2610 Statistics or permission of
instructor. (Fee: $5)
PYCH-3740 Qualitative Research–Fa
3 hours
An investigation of a scientific method of inquiry utilizing
qualitative rather than quantitative methodologies. Research
methodologies such as participant observation and in-depth
interviewing will be emphasized. A significant portion of the course
will involve students actively engaging in qualitative research
projects and preparing papers for potential presentation and
publication. Prerequisites: PYCH-1010 Writing in APA or permission
of instructor.
PYCH-3750 Psychological Testing
3 hours
A survey of instruments frequently utilized in psychology.
Assessments include intellectual, personality, and vocational
interest inventories. Students have opportunities for self-
assessment and are introduced to report writing and ethical
principles of psychological testing. Prerequisite: PYCH-1600
General Psychology; PYCH-2610 Statistics or permission of
instructor. (Fee: $20)
PYCH-3760 Cognitive Neuroscience–Sp
3 hours
Equip students with a thorough understanding of theories and
research in Cognitive Neuroscience. Emphasis will be placed
on brain physiology and anatomy contributing to the various
cognitive processes. Laboratory exercises will enable the students
to concretize the concepts presented in class as well as those
presented in the research papers and to apply it to themselves.
Prerequisites: PYCH-1600 General Psychology or permission of
instructor.
PYCH-3770 Experimental Design–Fa
3 hours
A critical understanding of, and an empirical familiarity with the
quantitative approaches used in psychology. An examination of
methodology includes sampling and generalizability, measurement
issues, data collection and analysis, non-experimental and
experimental designs. Prerequisite: PYCH-2610 Statistics.
PYCH-3900 Neurophysiological Psychology–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Explores the neurological, physiological, biological, and
anatomical mechanisms responsible for behavior. Prerequisite:
PYCH-1600 General Psychology or permission of instructor.
PYCH-3901 Medications and Behavior–Fa
3 hours
An overview of the major categories of psychotropic
medications. Emphasis is on general understanding of how
these medications affect behavior, their mechanism of action,
and common side effects. Prerequisite: PYCH-1600 General
Psychology or permission of instructor..
PYCH-4400 Counseling Skills–Sp
3 hours
Emphasis is on assisting individuals in ways of dealing with
solving or transcending their problem situations. The methods and
skills of helping others are investigated.
PYCH-4640
[0-9] hours
Psychology Comprehensive Review–Fa, Su
Reports and discussions of research literature in psychology.
Required of all psychology majors during their senior year.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. (Fee: $20)
PYCH-4650 Special Topics Seminar
1–3 hours
Various topics to be offered as interest demands. Available
to students with special interests in psychology. Prerequisite:
Permission of instructor. (Fee: $5)
PYCH-4700 Counseling Children–Fa
3 hours
An in-depth analysis of the effects of genetic, family, and
environmental factors on the developmental patterns of children.
A special emphasis will be placed on behavioral disorders of
dysfunctional families.
PYCH-4800
1–3 hours
Seminar in Undergraduate Teaching–Fa, Sp, Su
Students learn the fundamentals of college course preparation,
instruction, management, tutoring, and assessment in 1000- and
2000-level courses. Prerequisite: Permission of instructor.
PYCH-4850
1–3 hours
Advanced Seminar in Teaching Apprenticeship–Fa, Sp, Su
Students learn the fundamentals of college course preparation,
instruction, management, tutoring, and assessment in 3000- and
4000-level courses. Prerequisite: Permission of instructor.
PYCH-4950 Psychology Thesis–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Provides opportunities for students to conduct an independent
research project on a topic of interest and prepare a publishable
paper under the supervision of an individual faculty advisor. (Fee:
$20)
PYCH-4960 Independent Study in Psychology
1–3 hours
Independent research carried out by the advanced psychology
student in an area of interest and usefulness to the student.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor.
PYCH-4990 Psychology Internship–Fa, Sp, Su
1–9 hours
Junior and senior psychology majors may, with approval of
the department, engage in psychological activity at a human
service setting. One member of the Department of Psychology will
supervise the student’s internship. The department will determine
the number of credit hours that will be given for individual
work experience. Repeatable to nine hours. Capstone course.
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. (Fee: $20)
Science Education (SCED)
SCED-3120 Teaching Science–Fa
3 hours
This course presents the professional knowledge, skills,
methods, and instructional strategies required for teaching
adolescent and young adult science, based on Ohio Educator
Standards and NSTA science teacher preparation standards
within the context of a biblical framework. Emphasis will be given
to the facilitation of learning and innovation skills for adolescents
and young adult students. Prerequisite: Admission to the Teacher
Education Program. (Fee $100)
Sport Management (SMGT)
SMGT-2100 Sport in Society–Sp
3 hours
The purpose of this course is to expand the student’s
understanding of sport by investigating how sport and society
interact. The relationship of sport to social variables, institutions,
and social issues/problems will be examined.
SMGT-2500
3 hours
Organizational Behavior in Sport–Fa, Sp
This course will help students define and understand
the concepts of management and leadership within sport
organizations. There will be a focus upon the various skills,
roles, and functions of sport managers. This course places sport
organizations in the context of their environment and emphasizes
the manager’s role in adapting and reacting to changes in the
environment.
SMGT-2910
1 hour
Campus Sport Business Management Practicum–Fa, Sp
This practicum provides the sport business management
major with the opportunity to assist faculty members or staff
on the Cedarville University campus with their sport business
management responsibilities for a required minimum of 40
hours total. Prerequisite: Sophomore status or permission of the
instructor.


PYCH-3710 – SMGT-2910
SMGT-2920
1 hour
Sport Business Management Practicum–Fa, Sp
This practicum provides the sport business management
major with the opportunity to assist an off-campus sport business
professional for a required minimum of 40 total hours. Prerequisite:
Sophomore status or permission of the instructor.
SMGT-3180 Legal Issues in the Sport Industry–Sp
3 hours
This course will focus on the three major areas of law that have
a direct impact on the management of sport: tort liability and risk
management, contract law, and constitutional law. Prerequisite:
Junior status.
SMGT-3200 Facility Design and Management–Fa
3 hours
This course includes planning and designing areas and
facilities in sports and utilization of those facilities for sporting
events. Topics will include maintenance, supervision, scheduling,
planning, renovation, etc. Prerequisite: Junior status or permission
of the instructor. (Fee $35)
SMGT-3300 Event Planning and Production–Sp
3 hours
This course includes the process of planning for and organizing
an event in sport. Organizing a plan for an event would include
financial planning, risk management, scheduling, facility use,
communication, promotions, registration, etc. Prerequisite: Junior
status or permission of the instructor.
SMGT-3880
1–3 hours
Special Topics in Sport Management–Su

This course will be a means of exposing students to current
issues and trends in the sport industry.
SMGT-4100
3 hours
Sponsorship and Promotion in the Sport Industry–Fa
This course builds upon basic principles of marketing by
applying promotional and sponsorship activities to the sport and
fitness industry. Areas of application include professional sport,
intercollegiate sport, olympic sport, interscholastic sport, fitness
clubs and resorts.. Prerequisite: Senior status or permission of the
instructor. (Fee: $65)
SMGT-4200 Financing Sport Operations–Fa
3 hours
This course provides the student with an overview of the
financial aspects of the sport industry.
SMGT-4850
1–3 hours
Independent Study in Sport Management–Fa, Sp
Independent study in the area of sport management by
students pursuing the sport management major. Departmental
approval is required.
SMGT-4910 Athletic Administration Practicum–Fa, Sp
1 hour
This practicum provides the sport management major the
opportunity to assist a local athletic administrator with their
responsibilities for a required minimum of 30 hours total.
Prerequisites: SMGT-3200 Facility Design and Management;
SMGT-3300 Event Planning and Production.
SMGT-4990
6–12 hours
Internship in Sport Business Management–Fa, Sp
This internship is an actual work experience in a sport
management setting. Students must work a minimum of 40 hours
per credit hour. Capstone course. Departmental approval is
required. Credit/no credit. (Fee: $35)
Sociology (SOC)
SOC-1300 Introduction to Sociology–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Introduction to the concepts of sociology. The structure and
processes of social life are studied.
SOC-2200 Criminology–Fa
3 hours
Introduction to the major criminological perspectives regarding
crime causation. Selected notorious crimes are considered as
case studies to enhance understanding of each perspective.
Crosslisted as CRJU or SOC.
SOC-2310 Juvenile Delinquency–Fa
3 hours
Study and assessment of casual theory and problems of
correction and prevention of delinquency. Crosslisted as CRJU or
SOC. (Fee: $30)
SOC-2330 Introduction to Social Work–Fa, Sp
3 hours
See course description for SWK-2330 Introduction to Social
Work.
SOC-2400 Marriage and the Family–Fa, Sp
3 hours
A biblical theology of marriage and the family is developed as
a means by which to evaluate contemporary dating, marriage,
and family arrangements. A major focus of the course is upon
practical application related to such topics as dating/courtship,
engagement, marital adjustment, in-law relations, communication
and conflict resolution, family planning, and discipline.
SOC-2840
3 hours
Concepts of Chemical Dependency–Fa
Available to all students. This course presents an overview
of the social, economic, political, legal, spiritual, and ethical
considerations concerning the use and abuse of alcohol and other
drugs in our culture. A primary emphasis of the course includes
application of a biblical perspective to assess use of various
philosophies and perspectives on drugs and abuse. Treatment and
prevention options for individuals and families will be discussed.
Crosslisted as CRJU, PYCH, SOC, or SWK.
SOC-2900 Ethics in the Helping Professions–Sp
3 hours
This course is designed to introduce the student to current
issues and ethical dilemmas confronting professional helpers.
The course encourages development of critical thinking skills by
looking at dilemmas from a multifaceted point of view keeping in
mind the ramifications decisions have on practice, services, and
clients. Students learn to address dilemmas by drawing upon
Scripture, professional values, and ethical principles as presented
in the National Association of Social Workers Code of Ethics,
as well as codes of ethics from other helping professions. The
importance of human rights, justice, and mercy are incorporated
throughout the course content. Crosslisted as SOC or SWK.
SOC-3330 Social Stratification–Fa
3 hours
Study of the class structure and its implications for American
society. Prerequisite: SOC-1300 Introduction to Sociology.
SOC-3340 Sociology of Religion–Fa
3 hours
The relationship of religion to society with particular reference to
contemporary movements. (even years)
SOC-3420 Human Sexuality
2 hours
Study of biblical content regarding human sexuality and
an analysis of contemporary concepts within a framework of
Christian thought. Crosslisted with PYCH-3420 Human Sexuality.
Prerequisite: PYCH-1600 General Psychology or permission of
instructor.
SOC-3710 Family and Society–Sp
3 hours
This sociological study of the family examines the scientific
knowledge that exists about traditional and contemporary
household arrangements. Research on alternative family forms is
evaluated in light of public policy decisions and a biblical view of
the family.
SOC-3730 Social Problems–Sp
3 hours
Study of selected social problems for the purpose of developing,
understanding, and exploring approaches to the social treatment
of these problems within a theistic framework.
SOC-3750 Social Movements–Fa, Sp
3 hours
See course description for HIST-3750 Social Movements.
SOC-4440 Special Topics: Sociology
1–3 hours
Investigation of specific topics in Social Science and History
that have intrinsic worth and engage student interest.
SOC-4720 Social Theory–Fa
3 hours
Historical review of major sociological theorists and a critical
examination of their theories from a theistic perspective.




SMGT-2920 – SOC-4720
SOC-4800 Research in Sociology–Sp
3 hours
Senior research paper in which each student focuses upon an
issue or topic within the discipline of sociology. (Fee: $80)
SOC-4910
1–3 hours
Independent Study in Sociology
Provides the means whereby gifted and interested students
may explore, in a more in-depth and intensive manner, general
information acquired in the major courses. Further, independent
study provides a logical way to complete required hours not
obtained in normal sequencing. Prerequisite: Permission of the
instructor.
SOC-4990 Sociology Internship Fa Sp Su
3–12 hours
Sociology majors who participate in government service,
human services, research, social service, or other approved
activities related to the social sciences may earn up to 12 hours
of credit. Prerequisites: ANTH-1800 Cultural Anthropology,
PYCH-1600 General Psychology, and SOC-1300 Introduction to
Sociology
Spanish (SPAN)
SPAN-1710 Elementary Spanish I–Fa
4 hours
Development of basic skills in reading, writing, speaking,
and listening in Spanish to satisfy a broad variety of everyday,
school, and work situations, along with an introduction to Hispanic
cultures.
SPAN-1720 Elementary Spanish II–Sp
4 hours
Development of basic skills in reading, writing, speaking,
and listening in Spanish to satisfy a broad variety of everyday,
school, and work situations, along with an introduction to Hispanic
cultures. Prerequisite: SPAN-1710 Elementary Spanish I or
Spanish placement test for Elementary Spanish II.
SPAN-1740 Intensive Spanish–Su
6 hours
This course is a six-credit, short-term course designed for
students who wish to combine SPAN-1710 Elementary Spanish I
and SPAN-1720 Elementary Spanish II. Prerequisites: minimum
GPA 2.0, high school Spanish highly recommended.
SPAN-2710 Intermediate Spanish I–Fa
4 hours
Development of all four language skills through grammar review,
composition, conversation, and readings in Spanish literature and
culture. Prerequisite: SPAN-1720 Elementary Spanish, instructor’s
approval, or placement by exam.
SPAN-2720 Intermediate Spanish II–Sp
3 hours
Development of all four language skills through grammar review,
composition, conversation, and readings in Spanish literature
and culture. Prerequisite: SPAN-2710 Intermediate Spanish I;
instructors approval or placement by exam.
SPAN-2760 Spanish For Professionals–Sp
3 hours
Development of practical Spanish vocabulary and
conversational skills related to careers in education, criminal
justice, social work, and healthcare professions. Prerequisite:
SPAN-2720 Intermediate Spanish or permission of instructor. (odd
years)
SPAN-3100 Special Topics–Fa, Sp
1–3 hours
Available to upper-level or otherwise qualified students who
have an interest in specialized areas of Spanish language or
culture.
SPAN-3500
3 hours
Methods of Teaching Foreign Language–Fa
Designed around ACTFL’s Standards of Foreign Language
learning, this course prepares students to teach in the K–12 world
language classroom and also to teach English as a new language.
In this course, students will examine the purposes and objectives
along with the methods and curricular models appropriate for
the K–12 world language classroom, as well as adult-level
language teaching. This course addresses theories of second
language acquisition and how language learning looks different
at the various stages of a language learner’s life. Using theory to
inform practice, students will learn to plan and assess for student
learning, including the creation of learning activities, assessments,
lesson plans, and thematic unit plans, as well as evaluating and
providing feedback to maximize student learning. Students will
also gain insight into the importance of understanding one’s own
language, culture, and worldview as a means to understanding
the language, culture, and worldview of the target peoples and the
important role that cultural understanding plays in communication.
This course will prepare students to plan, teach, and assess
effectively in today’s rapidly changing classroom. Open to students
majoring in multi-age Spanish education or linguistics, and
those minoring in TESOL This course does not count toward
the Spanish major or minor. Prerequisites: degree-seeking
students only; sophomore, junior, or senior status only; LING-3100
Principles of Language Acquisition; permission of instructor or
advisor. (crosslisted with LING-3500)
SPAN-3610 Spanish Composition–Fa
3 hours
Emphasis on development of clear, natural, and effective written
communication in Spanish. Includes grammar review, vocabulary
expansion, discussion of stylistic elements, and practice in writing
narrative, descriptive, and several types of expository texts.
Prerequisite: SPAN-2720 Intermediate Spanish or permission of
instructor.
SPAN-3620 Spanish Conversation–Fa
3 hours
Designed to sharpen the student’s communication in oral
Spanish and to increase aural comprehension of spoken Spanish.
Attention given to pronunciation, vocabulary building, and practice
on hearing and speaking through in-class presentations and
other activities. Also emphasizes the development of culturally
appropriate approaches to communication and comparative
study of Anglo and Hispanic cultures. Prerequisite: SPAN-2720
Intermediate Spanish or permission of instructor.
SPAN-3640 Introduction to Hispanic Literature–Sp
3 hours
An introduction to concepts and vocabulary related to literary
analysis through the study of representative works in narrative,
poetry, drama, and essay by Spanish and Latin American authors,
with emphasis on contemporary authors. Prerequisite: SPAN-2720
Intermediate Spanish or permission of instructor.
SPAN-3670 Introduction to Translation–Sp
2 hours
An introduction to theory and practice related to bilingual
translation and interpreting. Students will learn strategies for
translating a variety of text types, as well as the fundamentals of
interpreting. Prerequisite: SPAN-3610 Spanish Composition; or
SPAN-3620 Spanish Conversation. (odd years)
SPAN-3680 History of Hispanics in the U.S.–Sp
3 hours
Examination of historical and contemporary issues that have
affected Hispanic cultures in the U.S. and their views of Anglos,
including the immigrant experience. Course taught in English;
counts for Global Awareness elective. (even years)
SPAN-3690 Hispanic Film–Sp
3 hours
Explores the genres of Hispanic film and how these genres
portray the cultural, social, and political environments in Spain and
the Americas. Prerequisites: SPAN-3640 Introduction to Hispanic
Literature; permission of instructor. (even years)


SOC-4800 – SPAN-3690
SPAN-4770
1 hour
Spanish Clinical Experience for Health

Care Personnel–Fa, Sp
A practical experience in which students minoring in Spanish
for Healthcare Personnel assist healthcare professionals in
clinical settings as they interact with Latino patients or clients.
Prerequisite: SPAN-4760 Advanced Medical Spanish.
SPAN-4790 20th Century Spanish Theatre–Sp
3 hours
Selected reading and analysis of outstanding Peninsular theatre
from Benavente, García Lorca, and other post-Civil War period
dramatists. Prerequisites: SPAN-3640 Introduction to Hispanic
Literature; permission of instructor. (even years)
Social Studies Education (SSED)
SSED-3800
2 hours
Teaching Social Studies: Adolescent to Young Adult–Fa
An emphasis on the identification, examination, and
implementation of the methods and materials that are appropriate
for each teacher candidate’s discipline area. Prerequisite:
admission to the Teacher Education Program. Corequisite: other
courses in the Adolescent and Young Adult Principles of Teaching
block or permission of the dean.
Social Work (SWK)
SWK-1100 Total Immersion Experience–Sp
1 hour
This course is available to all students interested in the helping
professions. It is primarily a course designed for social work
students who will receive a pre-professional experience in social
work. The student’s participation will be in a social service agency,
“shadowing” a social worker who has a degree in social work or
who is licensed in social work. (Fee: $60)
SWK-2330 Introduction to Social Work–Fa, Sp
[0-9] hours
Introduction to Social Work introduces the social work
profession and a variety of fields of social work practice. It includes
a study of the historical development of social work. Content will
emphasize an overview of the biblical foundation for the social
work profession. Crosslisted as SOC or SWK. (Fee: $55)
SWK-2350 Field Survey–Fa, Sp
2 hours
Experiential learning through visitation and observation of
social workers and intradisciplinary teams in agency settings. It
also provides exposure to fields of social work practice, the role of
social work, and the agency structure. There is a special emphasis
on understanding a biblical view of the diverse populations social
workers serve. A series of field trips will provide students with an
understanding of agency structure, the role of a social worker in a
variety of settings, generalist social work practice, the dynamics of
giving and taking help, and how to establish a professional helping
relationship. Does not count toward social science elective for
general education. (Fee: $40)
SWK-2500 Social Work with Aging Populations–Fa
[0-9] hours
This course is designed to complete the undergraduate program
and thus equip the student for beginning professional social work
practice with the elderly population. Focus is on knowledge of the
issues related to aging, exposure to the different types of social
work and agencies that service the elderly and the varied social
work careers related to serving the aged. The course will examine
aging, the role of caregiving, grief, death, and dying from a biblical
worldview.
SWK-2820 Social Work in Mental Health Settings–Sp
3 hours
This course will provide an exposure to contemporary issues of
social work practice in mental health settings, with an emphasis
on a biblical worldview. This is a survey course and will critically
examine the system of care and issues that currently exist for
individuals, families, and communities in the field of mental health.
SPAN-4610 Advanced Spanish Grammar–Fa
3 hours
Intensive review of high frequency grammatical structures
problematic to non-native speakers of Spanish. Exploration of the
history of the language as well as the theoretical aspects of the
nature of language and the practical development of written and
oral skills in Spanish. Prerequisite: Permission of instructor.

(even years)
SPAN-4640 Research in Language and Culture–Fa
3 hours
In-depth study of a particular topic of interest either through
individual research or group discussion. Orientation may be
interdisciplinary or author and genre specific. Capstone course.
Prerequisite: Major or minor in Spanish; permission of instructor.
SPAN-4650
3 hours
Civilization and Literature of Latin America I–Fa
A survey of the geography, history, culture, and literature of
Latin America from the pre-Columbian period through the 19th
century. Emphasis is on the diversity of Latin American society
and the factors that have shaped it. Literary works will be studied
for their literary significance within their socio-historical context.
Prerequisite: SPAN-3640 Introduction to Hispanic Literature. (odd
years)
SPAN-4670
3 hours
Civilization and Literature of Latin America II–Sp
A survey of the history, culture, and literature of Latin America
from  the present. Emphasis will be on
acquiring a greater awareness of current issues in Latin American
society and understanding their contributing factors. Literary
works will be studied for their literary significance within their
socio-historical context. Prerequisite: SPAN-3640 Introduction to
Hispanic Literature. (odd years)
SPAN-4680
2 hours
Advanced Conversation and Composition–Sp
Development of oral and written communication skills at the
advanced level as well as expansion of vocabulary dealing with a
variety of contemporary topics. Prerequisite: SPAN-3610 Spanish
Composition, SPAN-3620 Spanish Conversation, or permission of
instructor. (even years)
SPAN-4700 Independent Study in Spanish–Fa, Sp
1–3 hours
Independent and intensive study in a particular area of the
Spanish language, literature, or culture for individual students who
demonstrate special interests and ability.
SPAN-4740 Civilization and Literature of Spain I–Fa
[0-9] hours
A study of major literary works of Spain from the medieval and
Renaissance periods to the 17th century, with emphasis placed
on understanding works within their socio-historical context,
as well as their literary significance. Geography, history, and
culture of Spain from  the 17th century.
Prerequisites: SPAN-3640 Introduction to Hispanic Literature;
permission of instructor. (even years)
SPAN-4750 Civilization and Literature of Spain II–Sp
3 hours
A study of major literary works of Spain from the 17th century
to the present day, with emphasis placed on understanding
works within their socio-historical context, as well as their literary
significance. Geography, history, and culture of Spain from the
17th century to present. Prerequisites: SPAN-3640 Introduction to
Hispanic Literature. (even years)
SPAN-4760 Advanced Medical Spanish–Sp
2 hours
Study of Spanish medical terminology and cross-cultural
concepts essential for effective communication with Latino patients
and their families in a variety of healthcare settings. Prerequisite:
SPAN-2760 Spanish for Professionals. (odd years)




SPAN-4610 – SWK-2820
SWK-2840
3 hours
Concepts of Chemical Dependency–Fa
Available to all students. This course presents an overview
of the social, economic, political, legal, spiritual, and ethical
considerations concerning the use and abuse of alcohol and other
drugs in our culture. A primary emphasis of the course includes
application of a biblical perspective to assess use of various
philosophies and perspectives on drugs and abuse. Treatment and
prevention options for individuals and families will be discussed.
Crosslisted as CRJU, PYCH, SOC, or SWK.
SWK-2900 Ethics in the Helping Professions–Sp
3 hours
This course is designed to introduce the student to current
issues and ethical dilemmas confronting professional helpers.
The course encourages development of critical thinking skills by
looking at dilemmas from a multifaceted point of view keeping in
mind the ramifications decisions have on practice, services, and
clients. Students learn to address dilemmas by drawing upon
Scripture, professional values, and ethical principles as presented
in the National Association of Social Workers Code of Ethics,
as well as codes of ethics from other helping professions. The
importance of human rights, justice, and mercy are incorporated
throughout the course content. Crosslisted as SOC or SWK.
SWK-3010
3 hours
Human Behavior and the Social Environment–Fa, Sp
This course will provide a biblical assessment of social work
theories to assist in understanding human behavior with families,
groups, organizations, and communities. Emphasis will be
placed on holistic human relationships that have the capacity to
be influenced by biological, psychological, social, spiritual, and
cultural dimensions. Prerequisite: Admission to the social work
program.
SWK-3020
3 hours
Generalist Social Work Practice with Groups–Fa, Sp
This course provides students with the opportunity to develop
an understanding of theories, methods, and skills in relation to
generalist practice with social work groups. Students explore
the use of groups as a modality throughout scripture. Students
examine cultural values of individuals and the influence of those
values on the group process. Prerequisite: Admission to the
program or permission of the instructor. (Fee: $45)
SWK-3110 Social Welfare Programs and Policy–Fa, Sp
3 hours
This course examines social welfare policies and programs
in relation to their effects on specific populations in society.
Social policy is crucial to the way social workers are called
upon to advocate for their clients in diverse settings. This course
challenges students to examine the role of various levels of
governmental policy and our roles as believers in Christ. Students
gain this perspective through evaluating and analyzing current
social policies and the provision of services. The course considers
questions of social choice and the underlying criteria for the
funding and delivery of social services. Policy analysis will be a
major focus. Prerequisite: Admission to the social work program.
(Fee: $35)
SWK-3210
4 hours
Social Work Practice with Individuals and Families–Fa,Sp
This 4-hour course is designed to introduce the student to
social work practice from a generalist’s perspective. This course
will help the student integrate knowledge and theory with agency
practice. Emphasis will be given to the basic principles and
values of practice as well as the skill development essential to
beginning social work relationships. The student should emerge
with a foundation in the basic core of concepts, methodology, and
values along with an ability to examine his/her own practice. The
primary focus of this course is social work ethics, the worker/client
relationship, and interviewing skills. Prerequisites: Admission to
the social work program.
SWK-3430 Junior Seminar I–Fa
1 hour
and SWK-3440 Jr Field Experience I–Fa
3 hours
Junior Field Experience I is the placement of students in a
poverty focused social service agency. The first four weeks will be
one hour orientation sessions designed to inform and equip the
student to complete all assignments required before entering their
junior experience. Each student will be in field for a minimum of 75
hours, practicing eight hours weekly with clients and agency staff
under the supervision of a qualified field instructor. Seminar class
will meet once a week for one hour, where the student will receive
input from  the social
work program. Corequisite: It is recommended that SWK-3430
and SWK-3440 be taken concurrently. (Fee: $150)
SWK-3450 Junior Seminar II–Sp
1 hour
and SWK-3460 Jr Field Experience II–Sp
3 hours
Junior Field Experience II is the placement of students in a
poverty-focused social service agency. Each student will be in
field for a minimum of 75 hours, practicing eight hours weekly
with clients and agency staff under the supervision of a qualified
field instructor. Seminar class will meet once a week for one hour
where the student will receive input from peers and faculty. The
last four weeks will be one-hour orientation sessions designed to
inform and equip the student to complete all assignments required
before entering their senior field seminar. Prerequisite: admission
to the social work program. Corequisite: It is recommended that
SWK-3450 and SWK-3460 be taken concurrently. (Fee: $150)
SWK-4210
3 hours
Social Work Practice with Diverse Populations–Fa
This course provides instruction for students to acquire values,
skills, and knowledge of generalist social work practice. Instruction
emphasizes helping students develop cultural competence
for practice with diverse groups. Privilege, anti-racism, equity,
diversity, and inclusion are examined from a biblical worldview.
Prerequisite: Admission to the social work program. (Fee: $15)
SWK-4220
4 hours
Social Work Practice with Communities and Organizations–Sp
This course is designed for students to develop and
demonstrate competency in social work practice in multiple
macro settings. Instruction emphasizes use of generalist practice
skills to examine anti-racism, diversity, equity, and inclusion in
communities and organizations from a biblical worldview. Secular-
humanist and biblical perspectives of justice are compared..
Prerequisites: Admission to the social work program (Fee: $80)
SWK-4440 Special Topics: Social Work
1–3 hours
Investigation of specific topics in Social Work that have intrinsic
worth and engage student interest.
SWK-4510 Senior Seminar I–Fa
2 hours
and SWK-4560 Senior Field Experience I–Fa
6 hours
This course offers students the opportunity to practice social
work 16 hours weekly with professional supervision. A seminar is
held two hours weekly in which students submit their own practice
record for critical study and offer feedback to their peers. Emphasis
is placed on the integration of students’ social work theoretical
knowledge and skills as they enter the profession. Students must
complete a minimum of 225 hours in field. Prerequisite: Admission
to the social work program. Corequisite: It is recommended that
SWK-4510 and SWK-4560 be taken concurrently. (Fee: $250)


SWK-2840 – SWK-4560
SWK-4520 Senior Seminar II–Sp
2 hours
and SWK-4570 Senior Field Experience II–Sp
6 hours
These courses offer students the opportunity to practice social
work 16 hours weekly, with professional supervision. A seminar is
held two hours weekly in which students submit their own practice
record for critical study and offer criticism to their peers. Emphasis
is placed on the integration of the students’ social work theoretical
knowledge and skills as they enter the profession. Students must
complete a minimum of 225 hours in field. Prerequisite: Admission
to the social work program. Corequisites: It is recommended that
SWK-4520 and SWK-4570 be taken concurrently. (Fee: $250)
SWK-4610 Statistics for Social Workers–Fa
3 hours
This course is one of the two courses in the research sequence
for undergraduate social work majors. It provides an introduction
to the conceptual and quantitative tools used to describe and
interpret data that informs social work practice. Students learn
how to select, run, and interpret statistics applicable to social
work practice, while critically evaluating the provisional nature
of frequentist statistics from a biblical worldview. The course
provides students an opportunity to acquire a foundation in
personal computer skills through relevant examples of technology.
Students will be able to recognize how statistics can be used to
evaluate anti-racism, diversity, equity, and inclusion in practice
through class discussions and relevant computer lab assignments.
Prerequisite: Admission to the social work program or permission
of the instructor; students must have satisfied Cedarville’s
mathematics proficiency requirement before enrolling.
SWK-4620 Social Work Research Methods–Sp
3 hours
This course provides basic knowledge about research methods
as they apply to social work. Social work practice and research
share common features and processes, as both are fundamentally
problem-solving enterprises. Students learn to apply the basic
concepts and principles presented within this course, while
critically examining the concepts and principles from a biblical
worldview. Prerequisite: Admission to the social work program.
SWK-4950
1–3 hours
Independent Study in Social Work
Provides the means whereby gifted and interested students
may explore, in a more in-depth and intensive manner, general
information acquired in the major courses. Further, independent
study provides a logical way to complete required hours not
obtained in normal sequencing. Prerequisite: Permission of the
instructor.
Songwriting (SWMU)
SWMU-2100 Fundamentals of Songwriting–Fa
3 hours
This course will introduce fundamental components of
songwriting. This class is designed to expose students to practical
exploration of songwriting concepts such as lyric, melody,
harmony, rhythm, and form structure. In this course, special
emphasis will be placed on the topics of melody and poetic
devices. Prerequisite/Corequisite: THMU-1210 Music Theory I or
THMU-1250 Contemporary Musicianship I. (odd years)
SWMU-2500 Worship Songwriting–Sp
3 hours
This course will continue the development of skills related
to songwriting. This class is designed to help the student hone
practical techniques for crafting worship songs. Special emphasis
will be placed on the topics of lyrics, theology, and application
within a congregation. Prerequisite: SWMU-2100 Fundamentals of
Songwriting (odd years)
SWMU-3100 Professional Aspects of Songwriting–Fa
3 hours
This course will continue the development of skills related to
songwriting. It will discuss professional and legal aspects related
to songwriting such as copyright, publishing, licensing, production
and promotion. In an effort to offer exposure to the songwriting
industry, additional outside hours and travel component may
be required for this class. Prerequisites: SWMU-2500 Worship
Songwriting; corequisite: TYMU-2510 Introduction to Digital Music
Production (Fee:$300)(even years)
SWMU-4900 Senior Songwriting Seminar–Sp
1 hour
This course is designed to be a culminating experience for
songwriting minors. Students will record and produce a multi-song
demo of original music written within the context of the songwriting
minor. They will create a personal brand and professional social
media presence and release the EP digitally. They will also present
the music live in a “songwriters in the round” setting. Prerequisites:
SWMU-3100 Professional Aspects of Songwriting; corequisite:
TYMU-2520 Music Production Techniques. (Fee:$100) (even
years).
Music Theory (THMU)
THMU-1010
2 hours
Introduction to Music Theory and Aural Skills–Fa
An intensive study of the rudiments of music: notation, pitch,
and rhythm. These elements will be explored with aural and written
components. These credits may not be substituted for any other
music course. (Fee: $30)
THMU-1210 Music Theory I–Fa
3 hours
A foundational study of the essential building blocks of music
including chord analysis, harmony, voice leading, and form.
Prerequisite: THMU-1010 Introduction to Theory or competency
equivalency as shown by entrance examination. (Fee: $30)
THMU-1220 Music Theory II–Sp
3 hours
A continuation of Theory I with an in-depth exploration of
part-writing, seventh chords, and elementary chromaticism.
Prerequisite: THMU-1210 Music Theory I. (Fee: $30)
THMU-1250 Contemporary Musicianship I–Sp
2 hours
This course is designed to help students understand the
structure of contemporary music. The class will also continue to
develop written and aural musicianship studied in Introduction
to Music Theory and Aural Skills. Prerequisites: THMU-1010
Introduction to Music Theory and Aural Skills. (Fee: $30)
THMU-1310 Aural Skills I–Fa
2 hours
Introduction to techniques of basic aural musicianship, including
singing, recognizing, and dictating intervals and chords within the
diatonic major and minor systems by “guide tone” numeric scale
degree method. Corequisite: THMU-1210 Music Theory I.
THMU-1320 Aural Skills II–Sp
2 hours
A continuation of Aural Skills I with an in-depth exploration of
melodic and harmonic dictation along with an introduction to the
techniques of transcribing select popular music recordings by ear.
Prerequisite: THMU 1310 Aural Skills I.
THMU-2140 Functional Keyboard Skills–Fa
1 hour
Students will develop skills in harmonization at sight,
transposition, playing by ear, and other keyboard harmony skills
specifically designed to meet the piano proficiency requirements.
Prerequisite: Permission of the instructor.
THMU-2210 Music Theory III–Fa
3 hours
Critical study and analysis of the chromatic harmony,
counterpoint and formal structure of 18th century music. Creative
work in traditional compositional forms.
THMU-2220 Music Theory IV–Sp
3 hours
Critical study and analysis of the chromatic harmony and
formal structure of 19th-century music. Analytical study of 20th-
century compositional techniques, including impressionistic,
serial, neoclassical, and electronic practices: creative work in
contemporary styles.




SWK-4520 – THMU-2220
THMU-2250 Contemporary Musicianship II–Fa
2 hours
This course is designed to help students understand the
structure of contemporary music. The class will also continue to
develop written and aural musicianship studied in Contemporary
Musicianship I. Prerequisite: THMU-1250 Contemporary
Musicianship I. (Fee: $30)
THMU-2260 Contemporary Musicianship III–Sp
2 hours
This course is designed to help students understand the
structure of contemporary music. The class will also continue to
develop written and aural musicianship studied in Contemporary
Musicianship II. Prerequisite: THMU 2250 Contemporary
Musicianship II. (Fee: $30)
THMU-2310 Aural Skills III–Fa
2 hours
Intermediate aural musicianship techniques: at-sight singing,
melodic pattern recognition, and chord dictation within both
diatonic and chromatic major and minor systems by including
syncopated and irregular rhythmic patterns as well as four-voice
harmonic dictation, including more advanced chromatic language.
Prerequisite: THMU-1320 Aural Skills II. Corequisite: THMU-2210
Music Theory III.
THMU-2320 Aural Skills IV–Sp
2 hours
Advanced aural musicianship techniques: at-sight singing,
melodic pattern recognition, and chord dictation within both
diatonic and chromatic major and minor systems. More advanced
melodic, rhythmic, and harmonic dictation, including all tonal
language, as well as some extended chromatic possibilities and
introduction to the non-tonal tendencies of the 20th century.
Prerequisite: THMU-2310 Aural Skills III. Corequisite: THMU-2220
Music Theory IV.
THMU-3120 Jazz Theory and Improvisation I–Fa
2 hours
This course will introduce students to basic concepts of jazz
theory and improvisation. Material will include harmonic structure
and appropriate scales choice for improvisation. Students will
learn to improvise over jazz standards. Prerequisites: THMU-2210
Music Theory III, THMU-2310 Aural Skills III, and permission of
instructor. (odd years)
THMU-3130 Jazz Theory and Improvisation II–Sp
2 hours
This course will introduce students to advanced concepts of
jazz theory and improvisation. Material will include harmonic
structure and appropriate scales choice for improvisation.
Students will further develop the ability to improvise over jazz
standards. Prerequisites: THMU-2210 Music Theory III, THMU-
2310 Aural Skills III, and permission of instructor. (odd years)
THMU-4100 Counterpoint–Sp
3 hours
A survey of polyphonic music from  the 21st
centuries including the analysis and composition of species
counterpoint examples, canon, a fugal exposition, and a modern
composition. Students will especially focus upon contrapuntal
techniques utilized in contemporary choral and instrumental
music. Prerequisite: THMU-2220 Music Theory IV or permission of
instructor. (odd years)
THMU-4110 Form and Analysis–Sp
3 hours
The analysis of musical examples illustrating the primary
structural concepts operative within compositions dating from
1600 to the present. Emphasis will be placed upon the relationship
between musical form and performance. Using varied analytical
techniques, students will particularly focus upon repertoire
composed for their performance instrument. Prerequisites: THMU-
2220 Music Theory IV; THMU-2320 Aural Skills IV. (even years)
THMU-4130 Orchestration–Fa
2 hours
Designed to develop skills in scoring music for various
instrumental groups. Prerequisite: THMU-2220 Music Theory IV.
(Fee: $30) (odd years)
THMU-4140 Choral Arranging–Fa
2 hours
Study of arranging for the choral medium. Includes principles
of arranging for children, youth, and adult choirs. Special attention
given to arranging for large and small choral ensembles with a
variety of forms of accompaniment. Prerequisite: THMU-2220
Music Theory IV or permission of instructor. (Fee: $30) (even
years)
THMU-4990
1–3 hours
Independent Study in Theory/Composition
Independent and intensive study in a particular area of music
theory or composition for individual students who demonstrate
special interests and ability. Repeatable up to three credits.
Theatre (THTR)
THTR-1230 Voice for the Performer–Fa
3 hours
Practical approach to developing a healthy speaking voice
for professional use. Voice physiology provides foundation
for effective breathing, quality, projection, and articulation for
performance. Stage dialects are explored briefly as application of
the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA). Appropriate for actors,
singers, public speakers, and voice over artists. Crosslisted with
COM-1230.
THTR-1300 Introduction to Technical Theatre–Fa
3 hours
This course is designed to provide the student with an
introductory overview of various aspects of technical theatre,
including set construction, costume construction, lighting and
sound operation, and production run crews. The student will be
provided with opportunities to develop and explore their technical
skills with many of the basic tools, principles, and practices of
technical theatre. (Fee: $50)
THTR-1410 Introduction to Theatre–Fa
3 hours
Study of the history and development of theatre. Dramatic
literature is considered a reflection of man and culture
during various periods, dealing with philosophy, religion, and
sociopolitical thought. A brief look at acting skills is also offered.
THTR-1430 Stage Movement–Sp
3 hours
A practicum in theatrical stage movement for performance
with intensive studio sessions, starting with a foundation of
anatomically sound knowledge of Alexander technique. Physical
expressiveness is developed through exploration of industry-
standard approaches such as Elements, Laban effort/shape
movement, and Yakim’s social selves. Specific applications
develop technique for age demonstration and safe stage combat.
Appropriate for students in all performing arts. (odd years)
THTR-1460 Theatre Participation–Fa, Sp
0–1 hour
Theatre majors and minors must participate in one mainstage
production during each required semester. Theatre majors must
enroll each semester the student is a major. Theatre minors must
enroll two semesters. Participation may include acting, stage
managing, crew heading, crewing, dramaturgy, etc. Credit/no
credit.
THTR-1500 Introduction to Production Design–Sp
3 hours
This course is designed to provide the student an overview of
theatrical design and the process in which a designer follows in
analysis, research, and design for costume, lighting, scenic, and
sound design. Prerequisite: THTR-1300 Introduction to Technical
Theatre (Fee:$50)
THTR-2130 Dramatic Literature–Sp
3 hours
Study of the historical development of dramatic styles, theory,
criticism, and construction. Can be applied to meet English or
speech requirements, but not both. Crosslisted with LIT. (even
years)


THMU-2250 – THTR-2130
THTR-2200 Stage Management–Sp
2 hours
The course presents the procedures and ethics established
and practiced by professional stage managers. Students will put
these skills into practice through multiple class projects and in
the development of a prompt book. Prerequisites: THTR-1300
Introduction to Technical Theatre; THTR-1410 Introduction to
Theatre.
THTR-2350 Directing I–Fa
3 hours
Practical study of play directing methods, theories, and
techniques applied through class projects. Students will direct
scenes with complete artistic oversight, fulfilling every role and
function of a director. This course is also helpful to education
majors who will have to assist in educational theatre productions.
THTR-2430 Acting I–Fa
3 hours
Study in the principle theories of realistic acting is balanced with
practice in experiencing character creation. Principles of physical
and emotional character development are explored.
THTR-2470 Makeup Design–Fa
2 hours
Designed to provide the student with both theoretical
knowledge and practical skills for makeup design and execution
for a theatrical production. Each student will develop this craft
through individual projects and work on a mainstage production.
(Fee: $150) (odd years)
THTR-2510 The Arts and Social Change–Sp
3 hours
The nature of this course is to provide background in theory and
practical work in arts related areas that focus on efforts to work
effectively on behalf of those who are politically, economically,
behaviorally, or spiritually oppressed. (odd years)
THTR-3301 Technical Theatre Practicum: Costume–Fa
3 hours
This course is designed to provide the student with knowledge
and experience in the area of technical theatre. This hands-on
course may cover the areas of costume construction, costume
crafts, scenic construction, scenic painting, prop construction,
hanging and focusing of lighting instruments, etc., as pertaining to
the mainstage productions. Prerequisite: THTR-1300 Introduction
to Technical Theatre.
THTR-3302 Technical Theatre Practicum: Lighting–Fa
3 hours
This course is designed to provide the student with knowledge
and experience in the area of technical theatre. This hands-on
course may cover the areas of costume construction, costume
crafts, scenic construction, scenic painting, prop construction,
hanging and focusing of lighting instruments, etc., as pertaining to
the mainstage productions. Prerequisite: THTR-1300 Introduction
to Technical Theatre.
THTR-3303 Technical Theatre Practicum: Scenic–Fa
3 hours
This course is designed to provide the student with knowledge
and experience in the area of technical theatre. This hands-on
course may cover the areas of costume construction, costume
crafts, scenic construction, scenic painting, prop construction,
hanging and focusing of lighting instruments, etc., as pertaining to
the mainstage productions. Prerequisite: THTR-1300 Introduction
to Technical Theatre.
THTR-3304 Technical Theatre Practicum: Sound–Fa
3 hours
This course is designed to provide the student with knowledge
and experience in the area of technical theatre. This hands-on
course may cover the areas of costume construction, costume
crafts, scenic construction, scenic painting, prop construction,
hanging and focusing of lighting instruments, etc., as pertaining to
the mainstage productions. Prerequisite: THTR-1300 Introduction
to Technical Theatre.
THTR-3420 Theatre History I–Fa
3 hours
An analysis of performative modes of a given culture within
a historical study, reinforcing appreciation of the past and
strengthening the understanding of one’s own culture as well as
different cultures. General survey of theatre history from the pre-
Greek era to the present. Focus will be on prevailing philosophical
orientation, major dramatists, theatre architecture and staging
practices, styles of performance, costume design, innovations,
and development. (even years)
THTR-3430 Theatre History II–Sp
3 hours
Survey of staging practices and innovations from mid-17th
century to present, with study of representative plays from each
era. (even years)
THTR-3460 Acting II–Sp
3 hours
An advanced course that builds upon and expands the actor’s
repertoire. The course may cover theatre forms such as Western
foundational styles, Early modern to Post-Modern as well as non-
Western traditions and contemporary performance. (even years)
Prerequisite: THTR-2430 Acting I
THTR-3465 Performing Shakespeare–Sp
3 hours
This course will prepare students for performance of classical
works with an emphasis on communicating Shakespearean text
with clarity, understanding, and emotional honesty. Students’
skill will be challenged through performance of comic scenes,
tragic scenes, and monologues after thorough investigation of
Shakespeare’s rhetorical strategies and poetic form. (odd years)
THTR-3470 Dramaturgy–Sp
3 hours
This course provides background in specialized theatre
research for students interested in teaching theatre history, drama,
dramatic literature, and directing productions at the secondary or
college level. (odd years)
THTR-3501 Advanced Theatrical Design: Costume–Sp
3 hours
This course is designed to provide the student with both
theoretical knowledge and practical skills for designing costumes,
lighting, scenery, or sound for a theatrical production. The student
will develop this craft through individual projects that cover topics
such as rendering techniques, drawing and painting techniques,
working with a director’s concept, budgeting, presentation, and
collaboration. Prerequisites: ART-1100 Introduction to Art; THTR-
1300 Introduction to Technical Theatre; THTR-1500 Introduction to
Production Design. (Fee: $70)
THTR-3502 Advanced Theatrical Design: Lighting–Sp
3 hours
This course is designed to provide the student with both
theoretical knowledge and practical skills for designing costumes,
lighting, scenery, or sound for a theatrical production. The student
will develop this craft through individual projects that cover topics
such as rendering techniques, drawing and painting techniques,
working with a director’s concept, budgeting, presentation, and
collaboration. Prerequisites: ART-1100 Introduction to Art; THTR-
1300 Introduction to Technical Theatre, THTR-1500 Introduction to
Production Design. (Fee: $70)
THTR-3503 Advanced Theatrical Design: Scenic–Sp
3 hours
This course is designed to provide the student with both
theoretical knowledge and practical skills for designing costumes,
lighting, scenery, or sound for a theatrical production. The student
will develop this craft through individual projects that cover topics
such as rendering techniques, drawing and painting techniques,
working with a director’s concept, budgeting, presentation, and
collaboration. Prerequisites: ART-1100 Introduction to Art; THTR-
1300 Introduction to Technical Theatre, THTR-1500 Introduction to
Production Design. (Fee: $70)




THTR-2350 – THTR-3503
THTR-3504 Advanced Theatrical Design: Sound–Sp
3 hours
This course is designed to provide the student with both
theoretical knowledge and practical skills for designing costumes,
lighting, scenery, or sound for a theatrical production. The student
will develop this craft through individual projects that cover topics
such as rendering techniques, drawing and painting techniques,
working with a director’s concept, budgeting, presentation, and
collaboration. Prerequisites: ART-1100 Introduction to Art; THTR-
1300 Introduction to Technical Theatre, THTR-1500 Introduction to
Production Design. (Fee: $70)
THTR-3510 Directing II–Sp
3 hours
An advanced course exploring the direction of period plays and
stylistic genres other than realism. Student projects might include
one-act or full-length plays. Students will become familiar with
influential contemporary directors and directing theories. (odd
years) Prerequisite: THTR-2350 Directing I.
THTR-3530 Musical Theatre Techniques–Sp
3 hours
This course offers technique instruction in dance, voice, and
acting styles for musical theatre. As a performance course,
students will learn core dance technique starting with ballet and
moving through various applicable styles, as well as basic vocal
skills and acting technique necessary for musical theatre styles.
Students will mark their progress toward a mastery of each unit
through multiple classroom performances. Enrollment open to any
student interested in musical theatre performance.(even years)
(Fee: $75)
THTR-3540 Period Styles for Production–Sp
3 hours
A general survey of Western art, architecture, and fashion for
the stage from  Late 20th Century. This course
provides an overview of the evolution of art, architecture, and
fashion as well as the social and cultural history affecting those
evolutions. (even years) (Fee: $50)
THTR-3610 Theatre for Young People–Fa
3 hours
Designed to prepare college students to work with young
people in the arts, this course trains students to use theatrical
games/activities/productions with children between the ages of
preschool through 12th grade. Useful skills are demonstrated to
properly direct children in the classroom, on the stage, and in
ministry-based settings such as preschools, camps, and on the
mission field. Special focus is placed on childhood development
as a means to create/identify/adapt theatrical material and apply
it appropriately in various settings. Recommended for theatre/
education/missiology students who plan to work with young
children in educational, professional, and ministry settings. (Fee:
$60) (odd years)
THTR-3650 Playwriting–Fa
3 hours
This course is designed as a means of providing an opportunity
for the student to concentrate on the writing of plays as a part
of preparation for graduate work, ministry and worship, and the
creation of new works for theatre. The emphasis will be on creative
storytelling in dramatic form, including experimental work in
varying formats. (even years)
THTR-3850
2 hours
Seminar in Arts Administration and Arts Law–Sp
A seminar course providing background in arts administration
and arts law, with significant research and presentation
responsibilities for students. An overview of issues involved in the
operation of arts organizations. (even years) (Fee: $75)
THTR-4230 Stage Combat–Sp
3 hours
This course is an interactive study in theatrical stage combat
with intensive studio training in unarmed (hand-to-hand)
techniques. Emphasis is placed on safe, accurate, and convincing
combat training with practical application in dramatic scene study.
The course content will follow the policies/procedures dictated
by the Society of American Fight Directors (SAFD). The course
begins by building a strong foundation in unarmed skills and may
advance to include an introduction of various stage weapons as
appropriate for the students’ skill-levels. (even years) (Fee: $75)
THTR-4400 Professional Preparation Seminar–Fa
2 hours
Prepares the senior theatre arts student for entry into the
professional arts community and/or graduate study. Topics include
audition/portfolio preparation and presentation, resumé writing,
interviewing techniques, graduate study/assistantship options,
professional union affiliation, etc. (Fee: $125)
THTR-4430 Acting III–Sp
3 hours
Through various acting techniques, the actor will utilize in-depth
research, interpretation, and script analysis to create complex
characters. Course work may also explore emotionally-charged
scenes to develop a methodology for sustaining demanding roles
over long performance runs. When appropriate, students may
also use their work from  apply the
skills, techniques, and knowledge acquired in class. (odd years)
Prerequisites: THTR-2430 Acting I; THTR-3460 Acting II.
THTR-4630 The Christian in Theatre–Sp
2 hours
Students discuss issues they will face in the culture-shaping
world of stage and screen. A biblical view of the arts sets the
foundation for examining work ethic and professional practice.
Service-learning projects integrate faith and art in the local
community.
THTR-4640 Special Topics–Fa, Sp
1–3 hours
Topics of specialized theatrical interest are examined on an as-
needed basis. Repeatable up to six credit hours.
THTR-4750 Independent Study: Theatre–Fa, Sp
1–3 hours
Independent study in a selected field for students with special
interests and demonstrated ability. Repeatable up to eight credit
hours.
THTR-4810 Internship: Theatre–Fa, Sp, Su
0–6 hours
Students are placed with professional organizations to gain
experience in actual career situations. Internships depend upon
availability. Repeatable up to 12 hours.
THTR-4840 Senior Theatre Project–Fa, Sp
3 hours
The Senior Theatre Project (STP) will culminate students’ work
in the form of a project that presents their highest caliber of work
and that prepares students to achieve personal and professional
goals. STP requirements can be fulfilled through performance,
directed production, co-directed performance, theatre design, or
dramaturgical study. Students begin shaping the STP immediately
upon enrollment in the major and will work with an assigned
project advisor. Capstone course.
THTR-4850 Theatre Capstone Internship–Fa, Sp, Su
3 hours
The capstone internship has two goals: to culminate the
student’s work at Cedarville through professional work experience
representing the student’s highest caliber of work and to prepare
the student to achieve personal and professional goals. This
experience meets the capstone requirement as an alternative from
the STP capstone course.

THTR-3504 – THTR-4850
Music Technology (TYMU)
TYMU-2510
3 hours
Introduction to Digital Music Production–Fa
This course is a survey of music technology tools and
techniques including an introduction to the digital audio
workstation, digital audio editing, MIDI editing and programming,
and virtual instruments. Prerequisites: THMU-1010 Introduction
to Music Theory and Aural Skills or successful completion of the
Music Theory Entrance Exam; or permission of the instructor. (Fee:
$45) (even years)
TYMU-2520 Music Production Techniques–Sp
3 hours
This course focuses on laptop recording and editing,
giving students skills necessary to record and mix their own
arrangements and compositions. Students will use a guerrilla
recording approach to create singles and albums. Prerequisites:
TYMU-2510 Introduction to Digital Music Production; or
permission of the instructor. (Fee: $45) (even years)
TYMU-3510 Electronic Music Production–Fa
3 hours
Students will learn music production techniques related to
electronic and ambient genres. Using appropriate synthesizer
sound design, sampling, MIDI programming, and mixing
techniques, students will produce several original projects in
modern electronic genres. Prerequisites: TYMU-2520 Music
Production Techniques; or permission of the instructor. (Fee: $45)
(odd years)
TYMU-3520 Scoring for Digital Media–Sp
3 hours
This course focuses on film-scoring techniques using live
instruments and electronics. Students will create music for a
variety of media including film, websites, and radio. Prerequisites:
TYMU-3510 Electronic Music Production or permission of the
instructor. (Fee: $45) (odd years)
Visual Communication Design (VCD)
VCD-1050 Applied Design: Tech Tools I–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Students learn fundamental, industry-standard and processes
and design technologies-Adobe Illustrator, InDesign, and
Photoshop-as they apply principles of visual communication
design to both print and screen contexts. (Fee:$35)
VCD-1200 Design Thinking–Sp
2 hours
In this introductory course, students will explore why we design.
Through a variety of projects, contextual research opportunities,
reading, instruction, and collaboration, students will learn the core
principles of the design discipline, design’s role within–and its
potential impact on–business and our community, and the ways
designers develop innovative insights and compelling ideas that
resonate deeply and authentically with ordinary people. (Fee: $50)
VCD-2000 History and Influences of Design–Sp
3 hours
Survey of design from  the present. The
course highlights significant stages in the development and pivotal
influences of design including technological advances, individual
works, key movements, schools of thought, and approaches
relative to time(s) and culture(s). Crosslisted with IDES.
VCD-2050 Applied Design: Tech Tools II–Sp
3 hours
Building on a foundation of technical tools, students will learn
advanced technical skills, complex processes, and creative
exploration as they apply principles of visual communication
design to relevant, practical, and complex design problems and
contexts. Prerequisite: VCD-1050 Applied Design: Tech Tools I
(Fee: $35)
VCD-2200 Typography–Fa
3 hours
An introduction to the study of typography and its role in
the structuring of visual language and its relationship to the
discipline of graphic design. The course will examine the history
of letter forms, their sources, and their influences and will provide
opportunities for learning principles and guidelines for the effective
use of type in visual communication for a variety of media and
messages. Students will learn to structure intelligent, creative
type solutions through classroom discussion, reading, research,
and studio assignments, including editorial, promotional, and
informational applications of typography. Prerequisites: ART-1230
Two-Dimensional Design; VCD-1050 applied Design: Tech Tools I;
or permission of instructor. (Fee: $50)
VCD-2400 Graphic Design I–Sp
3 hours
An introduction to the study of graphic design with emphasis
on using the principles of design to communicate information
and ideas in visual form. The course will provide opportunities to
learn principles of visual communication and steps in the design
process necessary to produce effective design solutions. Learning
will be achieved through classroom discussion, reading, research,
and studio assignments that center on producing concepts
for both printed and electronic forms of information design.
Prerequisites: VCD-2200 Typography; or permission of instructor.
(Fee: $50)
VCD-2600 Web Design I–Fa, Sp
3 hours
Students learn foundational concepts and skills for building
usable and beautiful user-centered websites by exploring the
differences between graphic design and interactive design, gaining
experience with designing webpage layouts, and practicing the
skills necessary for constructing and publishing web pages with
HTML and CSS. (Fee: $10)
VCD-3200 Portfolio I–Sp
1 hour
This course will focus on developing professional presentation
materials and communication skills required to present project
work to design professionals and prospective employers.
Previous project work will be refined along with additional project
work necessary to emphasize interest in a particular area of
specialization. Students will be required to develop a resumé
and portfolio along with written communication for documenting
their education, experience, and technical skills. Students are
recommended to have completed or be concurrently taking
VCD-2400 Graphic Design I to have adequate material for their
portfolio.(Fee: $145)
VCD-3300 Production Design I–Fa
3 hours
An introduction to the technical processes required for the
production of graphic design solutions in a variety of media.
The course will provide opportunities to gain understanding
of guidelines and requirements necessary for producing
design documents in both conventional and electronic media.
Prerequisites: VCD-1050 Applied Design: Tech Tools I; Students
are recommended to have completed VCD-2400 Graphic Design
I. GD majors and minors only. (Fee: $50)
VCD-3400 Graphic Design II–Fa
3 hours
An in-depth study of graphic design and its role in creating
visual communication. Coursework will examine methods of
conducting and interpreting research, the development of strategy-
driven concepts to formulate targeted design solutions, as well as
the foundations of the branding process. The course will provide
opportunities for developing conceptual and technical skills
through class work and projects following specific communication
models. Prerequisites: VCD-2400 Graphic Design I; or permission
of the instructor. GD majors and minors only. (Fee: $50)




TYMU-2510 – VCD-3400
VCD-3600 Web Design II–Sp
3 hours
Students will learn advanced concepts and techniques in
web design including visual design, navigation, usability, grid
layout, scripting, coding, and other skills necessary to produce
professional, visually enhanced media for delivery via the web.
Students will use industry standards, including software, to
develop websites and digital media that integrate motion, sound,
and interactivity to add value and enhance the user experience
for web-based advertising, marketing, and other communication
needs. Prerequisites: VCD-2600 Web Design I. (Fee: $60)
VCD-3650 Scripting for Interactivity–Fa
3 hours
Students are introduced to the disciplines of interaction
design and front-end development and learn how to use current
technologies and best practices to apply principles of interaction
to achieve simple, user-centered, interactive effects on real-world
projects. Prerequisite: VCD-3600 Web Design II. (Fee: $50)
VCD-3700 User Experience and Interface Design–Fa
3 hours
Students will study the principles of user experience and
interface design, including processes, research methods, and
concept testing. They apply principles through conceptualizing,
testing and prototyping real-world projects for websites, web
applications, mobile applications, gaming consoles, and other
emerging technologies. Prerequisites: VCD-2400 Graphic Design
I; or permission of the instructor. (Fee: $35)
VCD-4200 Portfolio II–Fa
1 hour
This course will focus on revising a portfolio package that
demonstrates to prospective employers professional-level
knowledge and abilities within a particular area of specialization.
Additionally, students will develop professional written, verbal, and
non verbal communication skills that will guide the transition from
academia to the design industry. Prerequisites: VCD-3200 Portfolio
I and senior status; or permission of instructor.
VCD-4300 Production Design II–Sp
3 hours
An in-depth study of production methods and practices for
application to 2-dimensional and 3-dimensional design concepts.
Prerequisites: VCD-2400 Graphic Design I; VCD-3300 Production
Design I; or permission of the instructor. (Fee: $70)
VCD-4400 Graphic Design Capstone–Sp
3 hours
Students will complete a capstone project that combines skills
from previous classes. Students will research, plan, conceptualize,
prototype and implement a graphic design project - utilizing
human-centered design research to develop a design strategy
that informs targeted final solutions. Students will develop each
phase of the project into a comprehensive project presentation.
Prerequisites: VCD-3300 Production Design I; VCD-3400 Graphic
Design II; or permission of the instructor. (Fee: $50)
VCD-4600 Web Design III–Fa
3 hours
Student survey current trends and developments in the fields
of user experience, web design, and interactive design and apply
new knowledge and skills to create an experimental interactive
project. Prerequisite: VCD-3600 Web Design II. (Fee: $50)
VCD-4700 Interactive Design Capstone–Sp
3 hours
Students complete a capstone project that combines skills
from previous classes. They will research, plan, conceptualize,
prototype, test, develop, and implement a fully functional real-
world interactive project. Prerequisites: VCD-3650 Scripting for
Interactivity; VCD-3700 User Experience and Interface Design;
VCD-4600 Web Design III. (Fee: $50).
VCD-4800
1–3 hours
Special Topics in Visual Communication–Fa, Sp
This course will examine a topic of specialized interest within
the field of visual communication design. Rotation of course
content will be determined by faculty schedules and student
interest. Actual contact hours would determine the amount of
credit granted. Prerequisites: Topic dependent and by permission
of the instructor. (Fee: $50)
VCD-4900
0–6 hours
Visual Communication Design Internship–Fa, Sp, Su
The graphic design internship will give the student an
opportunity to gain actual on-the-job experience with professionals
in the graphic design industry. This opportunity will allow students
to gain insight into the professional practices and approaches
to solving communication challenges for a variety of business
models and client types. This experience will become a valuable
asset in competing for an entry-level position upon graduation.
CR/NC course.
VCD-4990 Independent Study in Design–Fa, Sp, Su 1–3 hours
This course allows a student independent and intensive study
in a particular area of specialized interest beyond regular course
offerings. The student must apply with a proposal and schedule to
be approved in advance by the faculty mentor. Repeatable up to 6
credit hours. Prerequisite: approval of proposal by faculty mentor.
Worship (WSHP)
WSHP-1010 Introduction to Worship Ministry–Fa
1 hour
This course is designed to be an introductory course to the field
of worship ministry. It will provide the student with an examination
of current practices in worship ministry, an overview of the worship
degree at Cedarville, the character of a worshipper, the role of a
worship leader, and career opportunities.
WSHP-1020 Introduction to Worship Technology–Sp
2 hours
This course is designed to be an introductory course to the
field of worship technology. It will explore the basic technologies
and concepts that are needed in worship ministry today, including
audio, graphics, video, copyright, and ministry team building. (Fee:
$50)
WSHP-2060 Music and the Arts in Worship–Fa
3 hours
An introduction to and overview of the philosophy and history
of church music ministry in the evangelical tradition, including
the biblical foundation of worship and music, the philosophical
foundations for various worship approaches, the application of
biblical principles to past and present traditions, and biblical,
cultural, and practical principles for worship and praise ministries.
WSHP-2100 Worship Forum–Fa, Sp
0 hour
A once-per-semester seminar designed to expose students
to various aspects of worship ministry. The seminar may take
the form of a lecture or masterclass. Crosslisted with CHMU-
2100 Church Music Seminar. Prerequisites: Worship major or
permission of instructor.
WSHP-2200 Worship Field Experience–Fa, Sp, Su
1 hour
Initial field experience in a local church or parachurch
organization. Students are responsible for finding a place
of ministry involvement to begin developing music ministry
skills. Supervision will be provided by an on-site staff member.
Prerequisites: worship major or permission of instructor.
WSHP-3100 Worship Practicum–Fa, Sp
0–1 hours
This course is designed to help students refine their worship
leadership abilities. Students will be given in-class and out-of-
class worship leading assignments. Current trends and advanced
worship leading topics will also be discussed. Prerequisites:
Junior-level status; church music or worship major; or permission
of instructor.
WSHP-3200 Worship Administration–Sp,
3 hours
This course will study various methods of organizing and
administering the total worship program of the church. This course
introduces materials and methods for teaching and supervising
ensembles. Students will examine, staff, finances, buildings, public
relations, and leadership skills necessary to successfully fulfill
one’s calling.




VCD-3600 – WSHP-3200
WSHP-4900 Worship Internship–Fa, Sp
3–9 hours
Intensive field experience in worship leadership. Place of
service is determined by student interest, recommendation of
supervising faculty, and by sponsoring organization (typically a
local church congregation). Students must apply for internships
and receive endorsement from the advisor and the chair of the
department one academic semester before period of service and
prior to registering. Students should check with their advisor for
complete internship requirements. Repeatable up to nine total
hours. Prerequisites: Senior-level standing as a worship major,
approval by the advisor and department Chair.
WSHP-4980 Special Topics in Worship
1–3 hours
This is a workshop for students interested in worship leadership
and will be offered on a periodic basis depending on instructor
availability and student interest. Contact hours will determine the
amount of credit given. Prerequisite: Topic dependent.

