ART 1223 ART SURVEY 
This General Education course traces the history of art from prehistory to 
the present. Emphasis is on art of the western world from antiquity through 
the modern era. Among the topics covered are the art of Renaissance 
Europe, Impressionism and Post-Impressionism, as well as ways of seeing 
and the influence of non-Western cultures. F, S, SU 
ASTRO 1904 ASTRONOMY 
An introductory course stressing basic science and how we arrived at our 
present knowledge. Topics include: history of astronomy; planets; 
meteorites; comets; asteroids; birth, life, and death of stars; galaxies; 
quasars; black holes; and cosmology. Several night viewing sessions will 
be arranged.  F, S, SU 
BIOL 1004 BIOLOGICAL CONCEPTS* 
An introduction to the concepts and methods of biology needed to 
understand biological issues faced by society. Upon completion of the 
course students will be able to apply the scientific method to problem 
solving and to explain natural phenomena. Students will also understand 
such concepts as the role of the cell in maintaining conditions essential for 
life. In addition, students will be able to describe the interactions between 
living organisms and the environment at the population, ecosystem, and 
biosphere levels and to identify potential impacts on society of 
biotechnology, world population growth, and human influences on global 
biogeochemical cycles. Credit for this course may not be applied to a 
Biological Sciences Major or Minor.  F, S, SU 
BIOL 1013 CURRENT ISSUES IN BIOLOGY 
Students will be introduced to how basic knowledge of biological sciences 
can contribute to their growth as informed global citizens. The course 
focuses on biological principles that have immediate applications in our 
everyday lives. The course will also require that students use the 
knowledge they received to debate important issues, solve problems, and 
communicate complex issues to their peers. F, S 
BIOL 1054 PRINCIPLES OF BIOLOGY I 
Introduction to major molecular, cellular and genetic principles needed to 
understand the functioning of all organisms. Investigative laboratories 
introduce important techniques and methodologies used by modern 
biologists. Students will be introduced to scientific procedure, reasoning, 
problem solving, and reporting. Required for all biological sciences majors 
and minors and recommended for pre-professional and other science 
majors. Corequisite: BIOL 1054L. F, S 
* Or a higher numbered biology course 
** Or a higher numbered chemistry course 
CHEM 1004 GENERAL CHEMISTRY** 
A survey course in general chemistry designed for students requiring a 
single chemistry course (of 4 hours or fewer) in their major or for students 
requiring a preparatory course for CHEM 1203 and CHEM 1252, General 
Chemistry I. Topics include measurements, atomic theory, bonding, 
naming /writing formulas of inorganic compounds, properties of 
solids/liquids/gases, energy (primarily light/heat), reactions (including 
balancing equations, stoichiometry, equilibrium), solutions/concentrations, 
and acids/bases. The laboratory is designed to fortify the understanding of 
the major topics of the course. No prerequisites although a minimal algebra 
background is helpful. F, S 
COMM 1263 INTRODUCTION TO THEATRE 
Background, philosophy, and practices of theatre arts, the theory and 
practice of elementary principles of direction, acting, and stagecraft. All of 
the above will be applied to the study of American, British, and European 
plans representing major literary periods from classic to modern. F, S 
COMM 1313 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC SPEAKING 
This course provides students with an in-depth analysis of public speaking. 
It includes a thorough examination of the theoretical framework of public 
speaking and requires students to put those theories into practice. Students 
will build critical thinking skills by constructing their own messages and 
evaluating those of others. This course is designed to heighten student’s 
skills as well as increase their confidence as public speakers. F, S, SU 
COMSC 1023 COMPUTERS & INFORMATION ACCESS 
Introduction to computers, computer software, and the use of computers to 
access information for general education students. Includes an introduction 
to computer concepts and security, operating systems, and computer 
applications, including Word, Excel, PowerPoint, and Access. F, S, SU 
NOTE: The course curriculum is based on the Windows operating 
system. Students who do not have access to a Windows computer 
should plan to use computers in the SWOSU computer labs whether 
taking this course online or face-face. 
COMM 2103 INTRO TO MASS COMMUNICATIONS 
Basic study of the nature and function of mass communication systems, 
their audiences, social impact, pressures, and regulations. F, S 
COMM 2113 WRITING FOR MASS MEDIA 
Introduction to writing for both print and broadcast media. Includes news, 
feature, editorial, and sports writing. F 
COMM 3573 INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION 
Students examine the ways that communication varies in different cultures. 
Kinds of differences studied include nationalities, languages, ethnicities, 
gender, age and others. SE 
ECONO 2263 INTRODUCTION TO MACROECONOMICS 
Study of the economy as a whole. Topics include national income 
accounting, the determination of the levels of income, output, employment, 
and price; money and banking; stabilization policies; international 
economics. F, S 
ECONO 2363 INTRODUCTION TO MICROECONOMICS 
Fundamental microeconomic principles involving behavior of consumers, 
business firms, and resource owners as they relate to the allocation of 
resources; individual price and output determination. F, S 

 
ENGL 1113 ENGLISH COMPOSITION I 
A limited review of principles of grammar and basic language mechanics; 
training for effective communicative skills with emphasis on writing as 
required for successful college study. F, S, SU 
ENGL 1213 ENGLISH COMPOSITION II 
Training for skills in communication, as in ENGL 1113, but a higher level. 
Research component. Prerequisite: ENGL 1113. F, S, SU 
ENGL 4653 WRITING FOR MULTIMEDIA 
Writing for Multimedia is an interactive course designed to give students 
practice producing texts for a wide range of media for a variety of purposes 
– entertainment, gaming, marketing, education. Students will learn to 
write, think and edit using multiple modes of composition, as well as how 
to engage effectively, respectfully and safely in/with digital spaces. S 
GEOG 1103 WORLD CULTURAL GEOGRAPHY 
Study of world’s cultural regions. Cultural development is surveyed for 
such topics as populations, technologic-economic systems, and socio-
cultural beliefs and practices. F, S, SU 
GEOL 1934 PHYSICAL GEOLOGY 
Introduction to earth science; earth in the universe, seafloor spreading and 
continental drift, the geomagnetic field, earthquakes and landform 
development; laboratory study of minerals and rocks, topographic maps, 
stereophotographs and landforms. F, S 
HIST 1033 WORLD HISTORY 
An introduction to the history of world civilizations with an emphasis on 
the development of ideas, institutions, and religions as well as an 
examination of the impact particular individuals and movements have had 
in history. F, S, SU 
HIST 1043 UNITED STATES HISTORY TO 1877 
A survey of American history, beginning with the European background 
and continuing through the reconstruction era. F, S, SU 
HIST 1053 UNITED STATES HISTORY SINCE 1877 
A survey of American history from the end of reconstruction to the present. 
F, S, SU 
HUM 1103 INTRODUCTION TO HUMANITIES 
An interdisciplinary, multi-perspective assessment of cultural, political, 
philosophical, and aesthetic factors critical to the formulation of values and 
the historical development of the individual and of society. Examines 
human creativity broadly, including music, painting, literature, theater, 
architecture, sculpture, and modern innovations such as photography and 
film. F, S, SU 
KINES 1133 WELLNESS CONCEPTS AND EXERCISE 
APPLICATIONS 
This course is designed to provide the student with a philosophy of living 
that encourages a higher quality of life and a state of well-being. Lifestyle 
choices are identified and explained in regard to proper exercises, weight 
management, stress management, substance use, sexually transmitted 
diseases, health care, nutrition, cardiovascular disease prevention, and 
cancer prevention. Assessment techniques and development of individual 
prescriptions in the areas of muscular strength, muscular flexibility, 
cardiovascular endurance, body composition, and nutrition are studied. 
Lifetime leisure skills are identified and developed to provide a well-
rounded exposure to wellness. F, S, SU 
*** Or a higher numbered mathematics course 
LIT 2333 INTRODUCTION TO FILM 
A study of films as entertainment, cultural force, and art form. This course 
consists of viewing, analyzing, and discussing numerous full-length 
commercial films. F, S 
LIT 2413 INTRODUCTION TO LITERATURE 
The study of short stories, poetry, and drama. F, S, SU 
MATH 1143 MATH CONCEPTS 
An introduction to mathematical ideas and their applications. Topics are 
chosen from set theory, logic, probability and statistics, financial 
mathematics, number theory, and graph theory.  F, S, SU 
MATH 1153 MATH APPLICATIONS 
A course in mathematics designed for nursing and health science students. 
Topics covered will include solving ratios and proportions, dimensional 
analysis, dosage calculations, and working with logarithms. F, S 
MATH 1513 COLLEGE ALGEBRA*** 
A fundamental course including solutions of equations and inequalities, 
systems of equations, algebra of functions, polynomial functions, rational 
functions, exponential and logarithmic functions, matrices, and conic 
sections. Prerequisite: ACT Math subscore of 19 or higher, or MATH 
0133, or departmental approval, or placement by examination. F, S, 
SU 
MUSIC 1013 INTRODUCTION TO MUSIC I 
Introduction to the history of music and musical styles. F, S, SU 
MUSIC 1103 MUSIC AND CULTURE 
Introduction to history of music and musical styles from cultures around 
the world. Designed as a course for music majors. F 
MUSIC 1123 HISTORY OF ROCK-N-ROLL 
A course on listening, with emphasis on the relationship between musical 
style and historical context, and the history and development of rock-n-roll. 
F, S 
PHILO 1453 INTRODUCTION TO PHILOSOPHY 
A survey of major philosophers and their ideas, from ancient Greece to 
Rome, to Medieval Christian philosophers, Descartes and the debate over 
Rationalism and Empiricism, Kant and his followers, Marx, Utilitarianism, 
and the Existentialism of both Kierkegaard and Sartre. Attention to 
metaphysics, ontology, ethics, epistemology, axiology, and some logic. 
Primary emphasis on the Western tradition. F, S, SU 
POLSC 1103 AMERICAN GOVERNMENT & POLITICS 
Survey of origin, structure, and functions of national government with 
emphasis on Constitution and the American political process. Unless 
otherwise noted, POLSC 1103 is a prerequisite for all political science 
courses. F, S, SU 
PSYCH 1003 GENERAL PSYCHOLOGY 
A general education course which provides an overview of psychology 
with an emphasis on the applied areas in the field. F, S, SU 
SCI 1501 CONCEPTS OF PHYSICAL SCIENCE 
LABORATORY 
The lab meets two hours each week and focuses on the importance of the 
laboratory experiment to the scientific method. Inquiry-oriented laboratory 
investigations of selected topics in the disciplines of astronomy, chemistry, 
geology and physics introduced in SCI 1513 will be undertaken. 
Prerequisite: Completion of or concurrent enrollment in SCI 1513. S 

 
SCI 1513 CONCEPTS OF PHYSICAL SCIENCE 
A course designed to develop an awareness of the interrelationships 
between science and society. Readings and discussions on the tactics and 
strategy of science, with emphasis on the physical sciences. F, S, SU 
SOCIO 1003 INTRODUCTION TO SOCIOLOGY 
A general education course covering the fundamental concepts of 
sociology; foundations of group life; social change, processes, and 
problems. SOCIO 1003 is a prerequisite for all other sociology courses. 
F, S, SU 
TECH 1223 TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETY 
A survey course introducing the student to new and emerging technologies 
in relation to their economic, social, and global impact on society. F, S 
WORLD LANGUAGES _ _ _ 4† 
Fundamentals of grammar taught in order to acquire facility in all four 
language skills: reading, writing, speaking, and understanding the spoken 
language; limited introduction to the culture. F, S, SU 
† Descriptions for World Language courses are listed under 
 the Language & Literature Department. 

 
 
GENERAL STUDY COURSES 
GSTDY 1051 SWOSUCONNECT 
This course helps all new SWOSU students navigate the university, 
engage in education, and succeed in their college experience. It provides 
information about campus resources and policies and prepares students 
for academic success. Students will complete a variety of reading and 
writing assignments, participate in class discussions, and engage in a 
service-learning experience during this course. 
GSTDY 1061 PRESIDENT’S LEADERSHIP I 
Basic leadership course (one-hour credit per semester.) Students will learn 
about different leadership theories and how they apply to different 
situations. This class is designed for students to learn the importance of 
leadership on campus and in their community. The main objective is to 
produce outstanding graduates who will assume roles as leaders in their 
chosen professions and communities. Students will also be instructed on 
materials related to SWOSUConnect. Signature Only. F 
GSTDY 1071 PRESIDENT’S LEADERSHIP II 
Basic leadership course (one-hour credit per semester.) Students will learn 
about different leadership theories and be able to identify them from 
examples provided. This class is designed for students to learn the 
importance of leadership in the area and state. The main objective is to 
produce outstanding graduates who will assume roles as leaders in their 
chosen professions and communities. Signature only. S 
GSTDY 1441 COLLEGE SUCCESS 
College Success is designed to enhance students' skills in becoming 
successful college students. The course will address topics including time 
management, learning styles, note taking, test taking, reading skills, etc. 
The course is required for all students who do not meet the State Regent’s 
requirements for admission to a regional university and for all students 
returning from suspension. It is highly recommended for students desiring 
to improve skills needed for academic success. F, S 
GSTDY 2061 PRESIDENT’S LEADERSHIP III 
Mid-level leadership course (one-hour credit per semester.) Students will 
learn about different leadership theories and be able to put those into 
practice. This class is designed for students to learn the importance and 
practice of leadership on campus and in the community. The main 
objective is to produce outstanding graduates who will assume roles as 
leaders in their chosen professions and communities. Signature only. F 
GSTDY 2071 PRESIDENT’S LEADERSHIP IV 
Advanced leadership course (one-hour credit per semester.) Students will 
learn about different leadership theories and be able to develop their own 
leadership style and put it into practice. This class is designed for students 
to build upon their leadership skills and be able to recognize leadership 
skills in others. The main objective is to produce outstanding graduates 
who will assume roles as leaders in their chosen professions and 
communities. Signature only. S 
SELF-PACED ONLINE COURSES 
GSTDY 1901 BASIC EXCEL  
A self-paced study of Microsoft Excel as part of a three-part series covering 
introductory through advanced concepts in using the application. Topics 
include creating spreadsheets, functions and formulas, formatting, web 
features, Visual Basic for Applications, querying data, and using various 
Excel features. 
GSTDY 2901 INTERMEDIATE EXCEL  
A self-paced study of Microsoft Excel as part of a three-part series covering 
introductory through advanced concepts in using the application. Topics 
include creating spreadsheets, functions and formulas, formatting, web 
features, Visual Basic for Applications, querying data, and using various 
Excel features. 
GSTDY 2901 ADVANCED EXCEL  
A self-paced study of Microsoft Excel as part of a three-part series covering 
introductory through advanced concepts in using the application. Topics 
include creating spreadsheets, functions and formulas, formatting, web 
features, Visual Basic for Applications, querying data, and using various 
Excel features. 
GSTDY 1901 BASIC EXCEL FOR ENGINEER & TECH 
Self-paced study of Excel as part of a three-part series focusing on 
engineering & technical situations emphasizing problem solving, 
simulation, and decision making. 
GSTDY 1901 INTERMEDIATE EXCEL FOR ENGINEER 
& TECH 
Self-paced study of Excel as part of a three-part series focusing on 
engineering & technical situations emphasizing problem solving, 
simulation, and decision making. 
GSTDY 2901 ADVANCED EXCEL FOR ENGINEER & 
TECH 
Self-paced study of Excel as part of a three-part series focusing on 
engineering & technical situations emphasizing problem solving, 
simulation, and decision making. 
GSTDY 1901 BASIC ILLUSTRATOR CC 
A self-paced study of Adobe Illustrator CC as part of a three-part series 
covering introductory through advanced concepts in using the application.  
Topics include creating a document, creating basic shapes, applying fill 
and stroke color to objects, placing objects, working with guides, 
transforming objects, creating and formatting text, creating colors and 
gradients, applying colors and gradients, drawing, attributes, assembly, 
paths, clipping masks, layers, and paths. 
GSTDY 2901 INTERMEDIATE ILLUSTRATOR CC 
A self-paced study of Adobe Illustrator CC as part of a three-part series 
covering introductory through advanced concepts in using the application. 
Topics include creating a document, creating basic shapes, applying fill 
and stroke color to objects, placing objects, working with guides, 
transforming objects, creating and formatting text, creating colors and 
gradients, applying colors and gradients, drawing, attributes, assembly, 
paths, clipping masks, layers, and paths. 
GSTDY 2901 ADVANCED ILLUSTRATOR CC 
A self-paced study of Adobe Illustrator CC as part of a three-part series 
covering introductory through advanced concepts in using the application. 
Topics include creating a document, creating basic shapes, applying fill 
and stroke color to objects, placing objects, working with guides, 
transforming objects, creating and formatting text, creating colors and 
gradients, applying colors and gradients, drawing, attributes, assembly, 
paths, clipping masks, layers, and paths. 
GSTDY 1901 BASIC INDESIGN CC 
A self-paced study of Adobe InDesign CC as part of a three-part series 
covering introductory through advanced concepts in using the application. 
Topics include exploring the workspace, changing views, navigating, 
formatting text and paragraphs, creating and applying styles, creating and 
using master pages, placing text and thread text, creating sections, aligning 
and distributing objects on a pages, stacking and layering objects, working 
with frames, and working with colors. 
GSTDY 2901 INTERMEDIATE INDESIGN CC 
A self-paced study of Adobe InDesign CC as part of a three-part series 
covering introductory through advanced concepts in using the application. 

 
Topics include exploring the workspace, changing views, navigating, 
formatting text and paragraphs, creating and applying styles, creating and 
using master pages, placing text and thread text, creating sections, aligning 
and distributing objects on a pages, stacking and layering objects, working 
with frames, and working with colors. 
GSTDY 2901 ADVANCED INDESIGN CC 
A self-paced study of Adobe InDesign CC as part of a three-part series 
covering introductory through advanced concepts in using the application. 
Topics include exploring the workspace, changing views, navigating, 
formatting text and paragraphs, creating and applying styles, creating and 
using master pages, placing text and thread text, creating sections, aligning 
and distributing objects on a page, stacking and layering objects, working 
with frames, and working with colors. 
GSTDY 1901 BASIC PHOTOSHOP CC 
A self-paced study of Adobe Photoshop CC as part of a three-part series 
covering introductory through advanced concepts in using the application. 
Topics include getting started with Photoshop, working with layers, 
making selections, incorporating color techniques, placing type in an 
image, using painting tools, creating special effects with filters, adjusting 
colors, performing image surgery, annotating and automating an image, 
and creating images for the Web.  
GSTDY 2901 INTERMEDIATE PHOTOSHOP CC 
A self-paced study of Adobe Photoshop CC as part of a three-part series 
covering introductory through advanced concepts in using the application. 
Topics include working with layers; making selections; incorporating color 
techniques; placing type in an image; using painting tools; working with 
special layer functions; creating special effects with filters; enhancing 
specific selections; adjusting colors using clipping masks, paths, and 
shapes; transforming type; liquefying an image; performing image surgery; 
annotating and automating an image; and creating images for the Web. 
GSTDY 2901 ADVANCED PHOTOSHOP CC 
A self-paced study of Adobe Photoshop CC as part of a three-part series 
covering introductory through advanced concepts in using the application. 
Topics include working with layers; making selections; incorporating color 
techniques; placing type in an image; using painting tools; working with 
special layer functions; creating special effects with filters; enhancing 
specific selections; adjusting colors using clipping masks, paths, and 
shapes; transforming type; liquefying an image; performing image surgery; 
annotating and automating an image; and creating images for the Web. 
GSTDY 1901 BASIC POWERPOINT  
A self-paced study of Microsoft PowerPoint as part of a three-part series 
covering introductory through advanced concepts in using the application. 
Topics include creating a presentation, creating a slideshow, creating a 
presentation on the Web, using visuals to enhance a slide show, modifying 
visual elements and presentation formats, collaboration, and working with 
macros and Visual Basic for Applications. 
GSTDY 2901 INTERMEDIATE POWERPOINT  
A self-paced study of Microsoft PowerPoint as part of a three-part series 
covering introductory through advanced concepts in using the application. 
Topics include creating a presentation, creating a slideshow, creating a 
presentation on the Web, using visuals to enhance a slide show, modifying 
visual elements and presentation formats, collaboration, and working with 
macros and Visual Basic for Applications. 
GSTDY 2901 ADVANCED POWERPOINT  
A self-paced study of Microsoft PowerPoint as part of a three-part series 
covering introductory through advanced concepts in using the application. 
Topics include creating a presentation, creating a slideshow, creating a 
presentation on the Web, using visuals to enhance a slide show, modifying 
visual elements and presentation formats, collaboration, and working with 
macros and Visual Basic for Applications. 
GSTDY 1901 BASIC PUBLISHER  
A self-paced study of Microsoft Publisher as part of a three-part series 
covering introductory through advanced concepts in using the application. 
Topics include creating and editing a publication; designing a newsletter, 
brochure, or web site; creating business forms; and integrating Publisher 
with other Office applications. 
GSTDY 2901 INTERMEDIATE PUBLISHER  
A self-paced study of Microsoft Publisher as part of a three-part series 
covering introductory through advanced concepts in using the application. 
Topics include creating and editing a publication; designing a newsletter, 
brochure, or web site; creating business forms; and integrating Publisher 
with other Office applications. 
GSTDY 2901 ADVANCED PUBLISHER  
A self-paced study of Microsoft Publisher as part of a three-part series 
covering introductory through advanced concepts in using the application. 
Topics include creating and editing a publication; designing a newsletter, 
brochure, or web site; creating business forms; and integrating Publisher 
with other Office applications. 
GSTDY 1901 BASIC WORD  
A self-paced study of Microsoft Word as part of a three-part series covering 
introductory through advanced concepts in using the application. Topics 
include creating a variety of documents, adding many document features, 
collaboration, and creating web documents. 
GSTDY 2901 INTERMEDIATE WORD  
A self-paced study of Microsoft Word as part of a three-part series covering 
introductory through advanced concepts in using the application. Topics 
include creating a variety of documents, adding many document features, 
collaboration, and creating web documents. 
GSTDY 2901 ADVANCED WORD  
A self-paced study of Microsoft Word as part of a three-part series covering 
introductory through advanced concepts in using the application. Topics 
include creating a variety of documents, adding many document features, 
collaboration, and creating web documents. 
GSTDY 3212 STUDENT LEADERSHIP I 
Student Leadership is a training course for student orientation leaders. The 
course is designed to teach students leadership strategies and information 
about SWOSU so that they can help facilitate the transition to college for 
incoming students. Topics covered include SWOSU enrollment 
procedures, SWOSU student/campus resources, and varying leadership 
styles. As part of the course, students assist with all aspects of New Student 
Orientation programming. Student Leadership is a service learning course. 
Signature Only. 
GSTDY 3222 STUDENT LEADERSHIP II 
Student Leadership is a training course for student orientation leaders. The 
course is designed to teach students leadership strategies and information 
about SWOSU so that they can help facilitate the transition to college for 
incoming students. Topics covered include SWOSU enrollment 
procedures, SWOSU student/campus resources, and varying leadership 
styles. As part of the course, students assist with all aspects of New Student 
Orientation programming. Student Leadership is a service learning course. 
Signature Only. 
.
 

 
 
COLLEGE OF ARTS AND SCIENCES 
(F = Classes offered in the Fall, S = Classes offered in the Spring, SU = Classes offered in the Summer,  
D = Classes offered upon Demand, O = Odd years, E = Even years) 
DEPARTMENT OF ART, 
COMMUNICATION AND THEATRE 
ART 
ART 1113 FUNDAMENTALS OF ART 
Examination of the basics in art. Foundation laid for future participation in 
drawing and painting. This course cannot be used to satisfy General 
Education requirements. F, S  
ART 1123 FOUNDATIONS I, DRAWING 
Development of basic drawing skills and powers of observation. Topics 
include: gesture, line, volume, value, perspective, sighting and texture. A 
variety of materials and techniques will be explored. F 
ART 1133 FOUNDATIONS II, TWO-DIMENSIONAL 
DESIGN 
A study of the organizing principles and visual elements of two-
dimensional design (unity, variety, balance, color, value, line, texture).  
Students will explore the concepts covered through assignments which 
utilize a variety of materials. Emphasis is placed on the development of 
independent research skills. S 
ART 1143 FOUNDATIONS III, THREE-DIMENSIONAL 
DESIGN 
A study of three-dimensional form with emphasis on the elements of art 
and principles of design. Various media, construction techniques, and areas 
of art history, aesthetics and art criticism, as applied to form, will be 
explored. F 
ART 1153 INTRO TO PHOTOGRAPHY 
This course offers practical instruction in digital photography by teaching 
the fundamentals of camera operation, composition, and the digital work 
flow. These applications will be used to explore several genres of 
photography in natural light settings, while discussing the theory and 
objectives to consider when photographing these genres. Assignments and 
projects will be issued throughout the course to allow students the 
opportunity to exemplify each class topic, followed by class review and 
critique. Course provides opportunity for continued development. A digital 
camera is required. 
ART 1213 PERSPECTIVE 
An introduction to the essentials of beginning perspective and advanced 
perspective devices. Both linear and atmospheric perspective are covered.  
ART 1661 COMPUTER APPLICATIONS 
Introductory class for art students into the graphic arts. Teaches basic 
understanding of Photoshop and Illustrator. F, S 
ART 1223 ART SURVEY 
This General Education course traces the history of art from prehistory to 
the present. Emphasis is on art of the western world from antiquity through 
the modern era. Among the topics covered are the art of Renaissance 
Europe, Impressionism and Post-Impressionism, as well as ways of seeing 
and the influence of non-Western cultures. F, S 
ART 2113 ACRYLIC TECHNIQUES 
Beginning level easel painting course focusing on development of 
student’s individual expression in form and color. 
ART 2133 INTRODUCTION TO GRAPHIC DESIGN 
Introduces graphic design as a means of visual communication. Formal 
principles of design, semantics, symbol theory, and theory of 
communication will be studied. Macintosh graphics and illustrator will also 
be studied in the execution of the class projects. Previous computer 
experience is not required. ART 2143 HISTORY AND THEORY OF GRAPHIC 
DESIGN 
This is a five-part survey of the history of graphic design, including the 
influences of Modern Art and the Bauhaus on graphic design. Course work 
concludes with the effects of the information age and the global village on 
graphic design. SE 
ART 3011-4 SEMINAR IN ART 
Group study of specific topics needed for special courses offered on an 
irregular basis. 
ART 3113 WATERCOLOR STUDIO 
Study and practice of traditional transparent watercolor technique and 
experimentation with contemporary methods. Emphasis on composition, 
color, process and technique. 
ART 3153 FIGURE DRAWING 
Develop skills of draftsmanship and perception while studying the figure. 
ART 3173 COLOR THEORY 
A study in historical and contemporary practices in color principles in art 
and design, primarily focused but not limited to two-dimensional media. 
ART 3183 PUBLIC ART 
This course focuses on the research, discussion, and creation of art projects 
for public places, which includes individual and group projects.  

ART 3212 AESTHETICS AND ART CRITICISM 
A course designed to introduce the student to what aesthetics is, the nature 
of aesthetic judgment, perception and aesthetic theory. Criticism is 
examined as a way to approach the study of art. S 
ART 3223 TAPESTRY 
The basics of tapestry weaving. Students will learn the essential tapestry 
weaving techniques and how to weave a variety of shapes. D 
ART 3324 MOTION GRAPHICS 
This is an introductory course to motion graphics and animation and will 
utilize industry standard software like Adobe After Effects. This course 
will incorporate design techniques and best practices through the 

 
integration of design, animation, imaging, sound and video. Prerequisite: 
ART 1163 or COMM 2233. SE 
ART 3353 CLAY STUDIO 
A study in ceramic design using both hand-built and wheel methods of 
construction. Firing and glazing procedures will also be covered. F, S, SU 
ART 3383 MIXED MEDIA 
Students draw upon a wide range of materials such as paper, metal, clay, 
plaster, wax, plastic and found objects while incorporating various 
techniques in the fabrication of 3-D works. Students incorporate materials 
and technical skills that they may already possess. D 
ART 3413 SCULPTURE STUDIO 
Three-dimensional work in the area of sculpture. Emphasis is placed on 
fundamental sculpture techniques and the elements of art and principles of 
design as applied in a three-dimensional composition. 
ART 3483 PRINTMAKING STUDIO 
Printmaking by hand transfer and with the press. Composition and personal 
expression are emphasized. Intaglio and relief methods are explored. 
ART 3513 INTERMEDIATE GRAPHIC DESIGN I 
Introduction to web design using Dreamweaver and Flash programs. 
ART 3593 AMERICAN ART HISTORY 
The focus of this course is an overview of the painting, sculpture and 
architecture of the United States from the golden age to the expression of 
today, with attention to the 20th century struggle for stylistic independence 
from European influence. Native American Modernism and the Harlem 
renaissance will be addressed. D 
ART 3613 HISTORY OF ART I 
A survey of art from prehistory through the Gothic era, this course 
considers the visual culture of Ancient Egypt, Mesopotamia, Greece and 
Rome, the influence of non-Western cultures on Christian art in the west, 
the art and architecture of Early Christian and Byzantine Europe, and the 
rise of the Romanesque and Gothic styles. 
ART 3653 HISTORY OF ART II 
Continuing the survey of art begun in ART 3613, this course follows the 
Renaissance development of modern ways of seeing, the rise of the 
Baroque and Rococo, the battle between Neoclassicism and romanticism 
during the early nineteenth century, and the optical experiments of the 
Impressionists and Post-Impressionists. D 
ART 3683 ILLUSTRATION STUDIO 
Visual communication is stressed, expressing both the artist and the subject 
matter. Traditional illustration media includes marker, color pencil, 
airbrush, watercolor, acrylic and oil paint. 
ART 3753 LIFE DRAWING 
Observational drawing with an emphasis on composition. Various 
techniques and subjects will be explored. 
ART 3783 INTERMEDIATE GRAPHIC DESIGN II 
Projects explore design processes in two or three dimensions, visual 
identity and communication, thematic structure and hierarchy, creative 
problem solving and basic design practice of critiques and discussion. 
Emphasis is placed on using media techniques, concepts, strategies and 
professionalism in all aspects of design. Upon completion, students should 
be able to conceptualize, create and produce designs for reproduction. 
ART 3853 TYPOGRAPHIC DESIGN 
Course content includes the anatomy of typographical letter forms, fonts 
and classifications. Syntax, space, visual hierarchy, typographical grids, 
function, expression and communication theory are stressed. Course work 
will be done on Power Macintosh computers, using Quark/Xpress and 
Adobe Illustrator software. 
ART 3883 ADVERTISING DESIGN 
Course work includes logo and corporate identity development. Traditional 
advertising formats are studied and applied to a fictional company created 
by the student. ART 3923 ADVANCED GRAPHIC DESIGN I 
This course is an advanced exploration of various techniques and media for 
advertising and graphic design. Emphasis is placed on advanced concepts 
and solutions including but not limited to complex and challenging graphic 
design problems. Upon completion, students should be able to demonstrate 
competence and professionalism in visual problem solving. 
ART 3953 PROFESSIONAL PRACTICES OF GRAPHIC 
DESIGN 
This course provides the student practical real-world experience in the field 
of design. It should be approached as an internship, and subsequently the 
requirements can be achieved effectively through a summer internship with 
an appropriate agency under supervision of an instructor. Not 
recommended for Design Studio Employees. 
ART 4001-4 INDIVIDUAL STUDY IN ART (TOPIC) 
Individual study of specified topic for undergraduate students. Credit 1 to 
4 semester hours. 
ART 4011-4 SEMINAR IN ART (TOPIC) 
Group study of specified topic for undergraduate students. Credit 1 to 4 
semester hours. D 
ART 4163 PORTFOLIO 
The objective of this course is to prepare Graphic Design majors for the 
job market. Students will research the current job market and prepare a 
career plan. A portfolio will be created with a resume, a self-promotional 
mailer and 35 mm slides. Prerequisite: Sr. Status. S 
ART 4183 FIGURE PAINTING 
Building upon skills and practices developed in ART-3153, Figure 
Drawing, this course will facilitate an exploration of the figure as a subject 
encompassing historical precedents as well as contemporary practices. 
Prerequisite: ART 3153. FE 
ART 4253 APPLIED DESIGN 
A studio course involving the design, execution and study of contemporary 
trends in crafts. 
An exploration of opaque painting techniques and processes. The 
development of pictorial form and content is emphasized. 

 
ART 4333 STUDIO DRAWING 
Studio Drawing will explore creative and expressive approaches to 
drawing with an emphasis on diversity of techniques. Experiences utilizing 
a variety of media will be used to develop fundamental and advanced 
drawing concepts. ART 4353 MODERN ART HISTORY 
This course, continuing the survey of art begun in ART 3613 and ART 
3653, investigates the history of painting, sculpture and architecture from 
the late nineteenth century through World War II. Symbolism, Post-
Impressionism, Cubism and Expressionism are among the trends 
discussed, as are the art of Picasso, Duchamp, Klimt and Dali. D 
ART 4383 ART HISTORY SINCE 1945 
This survey, completing the series begun with ART 3613, 3653 and 4353, 
traces the development of art from the rise of the New York School to the 
present day. Among the topics discussed are Abstract Expressionism, Pop 
and Op Art, and the art of Jackson Pollock, Mark Rothko, Andy Warhol 
and Keith Haring. D 
ART 4393 NON-WESTERN ART HISTORY 
Supplementing rather than replacing the traditional art survey, this course 
examines the history of art and visual culture of non-Western civilizations 
with emphasis on Asia, Africa, Oceania and native America. Topics 
include the art of Japan, China and Nigeria, as well as the visual legacy of 
the Aztec, Mayan and Incan civilization. D 
ART 4413 ADVANCED GRAPHIC DESIGN II 
This course is a continuation of the techniques learned in Advanced 
Graphic Design I. The course further develops the application of visual 
elements and design principles in advertising and graphic design. Topics 
include creation of various designs, such as logos, advertisements, posters, 
outdoor advertising and publication design. Upon completion, students 
should be able to effectively apply design principles and visual elements to 
projects. ART 4452 CONTENT, METHODS AND MATERIALS IN 
ELEMENTARY SCHOOL ART 
Current methods of applying Discipline-Based Art Education will be used 
to explore ways to integrate the visual arts into the elementary grades. F, S 
ART 4553 TEACHERS’ COURSE IN ART 
This course explores methods of teaching visual art at the secondary level. 
In-depth attention will be given to the application of Discipline-Based Art 
Education assignments at this level. 
ART 4651 SENIOR EXHIBIT 
Students will prepare and present a body of work produced as an 
undergraduate. Emphasis will be on professionalism in presentation as well 
as the quality of artwork selected. F, S 
Communication Arts 
COMM 1263 INTRODUCTION TO THEATRE 
Background, philosophy and practices of theatre arts, the theory and 
practice of elementary principles of direction, acting, and stagecraft. All of 
the above will be applied to the study of American, British, and European 
plans representing major literary periods from classic to contemporary. F, 
S 
COMM 1313 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC SPEAKING 
This course provides students with an in-depth analysis of public speaking. 
It includes a thorough examination of the theoretical framework of public 
speaking and requires students to put those theories into practice. Students 
will build critical thinking skills by constructing their own messages and 
evaluating those of others. This course is designed to heighten students’ 
skills as well as increase their confidence as public speakers. F, S, SU 
COMM 2103 INTRODUCTION TO MASS 
COMMUNICATION 
Basic study of the nature and function of mass communication systems, 
their audiences, social impact, pressures, and regulations. This course 
surveys the vast landscape of mass communication industries and their 
impact on culture. The course promotes media literacy. FE 
COMM 2113 WRITING FOR MASS MEDIA 
This course is designed to facilitate an understanding of convergence 
between mass media industries and the changing requirements of necessary 
skills for media journalists. Students will foster an understanding of the 
differences and similarities in journalistic styles between newspapers, 
magazines, public relations, radio, television, advertising and specialized 
media. The course explores the rights and responsibilities guaranteed by 
the First and Fourth Amendments. SE 
COMM 2123 INTERPERSONAL COMMUNICATION 
The study of symbolic and nonverbal communication in dyadic settings. F, 
S 
COMM 2223 INTRODUCTION TO STRATEGIC 
COMMUNICATION 
This course will be an overview of the field of communication and will be 
a required course for all communication arts majors with an emphasis in 
strategic communication. This course will explore the many forms of 
persuasive communication in corporate, non-profit, and agency settings. 
The course material covers a wide range of topics including psychological 
and sociological principles as bases for the appeals, strategies for media 
selection and message execution, as well as introduction to research and 
ethics. SE 
COMM 2233 STRATEGIC COMMUNICATION DESIGN 
Course is designed to introduce students to the software they will use in 
other media production related courses. The course focuses on the most 
current and the most commonly used software in the communication fields 
such Adobe Creative Suite which includes InDesign, Photoshop, Audition 
and Premier as well as new technology as it becomes available. This course 
will fulfill GE computer requirement. F, S 
COMM 2363 ACTING I 
Introduction to basic principles of acting and development of basic acting 
techniques, training through lectures, class improvisations and play 
analysis. F 
COMM 2763 STAGECRAFT 
The construction, painting, rigging, and handling of stage scenery and 
properties. FO 
COMM 3013 THEATRICAL MAKE-UP 
Study and implementation of the principles, skills, techniques, materials, 
and methods relevant to the selection, design, and application of stage 
make-up for varying dramatic genres and purposes. SO 
COMM 3023 LIGHTING DESIGN 
The course covers the principles of designing, mounting and operating 
stage lighting applied to actual campus productions. Students in this course 
will light the student-directed plays developed in COMM 3263.Play 
Directing and Production. SO 

 
COMM 3043 DIGITAL STORYTELLING 
Course will introduce students to the concepts of collecting information in 
a variety of forms and using the information to communicate with a mass 
audience. Students can use course for various media fields including news 
and public relations. The major function of this course will be to produce 
on-line content for the university’s digital newspaper. F, S 
COMM 3063 AMERICAN FILM AND CULTURE 
This course is designed to understand the role and impact that the film 
industry has on American pop culture. Employing sociological theory to 
critically analyze films impact on cultural perceptions of race, gender, 
sexuality, class, occupations, life course and others. Students are 
encouraged to think critically about films ability to influence in leading and 
or reflecting American culture. F 
COMM 3073 PERSUASION 
Exposure to several theories of persuasive communication. Practical 
assignments used to test theories and develop persuasive skills. FO 
COMM 3121 COMMUNICATION PRODUCTION 
The purpose of this course is to give students practical, hands-on, "real 
world" experience in the Communication Arts emphases areas (Strategic 
Communication and Theatre). The over-arching goal of the class is to 
provide students with realistic overview of the types of work to expect 
when entering a chosen field. The course also may instruct students on how 
to develop and produce the materials needed for their specific discipline. 
The course will be repeated at minimum three times to cover a wide array 
of experiences. F, S 
COMM 3133 SCREENWRITING 
Course will explore industry standard techniques for writing, revising, and 
workshopping screenplays for film and video content. Students will draft 
short film screenplays which will be subject to classroom discussion with 
the intent of producing the scripts for online distribution. 
COMM 3143 CINEMATOGRAPHY 
An introduction to cinematography skills including video and audio 
production. 
COMM 3153 LEADERSHIP 
The course is designed to introduce students to the role communication 
plays in effective leadership and management strategies. The exploration 
of communication variables involved in the influence of team members to 
achieve a goal is covered. Topics include power, credibility research on 
leader traits, styles and situations and current models of leadership. 
COMM 3183 SOCIAL MEDIA 
Study and application of social media communication and strategy, 
including social media platforms and user devices, message distribution, 
and personal and professional online, social environments. 
COMM 3333 PHOTOJOURNALISM 
This course covers basic and intermediate photography as applied to 
journalism. Students use digital and 35mm cameras to produce color and 
black-and-white images. Additionally, they use computer programs to 
manipulate digital images and insert them into text-based or web-based 
publications. SU 
COMM 3583 SPORTS COMMUNICATION 
Sports communication is a course designed for students to understand the 
impact of sports on the media and the impact of media on the sports 
industry. The course will address topics including distinctions among 
careers in sports media, including sports journalism and sports 
communication. There is an increasing need for highly trained and 
educated professionals in sports journalism and communications and for a 
better understanding in society of the relationship between sports, 
journalism, integrated marketing and the various media. F 
COMM 3543 SMALL GROUP COMMUNICATION 
Study of ways in which group discussion functions and means of becoming 
effective discussion leaders and participants. FE 
COMM 3563 ARGUMENTATION AND DEBATE 
Study and application of logic and argumentation; practical application 
through debate and discussion. FE 
COMM 3613 SPECIALIZED PUBLICATIONS 
Principles, methods, and problems of specialized publications, including 
magazines, newsletters, anthologies, yearbooks, programs and special 
public relations publications. F, S 
COMM 3663 SCRIPT ANALYSIS 
Focus is on the foundational approaches to script analysis and 
form/style/mood 
distinctions 
through 
reading 
and 
analysis 
of 
representative plays from distinct perspectives of playwright, actor, 
designer, and director; analysis is conducted through an in-depth study of 
assigned plays. Particular emphasis is placed upon analyzing a play’s 
meaning through plot and character construction, story, persuasive 
imagery, and language. Projects on assigned plays are further developed 
through readings in criticism and history and through live and/or 
videotaped theatrical productions. 
COMM 3763 STAGE MANAGEMENT 
Stage management is a class designed to introduce the student to the 
process of a theatrical production from inception to completion with an 
emphasis on the managerial aspects of the production. Specifically, the 
student will have basic understanding of stage management for the theatre. 
COMM 3963 COSTUME HISTORY 
A study of the design and development of costume from ancient times up 
to the present. D 
COMM 3973 COSTUME DESIGN 
Costume Design is a course designed to teach students about the process 
of costume design as well as to train them in the skills needed to realize a 
design of their own. 
COMM 4243 MULTIMEDIA PRODUCTION 
Students are provided opportunities to develop their communication skills 
through audio and video media projects. 
COMM 4253 GLOBAL COMMUNICATION 
This course critically examines verbal and nonverbal barriers to effective 
intercultural and international communication. It focuses on developing 
effective communication in advanced study of communication theories - 
interpersonal, organizational, mass media and intercultural contexts - and 
explores the definition and impact of global communication. 
COMM 4263 CRISIS COMMUNICATION 
This course introduces students to the important implications of effective 
internal and external communication during crises. The course examines 
proactive and reactive approaches to crisis communication from an 
academic and practical perspective. Elements of effective crisis 
communication plans and tactics are considered. Throughout the course, 
students are given the opportunity to analyze several crisis situations. 

 
COMM 4293 MEDIA LAW AND ETHICS 
Overview of First Amendment rights and responsibilities. Includes issues 
of obscenity, liable, censorship, rights of privacy, trial by media, rights of 
access, and political correctness. S 
COMM 4343 COMMUNICATION THEORY 
Introduction to theories and methods used to study human communication 
phenomena across several contexts. SO 
COMM 4363 ORGANIZATIONAL COMMUNICATION 
A course integrating theory and practice focusing on how people in 
professions are able to succeed in their jobs and careers through effective 
communication practices. FO 
COMM 4403 SCENE DESIGN 
Study of the theory of designing stage settings, including both aesthetic and 
practical considerations. Practice in creating sketches, floor plans, 
construction drawings, and set models. Prerequisite: COMM 2763. SE 
COMM 4463 THEATRE HISTORY: GREEK TO 1660 
Survey of growth and development of the theatre from its beginnings to 
1660 with consideration of dramatic literature, physical theatre, style of 
presentation, and social significance of theatre. FO 
COMM 4483 PLAY DIRECTING AND PRODUCTION 
This course covers the techniques of directing and producing plays: script 
analysis, play selection, casting, and approaches to rehearsal. Students will 
direct one-act plays for public performance. 
COMM 4563 TEACHING SPEECH IN THE SECONDARY 
SCHOOL 
Problems and methods of teaching speech and directing speech activities 
in the secondary school. Prerequisite: Admission to the Teacher 
Education Program. D 
COMM 4663 THEATRE HISTORY: 1660 TO PRESENT 
Survey of growth and development of the theatre from 1660 to the present 
with consideration of dramatic literature, physical theatre, style of 
presentation, and social significance of theatre. SE 
COMM 4813 PRINCIPLES OF PUBLIC RELATIONS 
This course is designed to expose students to the practices of writing and 
designing public relations documents. To help students develop the skills 
necessary for a career in public relations. Students will also be provided an 
understanding of the necessity and benefits of public relations to the 
business world. F 
COMM 4823 WRITING FOR PUBLIC RELATIONS 
This course is designed to develop writing skills necessary to a career in 
public relations. Students will be provided with exposure to the stresses of 
deadline requirements inherent within the public relations profession. 
Students will develop research skills necessary for public relations writing. 
S, E 
COMM 4833 PRINCIPLES OF ADVERTISING 
This course is designed to introduce students to different perspectives of 
advertising and the integration of marketing and sales. Students will be 
engaged in learning and applying various advertising strategies as well as 
creating various advertisements. Students will be challenged to create and 
evaluate marketing and advertising strategies through the use of a variety 
of advertising media. S 
COMM 4953 SENIOR CAPSTONE 
A course integrating the theory and practice of the job search process. 
Students will explore their career options through guided activities. 
Students will create a series of job search related materials for their 
particular field of study. S 
COMM 4963 ACTING II 
Intensive study of acting techniques with special emphasis on character 
development, vocal patterns, and physical movement. SE 
DEPARTMENT OF  
BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES 
BIOL 1004 BIOLOGICAL CONCEPTS 
An introduction to the concepts and methods of biology needed to 
understand biological issues faced by society. Upon completion of the 
course students will be able to apply the scientific method to problem 
solving and to explain natural phenomena. Students will also understand 
such concepts as the role of the cell in maintaining conditions essential for 
life. In addition, students will be able to describe the interactions between 
living organisms and the environment at the population, ecosystem, and 
biosphere levels and to identify potential impacts on society of 
biotechnology, world population growth, and human influences on global 
biogeochemical cycles. Does not apply to Biology major or minor 
credit. Corequisite: BIOL 1004L F, S, SU 
BIOL 1013 CURRENT ISSUES IN BIOLOGY 
Students will be introduced to how basic knowledge of biological sciences 
can contribute to their growth as informed global citizens. The course 
focuses on biological principles that have immediate applications in our 
everyday lives. The course will also require that students use the 
knowledge they received to debate important issues, solve problems, and 
communicate complex issues to their peers. Does not apply to Biology 
major or minor credit. F, S 
BIOL 1054 PRINCIPLES OF BIOLOGY I 
Introduction to major molecular, cellular and genetic principles needed to 
understand the functioning of all organisms. Investigative laboratories 
introduce important techniques and methodologies used by modern 
biologists. Students will be introduced to scientific procedure, reasoning, 
problem solving, and reporting. Required for all biological sciences majors 
and minors and recommended for pre-professional and other science 
majors. Corequisite: BIOL 1054L. F, S 
BIOL 1254 PRINCIPLES OF BIOLOGY II 
Introduction to major principles of evolutionary theory, the unity and 
diversity of life, and form and function in living organisms. The course and 
laboratory emphasize practice of scientific procedure while developing 
skills in reading, writing, researching, and speaking about science. Students 
are introduced to biological tools and techniques for understanding form 
and function. Required for all biology majors and minors as well as 
programs in medical laboratory science and secondary education. 
Corequisite: BIOL 1254L. Prerequisite: BIOL 1054. F, S 
BIOL 2205 HUMAN ANATOMY & PHYSIOLOGY 
A study of the structure and function of the human body. This course is 
designed to meet the needs of students in Medical Laboratory Technology 
and Radiologic Technology and others who need a working knowledge of 
the human body and its functions. This course fulfills the Anatomy and 
Physiology requirement for Health Information Management majors. 
Prerequisite: BIOL 1004 or BIOL 2204 or permission of Instructor. F 
BIOL 2354 MICROBIOLOGY FOR NURSING & ALLIED 
HEALTH 
This course emphasizes the interaction of microorganisms with humans 
and microbe-induced diseases including bacteria, viruses, parasites, and 

 
fungi. Specific areas of focus include: culturing of pathogens; 
differentiation, classification, and treatment of pathogens; physiology and 
genetics of disease-causing microbes; mechanisms of pathogenicity; and 
immunology and vaccines. Includes training in aseptic technique, proper 
disposal of contaminants, sampling body microbes, diagnostic procedures, 
and use of techniques to isolate and/or identify microbes from clinical 
samples. Corequisite: BIOL 2354L; 
BIOL 2503 PARASITOLOGY 
A study of the identification, isolation, morphology and life cycles of those 
parasites that affect man; includes both helminthology and protozoology. 
BIOL 3012 BIOLOGICAL TERMINOLOGY 
The course is designed to familiarize the students with the terminology 
used in biological disciplines. This familiarization will be accomplished by 
learning root words, prefixes, and suffixes from Latin and Greek and by 
studying word analysis techniques. D 
BIOL 3053 CELL BIOLOGY 
This course introduces the study of molecular, morphological, and 
physiological aspects of cell biology. Lecture only. 
BIOL 3074 ANIMAL BEHAVIOR 
This course is designed for students to develop a thorough understanding 
of animal behavior. The course will take an in-depth look into several 
behaviors including communication, antipredator, aggression, and mating 
to name a few. We will pay particular attention to the underlying 
mechanisms (e.g., hormones) that drive these behavioral decisions, the 
theory around the costs/benefits of behavioral decisions, and, ultimately, 
why and under what conditions behaviors have evolved. In addition to 
discussion periods (lectures), this course will also contain a fused lab 
component. Drawing from the Course-Based Undergraduate Research 
Experience (CURE) model, students will engage in two large-scale 
research projects. These projects will give students the opportunity to travel 
to field sites to make observations in nature and collect wild specimens 
which they bring back for further study under lab conditions. In the lab, 
students will apply their understanding of the scientific process to design 
and 
run 
behavioral 
experiments. 
Corequisite: 
BIOL 
3074L. 
BIOL 3152 GENETICS AND CELL BIOLOGY 
LABORATORY 
The laboratory study of genetics and cell biology. Corequisite: BIOL 
3253. BIOL 3253 GENETICS 
An introduction to genetics including Mendelian, molecular, and 
population genetics. Required for all Biological Science majors and 
Natural Science Education majors. 
BIOL 3283 ECOLOGY 
Introduction to population, community, and ecosystem ecology. Lecture 
only. BIOL 3304 AQUATIC ECOLOGY 
An introduction to freshwater ecosystems (rivers and lakes) with respect to 
their physical, chemical, and biological structure. These diverse aspects are 
united in the concept of trophic status. Adaptations of aquatic organisms to 
the aquatic environment are emphasized. The laboratory involves extensive 
field studies in local aquatic environments with emphasis on collection 
methods, analytical techniques, and data analysis. Fulfills program field 
course requirement. Corequisite: BIOL 3304L. 
BIOL 3355 GENERAL MICROBIOLOGY 
Provides a foundation for pre-professional students and biology majors in 
microbiology. Lecture includes: microscopy, microbial cell structure and 
function, microbial evolution, microbial genetics, metabolism, and 
microorganism’s roles in disease and immunity. Laboratory will emphasize 
isolation, cultivation, and identification of microbes from environmental 
and clinical samples. Applied laboratory exercises include bacteriological 
analysis of food, soil, and water samples; evaluating the effect of microbes 
on the environment; and analyzing the efficiency of water and sewage 
treatment. Corequisite: BIOL 3355L. 
BIOL 3363 INVERTEBRATE BIOLOGY 
A comparative study of adaptations of invertebrate organisms including 
anatomy and physiology, behavior, classification and identification, and 
natural history. BIOL 3604 BIOLOGY OF INSECTS 
A study of the fundamental principles of insect life, insect morphology, and 
physiology, classification and recognition of common families of insects, 
economic relations and fundamentals of insect control. Methods of 
collecting and preserving and displaying insects are also covered. Fulfills 
program field course requirement. Corequisite: BIOL 3604L. 
BIOL 3704 HUMAN ANATOMY 
A study of the normal functional anatomy of the human body. The 
laboratory includes extensive use of human models and cat dissection. 
Corequisite: BIOL 3704L. 
BIOL 3814 BIOLOGY OF PLANTS 
This course includes the study of algae, non-vascular and vascular plants 
with emphases on plant cell biology, morphology and physiology, 
classification, and ecology. Fulfills program plant course requirement. 
Corequisite: BIOL 3814L. 
BIOL 3904 HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY 
A study of the normal function of the human body. Strong emphasis is 
placed on homeostasis. Corequisite: BIOL 3904L. 
BIOL 4001-4 INDEPENDENT STUDY IN BIOLOGICAL 
SCIENCES (TOPIC) 
Independent study of a specified topic for undergraduate students. Credit 
one to four hours. Up to 4 hours of independent study credit may be applied 
to the biological sciences major. F, S, SU 
BIOL 4011-4 SEMINAR IN BIOLOGY (TOPIC) 
Group study of specified topic for undergraduate students. Credit one to 
four semester hours. F, S, SU 
BIOL 4021-4 SPECIAL TOPICS IN BIOMEDICAL 
SCIENCES 
Provides special topics in biomedical sciences with variable topics for 1-4 
credit hours. May include laboratory. May be repeated for a maximum of 
4 credit hours. Enrollment by signature only. 
BIOL 4031-4 SPECIAL TOPICS IN MICROBIOLOGY 
This course is offered with variable topics in microbiology for 1 to 4 credit 
hours. A maximum of 4 credit hours may be applied toward the B.S. 
Biological Sciences degree. 

 
BIOL 4041-4 SPECIAL TOPICS IN ENVIRONMENTAL 
AND ORGANISMAL BIOLOGY 
Provides special topics in environmental biology and the biology of 
organisms with variable topics for 1-4 credit hours. May include 
laboratory. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credit hours. Enrollment 
by signature only. 
BIOL 4154 DEVELOPMENTAL BIOLOGY 
The exploration of synthesis of vertebrate and invertebrate organisms. 
Cellular and molecular aspects of animal development will be covered as 
well as medical implications of developmental biology. Enrollment by 
signature only. Corequisite: BIOL 4154L. 
BIOL 4204 VERTEBRATE BIOLOGY 
A comparative study of vertebrate adaptations including anatomy and 
physiology, behavior, and natural history. Includes laboratory and field 
activities. Fulfills program field course requirement. Corequisite: BIOL 
4204L. BIOL 4213 IMMUNOLOGY 
The study of the body’s immune system and its relationship to health and 
disease. Prerequisite: BIOL 4355. F, S 
BIOL 4284 PARASITOLOGY 
Overview of eukaryotic parasites affecting plants and animals including 
humans. Lab includes collection, isolation, cultivation, and parasite 
identification using both morphological and molecular techniques. 
Corequisite: BIOL 4284L. 
BIOL 4293 BEHAVIORAL NEUROBIOLOGY 
This course is an introduction to the neural basis of animal behavior 
(neuroethology). The course will cover major concepts and research 
strategies of the rapidly developing field of neuroethology. We will cover 
the basic function of the nervous system at the cellular and organismal level 
within an ecological context. Many case studies will be used to illustrate 
the neural control of behavior, including sensory processing, motor output, 
escape responses, decision making, and learning. 
BIOL 4314 ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY 
The study of anthropogenic (man-made) effects of pollution on the 
environment, including the effects on plant and animal life as well as 
humans. Corequisite: BIOL 4314L. 
BIOL 4343 APPLIED MICROBIOLOGY 
This covers topics including gene therapy and therapeutic agents, industrial 
microbiology and fermentation, agricultural applications, recombinant 
DNA technology, analysis of microbial communities, microbial ecology, 
and food microbiology. Includes laboratory demonstrations in lecture. 
Prerequisite: BIOL 3355. D 
BIOL 4404 PATHOGENIC MICROBIOLOGY 
Provides an overview of microbial physiology, molecular genetic 
mechanisms of pathogenicity, disease pathology, and clinical diagnosis 
procedures. Emphasis is placed on specific bacterial and viral pathogens. 
Corequisite: BIOL 4404L. Prerequisite: BIOL 3355. D 
BIOL 4454 PLANT TAXONOMY 
A study of the history, literature, and principles of plant taxonomy, with 
emphasis on the flowering plant flora of Oklahoma. Fulfills program plant 
course requirement. Corequisite: BIOL 4454L. 
BIOL 4463 VIROLOGY 
A study of bacterial and animal viruses, including virion structure, 
cultivation, molecular genetics, and mechanisms of infection. Attention is 
given to viral diseases, their pathology, control, and prevention. 
Prerequisite: BIOL 3355. D 
BIOL 4503 MICROBIAL PHYSIOLOGY 
This course involves the physiological and biochemical activities of 
bacteria with emphasis on structure, function, and molecular control 
mechanisms. Pathogenic and non-pathogenic bacteria are considered. 
Prerequisite: BIOL 3355. D 
BIOL 4524 ENVIRONMENTAL MICROBIOLOGY 
Lecture and laboratory instruction on microbe-microbe and microbe-
environment interactions. Areas of study will be air, water, wastes, soil and 
special environments such as industrial and domestic wastes. Three hours 
of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week. Fulfills program field 
course requirement. Corequisite: BIOL 4524L. Prerequisite: BIOL 
3355. D 
BIOL 4604 TERRESTRIAL ECOLOGY 
A study of terrestrial biomes with emphases on interactions among 
organisms and the interactions between organisms and their environment 
that affect distribution and abundance. This course fulfills the plant course 
requirement. Corequisite: BIOL 4604L. 
BIOL 4622 ECONOMICALLY IMPORTANT PLANTS 
A survey of plants of economic importance throughout the world. Essential 
food, drug, textile-fiber, and industrially valuable plants will be discussed 
in relationship to world economy and human population needs. Lecture 
only. Fulfills program plant course requirement. 
BIOL 4703 INFECTIOUS DISEASE EPIDEMIOLOGY 
A study of the distribution patterns of infectious diseases within and across 
populations. Includes topics in population studies, disease and injury 
determinants, behavioral factors, and environmental factors. Lecture only. 
Prerequisite: BIOL 3355. D  
BIOL 4853 EVOLUTION 
An overview of evolution including historical development, underpinning 
evidence, and current science and applications. 
BIOL 4864 HUMAN GENETICS 
A study of human genetics that focuses on human molecular genetics 
including genetic factors causing diseases; changes in gene expression 
during development, differentiation, and pathogenesis; recombinant DNA; 
gene therapy; clinical genetics; genetic epidemiology; immunogenetics; 
cytogenetics; and genetics of specific disorders and diseases. Enrollment is 
by signature only. Corequisite: BIOL 4864L. 
BIOL 4901 BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES CAPSTONE 
Students will demonstrate their knowledge and skills in biological sciences 
by completing and presenting guided original research or by searching the 
biological literature and presenting a review paper on a topic chosen from 
a designated course completed the previous semester. Students must 
submit a plan for completion when enrolling in the course. Enrollment 
requires permission of the instructor. 

 
BIOL 4915 GENERAL AND COMPARATIVE ANATOMY 
AND PHYSIOLOGY 
A study of the principles of comparative anatomy and physiology with 
emphases on morphological, physiological, and behavioral adaptations. 
Major groups of vertebrates will be dissected to explore their structure and 
function. Physiological experimentation of animals will show the 
interaction of the body systems with the environment and the relationship 
between anatomy, physiology, ecology, and evolution. Corequisite: BIOL 
4915L. 
BIOL 4935 CELL AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY 
A study of the cellular and molecular basis for the structure and 
organization of the cell with emphases on control of the cell cycle, transport 
of information and materials, and signaling. The laboratory emphasizes 
cellular and molecular tools and techniques and includes research and 
presentation of a cell/molecular biology question. Permission of the 
instructor is required. Corequisite: BIOL 4935L. 
BIOL 4944 NEUROSCIENCE 
A study of the molecular, structural, physiologic, cognitive, and behavioral 
aspects of the brain and nervous system. Includes molecular and cellular 
neuroscience, brain science, anatomy and physiology of the central nervous 
system, molecular and biochemical basis for information processing, and 
applications to clinical sciences and biomedical engineering. Corequisite: 
BIOL 4944L. Prerequisite: Junior or senior standing. D 
BIOL 4974 HISTOLOGY 
A study of the microanatomy and functional aspects of normal animal 
tissues. Corequisite: BIOL 4974L. 
Biology Credit for Summer Activities 
Students who attend summer courses at the Gulf Coast Marine Research 
Laboratory (with which SWOSU is affiliated), the University of Oklahoma 
Biological Station, or other institutions of higher education, may be able to 
use those courses toward their biology degree. Likewise, students may earn 
college credit for some summer research positions and internships. 
Students who are considering such courses should meet with the 
Department Chair, prior to enrolling, to determine if these courses may be 
used toward their degree. 
Medical Laboratory Science Clinical Courses 
(Taught only at MLS accredited hospitals) 
MLS 4117 CLINICAL MICROBIOLOGY 
Lecture and supervised laboratory instruction in pathogenic bacteria, fungi, 
parasites, viruses, and antimicrobial susceptibility testing with emphasis on 
clinical decisions and medical significance. Includes quality control, 
computer application, instrumentation, quality assurance/improvement, 
and safety regulations.  
MLS 4125 CLINICAL CHEMISTRY I 
Lecture 
and 
supervised 
laboratory 
instruction 
in 
biochemistry 
methodology and clinical microscopy with emphasis on clinical decisions 
and medical significance. Includes quality control, computer application, 
instrumentation, quality assurance/improvement and safety regulations. 
MLS 4236 CLINICAL HEMATOLOGY 
Lecture and supervised laboratory instruction in routine and special 
hematology studies correlating hematological findings with medical 
significance 
including 
quality 
control, 
computer 
applications, 
instrumentation, quality assurance/improvement, and safety regulations. 
MLS 4246 CLINICAL 
IMMUNOLOGY/IMMUNOHEMATOLOGY 
Lecture on immunologic (antigen-antibodies) responses, serological 
methodology and theory of immunohematology as applied to blood groups, 
types, compatibility testing, and blood components. Supervised instruction 
in immunology and immunohematology methodology with emphasis on 
clinical decisions and medical significance; including quality control, 
computer application, instrumentation, quality assurance/improvement, 
safety and governmental regulations. 
MLS 4325 CLINICAL CHEMISTRY II 
Lecture 
and 
supervised 
laboratory 
instruction 
in 
biochemistry 
methodology with emphasis on clinical decisions and medical significance. 
Includes quality control, computer application, instrumentation, lab 
mathematics, quality assurance/improvement, and safety regulations. 
MLS 4351 TOPICS IN MEDICAL LABORATORY 
SCIENCE 
Lectures on principles and practices of the Medical Laboratory Scientist 
including management education (health care delivery system, ethics, 
professionalism, communication skills, human resources, and financial 
management), performance improvement, education methodology, 
laboratory information systems, safety and governmental regulations, and 
research design/special projects. 
DEPARTMENT OF CHEMISTRY  
AND PHYSICS 
Astronomy 
ASTRO 1904 ASTRONOMY 
An introductory course stressing basic science and how we arrived at our 
present knowledge. Topics include: history of astronomy; planets; 
meteorites; comets; asteroids; birth, life, and death of stars; galaxies; 
quasars; black holes; and cosmology. Several night viewing sessions will 
be arranged. F, S, SU 
ASTRO 4012 SEMINAR IN ASTRONOMY 
Study of topics of current interest such as extraterrestrial life, colonizing 
space, astrology, Bermuda Triangle, black holes, UFO’s, etc. Special 
attention is given to the questions asked of science teachers. D 
Chemistry 
CHEM 1004 GENERAL CHEMISTRY 
A survey course in general chemistry designed for students requiring a 
single chemistry course (of 4 hours or fewer) in their major or for students 
requiring a preparatory course for CHEM 1203 and CHEM 1252, General 
Chemistry I. Topics include measurements, atomic theory, bonding, 
naming/writing formulas of inorganic compounds, properties of 
solids/liquids/gases, energy (primarily light/heat), reactions (including 
balancing equations, stoichiometry, equilibrium), solutions/concentrations, 
and acids/bases. The laboratory is designed to fortify the understanding of 
the major topics of the course. No prerequisites although a minimal algebra 
background is helpful. F, S 
CHEM 1203 GENERAL CHEMISTRY I (LECTURE) 
An introduction to chemical principles for students intending to major in 
science 
areas. 
Topics 
include 
concentration, 
stoichiometry, 
thermodynamics, atomic and molecular theory, properties of gases, liquids, 
and solids. Prerequisite: Completion of or concurrent enrollment in 
MATH 1513. F, S, SU 

 
CHEM 1252 GENERAL CHEMISTRY I (LAB) 
Laboratory for General Chemistry I. Experimental investigation of those 
topics introduced in 1203 and introduction to visible spectroscopy. 
Completion of or concurrent enrollment in CHEM 1203. F, S, SU 
CHEM 1303 GENERAL CHEMISTRY II (LECTURE) 
A continuation of chemical principles for students intending to major in 
science areas. Topics include kinetics, equilibria, acids and bases, second 
law, electrochemistry, and nuclear chemistry. 
CHEM 1352 GENERAL CHEMISTRY II (LAB) 
Laboratory for General Chemistry II. Experimental investigation of those 
topics introduced in CHEM 1303. 
F, S, SU 
CHEM 2001-4 INDIVIDUAL STUDY IN CHEMISTRY 
(TOPIC) 
Specified topic in Chemistry. 1-4 hours credit. 
CHEM 2011-4 SEMINAR IN CHEMISTRY (TOPIC) 
Study of specified topic in chemistry for undergraduate students. Credit 
one to four semester hours. D 
CHEM 2044 CLINICAL CHEMISTRY 
The study of various chemical analyses of body fluids. Emphasis is on 
reactions, reagents and reference ranges of analytes measured in the 
clinical chemistry lab. S 
CHEM 2112 STRUCTURE AND BONDING 
A study of molecular structure and bonding beyond what is offered in 
General Chemistry courses. Topics covered include an overview of modern 
atomic theory, symmetry and group theory applications to chemistry, 
molecular orbital theory, advanced acid-base theories, descriptive 
inorganic chemistry, and nuclear chemistry. Prerequisite: CHEM 1303. 
S 
CHEM 2114 ORGANIC/BIOCHEMISTRY 
A survey course covering sufficient organic chemistry to support eight 
weeks of biochemistry material. The course is designed for Medical 
Technology majors, Environmental Technology majors, and Chemistry 
minors. The laboratory component of the course is designed to fortify the 
understanding of the major topics of the course. 
CHEM 2122 PROBLEM SOLVING IN ORGANIC 
CHEMISTRY II 
A recitation-style approach to solving problems relating to topics 
encountered in Organic Chemistry II. Corequisite: CHEM 4113 or 
CHEM 4115. Prerequisite: CHEM 3013 or CHEM 3015. D 
CHEM 2612 PRINCIPLES OF LABORATORY SAFETY 
Introduction to the principles of laboratory safety focused on recognizing, 
assessing and minimizing the risks of hazards, and preparing for 
emergencies. Topics include the planning of experiments and evaluations 
of their physical and chemical hazards, managing chemicals and waste, 
safe use of laboratory and personal protective equipment, emergency 
response to chemical spills and fires, hazard communication, safety ethics 
and government regulation. In addition to Chemistry, this course may be 
useful to Physics, Biology, Engineering Technology, Secondary 
Education, Health Sciences and other majors who may be working in a 
laboratory setting. Prerequisite: prior or concurrent enrollment in 
CHEM 1303 or permission of instructor. S 
CHEM 3013 ORGANIC CHEMISTRY I 
An introduction to organic chemistry. Emphasis is placed on structure and 
reaction mechanisms. The chemistry of hydrocarbons is developed in 
detail. CHEM 3015 ORGANIC CHEMISTRY I 
Same as 3013 except that theoretical principles are presented in more 
detail. The accompanying laboratory meets six hours each week and the 
instruction in modern instrumental techniques is more rigorous than in 
CHEM 3111. The course is designed for students majoring in chemistry 
and other science areas. CHEM 3111 ORGANIC CHEMISTRY I LABORATORY 
Methods of separation of mixtures and determination of the physical and 
structural properties of compounds are emphasized. Spectroscopy and 
chromatography are introduced with some applications. 
CHEM 3124 QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS 
An introductory course in analytical chemistry which includes sampling, 
separations 
(precipitation, 
solvent 
extraction, 
ion 
exchange, 
chromatography); and determinations (by titrimetry, gravimetry, 
colorimetry, and potentiometry techniques). 
CHEM 3211 INORGANIC CHEMISTRY LAB 
The lab meets three hours each week and focuses on the synthesis 
(including inert atmosphere and vacuum line techniques), purification 
(including 
chromatography 
and 
crystallization 
techniques), 
and 
characterization (including magnetic susceptibility, conductivity, UV-Vis, 
IR, NMR, X-ray diffraction, and mass spectra) of inorganic ligands and 
complexes. Corequisite: CHEM 3233. 
CHEM 3233 INORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
A study of advanced principles of inorganic chemistry. Major topics 
include: 1) Structure and bonding theories; 2) Transition metal 
coordination chemistry, and 3) Organometallic chemistry. Prerequisite: 
CHEM 3013 & CHEM 3111 or CHEM 3015. FO 
CHEM 3244 ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMISTRY 
Lecture, lab, and field course designed to provide broad based general 
knowledge of environmental chemistry, biology, and geology, especially 
including chemistry dealing with origins, transport, reactions, effects, and 
fates of chemical species in the water, air, soil and living environments. 
Laboratory will include a field component incorporating sampling 
techniques and methods of analysis. Prerequisite: CHEM 3013 or 
CHEM 3015 or by consent of instructor. SO 
CHEM 3343 PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY I 
A fundamental course in physical chemistry for students majoring in 
chemistry and related fields. Topics include gas laws, kinetic molecular 
theory, classical thermodynamics, solutions, kinetics, equilibrium, and 
electrochemistry and an introduction to statistical thermodynamics. 

permission of instructor. FE 
CHEM 3901 SEMINAR IN CHEMISTRY I (CAPSTONE) 
Course focus is on skills required for a successful professional career post 
graduation. Non-academic topics will include: selection and application to 
graduate programs, job search strategies, professional resume preparation 
and interview skills. Development of pertinent professional attitudes and 
professional and scientific ethics will be discussed. The second half of the 
course will cover methods of chemical literature searching and how to 

 
summarize the primary research publications in preparation for Seminar in 
Chemistry II. 
CHEM 4001-4 CHEMISTRY RESEARCH 
Individual students may arrange for a variety of laboratory research studies. 
Credit one to four hours. D 
CHEM 4011-4 SEMINAR IN CHEMISTRY (TOPIC) 
Credit is assigned for the completion of directed reading programs, 
seminars and similar activities. Credit one to four semester hours. 
Prerequisite: Departmental approval. D 
CHEM 4021 ORGANIC CHEMISTRY II LABORATORY 
Preparation and identification of organic compounds are emphasized. 
Spectroscopic and chromatographic techniques are utilized. 
4113. F, S, SU 
CHEM 4113 ORGANIC CHEMISTRY II 
A continuation of CHEM 3013. Preparations, properties, and reactions of 
organic functional groups with emphasis on biomolecules. 
CHEM 4115 ORGANIC CHEMISTRY II 
A continuation of CHEM 3015. Preparation, properties, and reactions of 
organic functional groups. The laboratory meets six hours each week and 
emphasizes the preparation and identification of organic compounds. 
Prerequisite: CHEM 3015 or departmental approval. S 
CHEM 4124 BIOCHEMISTRY 
An introductory course involving the study of the physical and chemical 
properties of compounds associated with the chemistry of life processes 
and an introduction to metabolism, especially carbohydrate degradation 
and nucleic acid and protein biosyntheses. 
CHEM 4223 POLYMER CHEMISTRY 
The synthesis, testing and industrial application of intermediate and high 
molecular weight polymers. Includes three hours of laboratory per week. 

CHEM 4234 INSTRUMENTAL ANALYSIS 
Theory and practice in the use of instrumental methods utilized in chemical 
analysis. CHEM 4313 ADVANCED ORGANIC SYNTHESIS 
This course is a study of advanced synthetic methodologies. Specifically, 
the application of modern organic reactions, associated mechanistic 
principles, and their application toward the design, execution, and 
evaluation towards the synthesis of complex molecules. 
CHEM 4353 MATERIALS CHEMISTRY 
An introduction to the fundamental chemistry of materials. Includes study 
of the classification, structure, bonding, synthesis, analysis, processing, 
development, and utilization of metals, glass-ceramics, polymers, 
composites, and nanomaterials. 
CHEM 4254 INDUSTRIAL CHEMISTRY AND 
ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS 
Critical examination of chemical innovation and emerging technologies in 
chemical production, use, and disposal for the protection of worker safety, 
public health, and the environment, including pollution prevention and 
remediation strategies, emissions monitoring and regulatory compliance, 
waste treatment, and resource conservation and recovery. 
CHEM 4455 PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY II 
A continuation of CHEM 3343. Topics include quantum mechanics and its 
role in chemistry and the theoretical and experimental aspects of atomic 
and 
molecular 
structure, 
chemical 
bonding, 
spectroscopy, 
and 
photochemistry. Includes 3 hours of lecture and 6 hours of laboratory 
instruction. Corequisite: CHEM 4455L. Prerequisite: CHEM 3124 and 
CHEM 3343 with a “C” or better and concurrent or prior enrollment 
in MATH 3834. SO 
CHEM 4554 ADVANCED ORGANIC SPECTROSCOPY 
In-depth study of instrumental techniques including nuclear magnetic 
resonance, infrared, ultraviolet/visible, and mass spectroscopy to identify 
or verify organic molecules of moderately complex structure. Efficient 
interpretation of structure is emphasized by establishing features such as 
overall carbon framework, presence and location of functional groups, 
regiochemistry of substituents, and stereochemistry of chiral centers. 

CHEM 4673 ADVANCED METABOLISM 
Study of metabolic reactions and biochemical processes of living 
organisms. An understanding of enzymes, utilization or energy, synthesis 
of compounds, interrelationships among various metabolic pathways, 
hormone function, and metabolic regulation is developed. Prerequisite: 
CHEM 4124. S 
CHEM 4900 SEMINAR ATTENDANCE 
A non-credit course required each semester for all chemistry majors. The 
course provides seminars, workshops and presentations by visiting and in-
house faculty and staff, graduate school and industry contacts, and student 
presenters. F, S 
CHEM 4901 SENIOR SEMINAR IN CHEMISTRY II 
(CAPSTONE) 
Each student will be required to select, conduct a literature search, write a 
review paper, and present a seminar on a current chemistry topic of interest. 
Prerequisite: CHEM 3901. S 
Geology 
GEOL 1934 PHYSICAL GEOLOGY 
Introduction to earth science; earth in the universe, seafloor spreading and 
continental drift, the geomagnetic field, earthquakes and landform 
development; laboratory study of minerals and rocks, topographic maps, 
stereo-photographs and landforms. F, S 
Physics 
PHY 1044 BASIC PHYSICS I 
Lecture and laboratory study of mechanics, wave motion, and heat; non-
calculus survey course for students in natural science and health sciences; 
the laboratory component will provide a forum for the student to perform 
experiments related to the lecture material. Prerequisite: MATH 1513. F 
PHY 1054 BASIC PHYSICS II 
Lecture and laboratory study of electricity and magnetism, optics, and 
modern physics; the laboratory component will provide a forum for the 
student to perform experiments relating to the lecture material. 

 
PHY 1063 GENERAL PHYSICS 
Lecture study of motion, thermodynamics, sound and hearing, optics and 
vision, electricity and magnetism, and radiation; one semester survey with 
emphasis on biological applications of physics. Prerequisite: MATH 
1513 or MATH 1613 or MATH 2823. F, S, SU 
PHY 1072 INTRODUCTORY ELECTRONICS 
Lecture and laboratory study of simple DC, AC, and nonlinear circuits; 
emphasis on basic electronic components and instrumentation including 
meters, oscilloscopes, and function generators. D 
PHY 2011 SEMINAR IN PHYSICS 
Group study on specified topic in Physics for undergraduate students. 
Credit one to four semester hours. 
PHY 2021 INTRODUCTION TO ENGINEERING PHYSICS 
A survey of the fields of engineering, engineering ethics, essential skills 
including communication and spreadsheets, and the basic physics that 
forms the core of engineering including kinetics, dynamics, statics, heat, 
materials, and energy. F 
PHY 2145 GENERAL PHYSICS I 
Study of mechanics, thermodynamics and wave motion including: Statics, 
dynamics, fluids, elasticity, heat, first and second laws of thermodynamics. 
Harmonic motion and sound; includes one laboratory per week. The 
laboratory component will provide “hands-on” experience of physical 
principles addressed during the lecture part of this course. Students will 
become familiar with laboratory equipment, procedures, and the scientific 
method. For engineering, physics, chemistry and mathematics students. 
Completion of or concurrent enrollment in MATH 1834. S 
PHY 2155 GENERAL PHYSICS II 
Study of electrostatics, electric circuits, magnetism, electromagnetic fields 
and optics; includes one laboratory per week. The laboratory component of 
the course consists of measurements, observation and comparison of 
measured values to the accepted theoretical or measured values. 

PHY 2203 RIGID BODY MECHANICS 
Study of statics, force systems, equilibrium, structures, distributed forces, 
friction, kinematics. 
PHY 2213 STRENGTH OF MATERIALS 
Study of mechanical properties of stressed materials; elastic and plastic 
deformations of beams, columns, and shafts; axial, transverse and torsion 
loadings; and temperature effects on materials. 
PHY 2223 INTRODUCTION TO RADIOLOGIC PHYSICS 
This course will provide the student with a knowledge of basic physics. To 
include fundamentals of x-ray generating equipment, information on x-ray 
production, beam characteristics, and units of measurement. S 
PHY 3013 MATERIALS SCIENCE 
An introductory, interdisciplinary course about the fundamental properties 
of solid materials. Topics include: atomic and crystalline structure, 
diffusivity, imperfections, mechanical testing, deformation, hardening 
techniques; electrical magnetic, optical, thermal, corrosive and wear 
properties. Materials discussed include ferrous and nonferrous alloys, 
ceramics, polymers, and composites. 
PHY 3112 EXPERIMENTAL TECHNIQUES 
Study of the techniques and devices used in experimental physics including 
lasers, vacuum systems, temperature measurements, photographic 
emulsions, spectrometers and particle detectors; procedures of data 
analysis. PHY 3311 MODERN PHYSICS LABORATORY 
The topics of spatial relativity, atomic and molecular physics, solid state 
physics, statistical physics, and nuclear physics are introduced along with 
engineering applications. Prerequisite: PHY 2155. Corequisite: MATH 
3834. S 
PHY 3403 MODERN PHYSICS FOR ENGINEERS 
The topics of spatial relativity, atomic and molecular physics, solid state 
physics, statistical physics, and nuclear physics are introduced along with 
engineering applications. Prerequisite: PHY 2155. Corequisite: MATH 
3834. S 
PHY 3413 ANALOG ELECTRONICS 
Lecture and laboratory study of basic network and semiconductor theory; 
Kirchhoff, Thevenin, and Norton Theorems, characteristics of solid-state 
components and their application in power supplies, amplifiers, oscillators, 
and operational amplifier. 
PHY 3424 OPTICS 
Lecture and laboratory study of geometrical and physical optics, including 
lenses, mirrors, interference, polarization, diffraction, dispersion and 
quantum optics. 
PHY 3501 PHYSICS SEMINAR (TOPIC) 
Course for students to gain experience in reporting a scientific and 
technical topic to peers; an oral and a written report on a subject of current 
interest in physics is required. Prerequisite: 18 hours of physics or 
consent of instructor. SO 
PHY 3544 DIGITAL ELECTRONICS 
Lecture and laboratory study of logic gates and circuits; microprocessor 
programming and interfacing. Prerequisite: PHY 1054 or PHY 2155. D 
PHY 3563 THERMODYNAMICS 
Study of thermal physics including the zeroth, first and second laws of 
thermodynamics; enthalpy, entropy, kinetic theory, Maxwell-Boltzmann 
distribution, specific heats, simple transport phenomena, and power cycle 
applications. PHY 3573 HEAT TRANSFER 
Study of conduction, convection and radiation heat transfer; properties of 
materials related to heat transfer; control volume analysis; laminar and 
turbulent fluid flow; Newton’s law of cooling; boiling and cooling; and 
blackbody radiation. PHY 3603 MECHANICS I 
Study of dynamics; conservative motion, central force problems, 
gravitation, harmonic oscillators, systems of particles, small vibrations, 
rigid-body dynamics, accelerated reference frames and Lagrange 
equations. 
PHY 3633 FLUID MECHANICS 
Study of fluid properties, compressible and incompressible fluids and 
aerodynamics, fluid statics and dynamics including viscous effects, 
dimensional analysis, and fluid measurements. 

 
PHY 4001-4 PHYSICS RESEARCH (TOPIC) 
Individual research under direction of an individual faculty member on a 
topic of mutual interest; one to four semester hours credit; topic, credit, and 
arrangements to be decided prior to enrollment. 
PHY 4011-4 PHYSICS SEMINAR (TOPIC) 
Formal study of a topic of current importance in physics or engineering 
which is not normally included in other courses; one to four semester hours 
credit. PHY 4644 ELECTRICITY & MAGNETISM I 
Lecture and laboratory study of electrostatics including Coulomb and 
Gauss laws, dielectric materials, electrostatic energy, steady currents and 
magnetic fields, and electromagnetic induction. 
PHY 4723 QUANTUM MECHANICS 
An advanced course in modern physics including applications of the 
Schroedinger equation, spin and magnetic interactions, complex atoms, 
molecules, and quantum statistical physics and its applications. 
Prerequisite: PHY 3403. Corequisite: MATH 4213 or consent of the 
instructor. FE 
Science 
SCI 1501 CONCEPTS OF PHYSICAL SCIENCE 
LABORATORY 
The lab meets two hours each week and focuses on the importance of the 
laboratory experiment to the scientific method. Inquiry-oriented laboratory 
investigations of selected topics in the disciplines of astronomy, chemistry, 
geology and physics introduced in SCI 1513 will be undertaken. 
SCI 1513 CONCEPTS OF PHYSICAL SCIENCE 
A course designed to develop an awareness of the interrelationships 
between science and society. Readings and discussions on the “tactics and 
strategy” of science, with emphasis on the physical sciences. F, S 
Science for Elementary Teachers 
The following three courses (SCI 3114, SCI 3214, and SCI 3314) are 
designed to prepare elementary school teachers and CANNOT satisfy any 
program requirements other than Bachelors in Elementary Education, 
Bachelors in Special Education, or Masters in Elementary Education. 
SCI 3114 BIOLOGICAL SCIENCE FOR ELEMENTARY 
TEACHERS 
An inquiry-oriented course which presents selected biological concepts, 
including ecological relationships, that are relevant to the elementary 
school science curriculum. This course includes a laboratory. 
Prerequisite: SCI 3214. F, S 
SCI 3214 PHYSICAL SCIENCE FOR ELEMENTARY 
TEACHERS 
A general physical science course designed for the prospective elementary 
teacher. The content covers major concepts from the traditional disciplines 
of physics, chemistry, geology, and astronomy. A study of energy and 
environmental issues is also included. This course includes a laboratory. F, 
S 
SCI 3314 GEOLOGICAL SCIENCE FOR ELEMENTARY 
TEACHERS 
A general Earth science course covering major concepts of geology, 
environmental issues, and the relationship between science and society. 
This course is intended for elementary teachers. Inquiry-oriented 
laboratory investigations are included. This course includes a laboratory. 
SCI 4001-4 INDIVIDUAL STUDY IN SCIENCE 
Specified topic in science. One to four credit hours. D 
SCI 4011-4 SCIENCE SEMINAR (TOPIC) 
Seminars of individual or group study are based on selected topics n 
science education. Credit one to four semester hours. Prerequisite: Senior 
college standing. D 
SCI 4843 TEACHER’S COURSE IN SCIENCE 
Methods, problems, and resources in teaching science in the secondary 
schools. Problems and topics in the middle school and high school are 
presented. Required for teacher certification in science areas. 
Prerequisite: Admission to Teacher Education Program. FO 
DEPARTMENT OF LANGUAGE  
AND LITERATURE 
English 
ENGL 0123 FUNDAMENTALS OF ENGLISH 
A course designed to provide remedial students an opportunity to increase 
their writing skills. Emphasis is placed on sentence construction, paragraph 
organization, sound thesis statements, and adequate support for them. Zero 
credit, this course is not counted as a part of a major or minor and it does 
not count towards graduation. F, S, SU 
ENGL 0132 COMPOSITION I SUPPORT 
A developmental course in English designed to provide remedial students 
an opportunity to increase their writing skills. Emphasis is placed on 
sentence construction, paragraph organization, sound thesis statements, 
and adequate support for them. The course is designed to supplement the 
ENGL-1113 curriculum in a manner that promotes student success there. 
Corequisite: ENGL-1113. F, S 
ENGL 1002 WRITING SKILLS LAB 
This course is designed for students who either need additional assistance 
in sharpening their writing skills to either bring them up to a college level, 
or maintain them at a college level, or need assistance with a writing project 
within a specific discipline. Students plan a course of action and study with 
the assistance of the instructor to meet the student’s individual needs. 
Corequisite: ENGL 1213; Prerequisite: ENGL 1113. F, S 
ENGL 1113 ENGLISH COMPOSITION I 
Training for effective communicative skills with emphasis on writing as 
required for successful college study. F, S, SU 
ENGL 1213 ENGLISH COMPOSITION II 
Training for skills in communication, as in ENGL 1113, but a higher level. 
Research and argument emphasized. Prerequisite: ENGL 1113. F, S, SU 
ENGL 2000 ENGLISH PROFICIENCY PROGRAM 
A writing examination required of all students who earn a “D” in ENGL 
1213 to verify their writing proficiency. 
ENGL 3013 WRITING: EXPLORATION AND PRACTICE 
This course offers a broad overview of language, its historical evolution, 
and the social and psychological phenomena associated with its use. It will 
also examine the fundamental systems of the English language, including 
its sounds (phonetics and phonology), words (morphology, vocabulary, 
lexicon), sentences (grammar systems and syntax), and language in use in 
speaking, listening, reading, and writing. The units of the course will 

 
address language from a holistic perspective to observe the systems of 
English in-action (discourse). During the course, students will have the 
opportunity to compare the systems of English to those of other languages 
to identify similar and contrasting features and areas of challenge for 
second language learners. Through this course, participants will acquire 
background knowledge of the English language systems to better guide 
English language learners. All course modules will take into consideration 
the role of language in teaching and learning, as well as stressing the 
relevant implications for effective instruction in culturally and 
linguistically diverse classrooms. Prerequisite: ENGL 1213. S 
ENGL 3133 PEER TUTORING AND WRITING CENTER 
PRACTICES 
Students receive training in writing center consultant practices; discuss 
current theories related to writing center work and writing pedagogy; 
reflect on their writing processes; and develop the interpersonal 
communication skills necessary for successful tutoring. The content of this 
course, via theoretical readings/discussions and experiential education 
opportunities, will enhance students’ ability to work with people in 
whatever field they might choose. Students interested in tutoring at the 
campus writing center are required to complete this course, though 
employment is not guaranteed. S 
ENGL 3213 WRITING FOR SOCIAL MEDIA 
This course will introduce students to the contexts, forms, and applications 
of social media writing. Writing and participating in any genre requires an 
awareness of discourse communities, your target audience, your 
motivation/purpose, and writing conventions that you may include or 
challenge. In this course, you will explore how these values play out in 
social media writing. Students will become familiar with a range of social 
media tools, exploring both theory and practice of social media through 
writing assignments, applied tasks, and course projects. Prerequisite: 
ENGL 1113. Prerequisite or Concurrent: ENGL 1213. FO 
ENGL 3223 INTRODUCTION TO CREATIVE WRITING 
This course will explore the main genres of creative writing (fiction, 
creative nonfiction, and poetry) with the possibility of other genres being 
included at the instructor’s discretion. After considering the genre 
characteristics and reading several examples, students will have the 
opportunity to write an example of each genre covered in the course. 
Prerequisite: ENGL 1113. S 
ENGL 3233 INTRODUCTION TO PROFESSIONAL 
WRITING 
Introduction to Professional Writing introduces students to the field of 
professional writing and offers opportunities to practice different kinds of 
professional correspondence, including but not limited to letters, email, 
memos, reports, and proposals. There will be emphasis on understanding 
the rhetorical situation of professional environments and the ways in which 
professional genres function in the real world. Collaboration, critical 
thinking and team work will be emphasized. 
ENGL 3473 SHORT FORM FICTION 
This workshop is a training ground for short story writers, intended for 
writers with little or no experience in writing fiction. The class focuses on 
the elements of fiction: dialogue, voice, image, character, point of view, 
and structure. Students are asked to read and discuss model short stories by 
published writers, to critique each other's work, and to write and revise a 
number of short stories.  Prerequisite: ENGL 1213. S 
ENGL 3483 BEGINNING CREATIVE WRITING OF 
POETRY I 
This workshop is a training ground for poets. The student’s work will be 
discussed critically. Exercises will be assigned. Full participation, both as 
writer and critic, is expected. Prerequisite: ENGL 1213. F 
ENGL 3603 ENGLISH GRAMMAR 
Students will learn the conventions of the English language as they relate 
to various rhetorical situations (grammar, usage, and mechanic); they will 
recognize and understand the concept of dialect and will become familiar 
with descriptive and prescriptive grammar systems (NCTE 2.2). Education 
students taking this course will prepare and provide weekly instruction 
related to the strategic use of language conventions (grammar, usage, and 
mechanics) in the context of students' writing for different audiences, 
purposes, and modalities (NCTE 4.3) as well as daily recitations that 
incorporates knowledge of language structure and conventions - to 
facilitate theirs and other students' comprehension and interpretation of 
print and non-print texts via the Reed Kellogg system of diagramming 
(3.5). Considerations for pedagogical impact are included in the course. 
Prerequisite: ENGL 1213. F 
ENGL 3653 WRITING IN THE DISCIPLINES 
“Good” writing is a slippery concept, as many students realize when they 
try to transfer what they learned in one class to writing assignments in 
another. Different disciplines value certain forms of writing over others 
because those forms help the members of the discipline communicate ideas 
more effectively. In this class, students learn to analyze the discourse of 
various disciplines and discern how the needs of the discourse communities 
shape their writing. ENGL 3663 CREATIVE NONFICTION I 
In this writing intensive workshop course, students will produce their own 
works of nonfiction as well as read and analyze the nonfiction of 
professional writers. Creative nonfiction includes the genres of personal 
essay, memoir and autobiography, travel writing, nature and science 
writing, and literary journalism. The course will address one or more of 
these genres. Students will utilize reportage, reflection, research, and 
techniques commonly used in fiction to turn their experiences and 
observations into stories and essays that are both truthful and artful. 
Prerequisite: ENGL 1113 and ENGL 1213. FO 
ENGL 4001-4 INDIVIDUAL STUDY IN ENGLISH (TOPIC) 
Individual study of specified topic for undergraduate students. Credit one 
to four semester hours. D 
ENGL 4011-4 SEMINAR IN ENGLISH (TOPIC) 
Group study of specified topic for undergraduate students. Credit one to 
four semester hours. D 
ENGL 4123 WRITING GENRES 
Writing Genres introduces students to the expectations and purposes.of a 
particular written genre and offers them intensive practice composing texts 
that function within the conventions and boundaries of this genre. Genres 
could be creative, professional, or some combination in nature. Students 
will read and analyze examples of the genre, compose multiple texts in 
drafts, participate in workshops and discussions, and produce critical 
analyses and reviews. Sample genres include autobiography, horror 
writing, fantasy, romance, children’s literature, writing for video games, 
grant writing, travel writing, and science writing, among other topics. 
Because the content is variable, students may take the course under 
different topics 2 times, and the Department of Language and Literature 
will distribute a description of the specific genre(s) under consideration 
before the registration period when the course is offered. Prerequisite: 
ENGL 1113. Prerequisite or Concurrent: ENGL 1213. FO 
ENGL 4423 INTRODUCTION TO LINGUISTICS 
This course offers a broad overview of language, its historical evolution, 
and the social and psychological phenomena associated with it use. It will 
also examine the fundamental systems of the English language, including 
its sounds (phonetics and phonology), words (morphology, vocabulary, 
lexicon), sentences (grammar systems and syntax), and language in use in 
speaking, listening, reading, and writing. The units of the course will 

 
address language from a holistic perspective to observe the systems of 
English in-action (discourse). During the course, students will have the 
opportunity to compare the systems of English to those of other languages 
to identify similar and contrasting features and areas of challenge for 
second language learners. Through this course, participants will acquire 
background knowledge of the English language systems to better guide 
English language learners. All course modules will take into consideration 
the role of language in teaching and learning, as well as stressing the 
relevant implications for effective instruction in culturally and 
linguistically diverse classrooms. Prerequisite: ENGL 1213. S 
ENGL 4453 ADVANCED COMPOSITION 
This course serves as an introduction to rhetoric and the field of rhetorical 
studies. Students learn about different rhetorical theories, starting with 
ancient Greek rhetoricians and then moving into present-day discussions 
of the use of rhetoric in education, popular culture, politics, science, 
religion, and other areas. Students complete the following projects in the 
course: rhetorical analysis essay, visual rhetoric project (either essay or 
multimedia presentation), rhetorical history project (either essay or 
multimedia teaching presentation), and rhetorical self-analysis (either 
essay or multimedia project). In addition, students complete regular 
informal writing tasks. Prerequisite: ENGL 1213. FE 
ENGL 4473 CREATIVE WRITING OF POETRY II 
This workshop is for poets seeking to create work of publishable quality. 
Publishing format is studied. Conferences with the instructor will be 
utilized. Group criticism will continue with participation by all members 
of the workshop. Prerequisite: ENGL 1213. FE 
ENGL 4483 LONG FORM FICTION 
This course is an introduction to the process of writing short longer works 
of fiction with emphasis on the techniques of discovery, invention, 
organization, and style. The student will gain a better understanding of 
implementation of plot, character, setting, theme, and tone through 
examination of both model fiction from contemporary writers and the 
student's own writing. This course will guide the student through the 
production of a 50,000-word novella/novel draft. Prerequisite: ENGL 
1213. FE 
ENGL 4653 WRITING FOR MULTIMEDIA 
Writing for Multimedia is an interactive course designed to give students 
practice producing texts for a wide range of media for a variety of purposes 
– entertainment, gaming, marketing, and education. Students will learn to 
write, think and edit using multiple modes of composition, as well as how 
to engage effectively, respectfully and safely in/with digital spaces.  
Prerequisite: ENGL 1213. S 
ENGL 4663 CREATIVE NONFICTION II 
In this writing intensive workshop course, students will produce their own 
works of nonfiction as well as read and analyze the nonfiction of 
professional writers. Creative nonfiction includes the genres of personal 
essay, memoir and autobiography, travel writing, nature and science 
writing and literary journalism. The course will address one of more of 
these genres. Students will utilize reportage, reflection, research, and 
techniques commonly used in fiction to turn their experiences and 
observations into stories and essay that are both truthful and artful. 
Prerequisite: ENGL 1213. SE 
ENGL 4673 TEACHING IN THE SECONDARY ENGLISH 
CLASSROOM 
This course emphasizes teaching of language, literature, and composition 
with emphasis on current trends recounted in recent textbooks, journal 
articles, experimental studies, and curriculum guides. It explores multiple 
modes-including technology-for involving students in purposeful reading, 
writing, speaking, & listening and considers innovative approaches for 
organizing the classroom to address a range of abilities and diverse cultural 
perspectives. This course is the capstone of the English Education degree 
and should be taken the fall before student teaching. Students will learn 
about selections, purposes, and structure of curriculum content, teaching 
and learning theories and procedures, and pedagogical strategies to 
promote learning and equity for diverse students, incorporating 
instructional techniques and materials for the English Language Arts 
classroom such as planning instruction and designing assessments for the 
reading of literature and for composing texts (oral, written, visual, etc.) 
Students must complete and will be assessed on 6 hours of professional 
development with reflections (various standards), a conceptual/thematic 
unit plan (various standards), a culturally relevant pedagogy project 
(NCTE 5, 6) 12 teachers think on Flipgrid vlog reflections (various 
standards), a discussion leaders cooperative micro-teaching demonstration 
(various standards), a write into the day microteaching lesson (NCTE 2,4), 
and 2 tricky teachings micro-teaching demonstrations (NCTE 1, 2, 4). This 
course MUST be taken the semester prior to student 
teaching/internship. F 
ENGL 4773 EDITING 
This course will introduce the principles of this media skill by covering the 
major elements of editing, among which are structural and line editing, 
proofreading, using reference books, understanding contracts and 
copyright, understanding production and design, and understanding the 
writer/editor relationship. Prerequisite: ENGL 1113 and ENGL 1213. 
SO 
ENGL 4882 ENGLISH SENIOR CAPSTONE 
The role of the capstone course is to draw all learning together and to 
provide a single opportunity or experience during which a student 
demonstrates that he or she has accomplished or achieved the university 
and department's educational goals as represented by the various courses 
taken and the appropriate mission statements. The two major objectives for 
the course are to invite students of each emphases (Writing, Literature 
Education) to participate in the theoretical debates surrounding the study 
of English and, secondly, to afford each student the opportunity to pursue 
a semester-long research project culminating in a senior essay focusing on 
an autobiographical exploration of their growth. The literature emphasis 
students will explore their growth as a deep reader and literary critic 
through an in-depth examination of texts they have read and essays they 
have written. The writing emphasis student will examine samples of their 
writing and discuss how those samples illuminate their growth as a writer. 
Teacher candidates will construct a teaching pedagogy and an essay which 
will summarize professional goals and highlight the candidate's 
professional development. The teaching candidate will also explore the 
teaching objectives, strategies, and assessments which the candidate deems 
cohesive with their pedagogical outlook. F, S 
Foreign Language 
Courses in foreign languages provide students the ability to actively and 
productively participate in today’s interdependent world. Better 
understanding and appreciation of other languages and cultures allow the 
student to understand better his/her native language and culture. 
Knowledge and ability in a foreign language enhance any area of the 
College of Arts and Sciences and provide essential cultural and linguistic 
background for students in teacher education. 
More than sufficient course work is offered for students who choose 
Spanish as a second teaching field or as a minor to enhance any major. 
American Sign Language 
ASL 2163 AMERICAN SIGN LANGUAGE I 
This course is an introduction to American Sign Language, the language 
used by deaf people in the United States and most of Canada. This course 
will also provide introductory information on deaf culture since a language 
cannot be separated from its culture. F, S 

 
Italian 
ITAL 1004 ELEMENTARY ITALIAN I 
A first semester elementary language course for students who have never 
studied Italian or who have had very little exposure to the language. 
Students will acquire elementary communication skills through a 
systematic introduction to the basic grammatical patterns and vocabulary 
of the Italian language. A cultural component ties into the grammatical 
content. Class work will emphasize development of the oral/aural skills, 
speaking and listening. Tape recordings will also be available for students 
to practice listening and speaking. 
ITAL 1104 ELEMENTARY ITALIAN II 
This is a continuation of ITAL 1004. The goal of this course is to improve 
proficiency in Italian in the four areas of communication: reading, writing 
listening, and speaking. Grammar structures are learned not as an end, but 
as a means of acquiring proficiency. Real life learning experiences are 
fostered through the use of grounding of language acquisition through 
classes based on Italian culture and basic daily topics. Prerequisite: ITAL 
1004.  
Latin 
LATIN 1054 ELEMENTARY LATIN I 
Elementary course in Latin. Fundamentals of Latin with emphasis on 
vocabulary and structure of the language. F 
LATIN 1154 ELEMENTARY LATIN II 
Continuation of Latin I. Subjunctive mood, active and passive of all verbs, 
conditional clauses, fourth and fifth declensions are covered.  
Prerequisite: LATIN 1054. 
Spanish 
SPAN 1054 ELEMENTARY SPANISH I 
Fundamentals of grammar taught in order to acquire facility in all four 
language skills; reading, writing, speaking, and understanding spoken 
Spanish; limited introduction to Hispanic culture. F, S, SU 
SPAN 1154 ELEMENTARY SPANISH II 
This course is a continuation of SPAN 1054 and completes the basic 
grammar of Spanish; consideration of Hispanic cultural background. 
Prerequisite: SPAN 1054 or equivalent high school Spanish. F, S, SU 
SPAN 2053 INTERMEDIATE SPANISH I 
Review of Spanish grammar to allow a more thorough understanding of 
fundamentals of Spanish with reading, cultural background, conversation, 
and composition. Prerequisite: SPAN 1054, SPAN 1154, or permission. 
F 
SPAN 2153 INTERMEDIATE SPANISH II 
Discussions in Spanish based on poetry, short prose selections, literary and 
current events. Informal grammar presentations as required. Prerequisite: 
SPAN 2053 or equivalent. S 
SPAN 3023 SPANISH FOR HEALTHCARE 
PROFESSIONALS 
Course designed to develop language skills with a focus on listening and 
speaking to provide vocabulary and conversational practice in realistic 
healthcare, pharmacy and/or emergency situations with emphasis on real-
life vocabulary. Spanish-language media and public-service opportunities; 
planned and spontaneous activities augment course text. S 
SPAN 3553 HISPANIC LIFE AND CULTURE 
Readings in Spanish that demonstrate origins, development, and 
characteristics of Hispanic life and culture; reading speed and 
comprehension increased; conducted when possible in Spanish. 
Prerequisite: SPAN 1154. F 
SPAN 3653 INTERMEDIATE SPANISH CONVERSATION 
Course designed to increase vocabulary and conversational ability in 
realistic situations; planned and spontaneous activities using newspapers 
and magazines to augment course text; no English spoken; may take 
concurrently with SPAN 2153. Prerequisite: SPAN 2053. FE 
SPAN 3753 READINGS IN SPANISH 
Course designed to increase reading and overall proficiency in Spanish 
through study of selected literary genres from Spanish America and Spain. 
Various interactive methods used. 
SPAN 3853 INTERMEDIATE SPANISH COMPOSITION 
AND GRAMMAR 
Intensive writing course to increase Spanish writing proficiency. Review 
of grammatical forms that typically cause problems for intermediate 
learners. Interactive approach through a variety of methods. Prerequisite: 
SPAN 2053 or equivalent. S 
SPAN 4923 TEACHERS COURSE IN WORLD 
LANGUAGES 
Course designed to give the basic principles and techniques for effective 
instruction in world languages. Prerequisite: SPAN 1054 or equivalent. 
SO 
Humanities 
HUM 1103 INTRODUCTION TO HUMANITIES 
An interdisciplinary, multi-perspective assessment of cultural, political, 
philosophical, and aesthetic factors critical to the formulation of values and 
the historical development of the individual and of society. Examines 
human creativity broadly, including music, painting, literature, theater, 
architecture, sculpture, and modern innovations such as photography and 
film. F, S, SU 
Literature 
LIT 2001-4 INDIVIDUAL STUDY IN LITERATURE 
(TOPIC) 
Individual study of specified topic for undergraduate students. Credit one 
to four semester hours. D 
LIT 2011-4 SEMINAR IN LITERATURE (TOPIC) 
Group study of specified topic for undergraduate students. Credit one to 
four semester hours. D 
LIT 2053 INTRODUCTION TO WOMEN’S STUDIES 
In this interdisciplinary course, students investigate the history and the 
practice of women’s studies from numerous angles, exploring the 
intersections of gender, class, race, sexuality, age, appearance, and 
ethnicity in women’s lives and the power dynamics and inequalities found 
along those axes. The course focuses on feminism and social justice. 
Students examine the varieties of women’s experience in current American 
society, noting how gender relations are changing and examining larger 
cultural, political, and social forces responsible for those changes. 
LIT 2333 INTRODUCTION TO FILM 
A study of films as entertainment, cultural force, and art form. This course 
consists of viewing, analyzing, and discussing numerous full-length 
commercial films. F, S 

 
LIT 2413 INTRODUCTION TO LITERATURE 
The study of short stories, poetry, and drama. F, S, SU 
LIT 2833 SCIENCE FICTION 
The aim of this course is to develop a clear understanding of the nature and 
purposes of Science Fiction as a genre. Students will consider not only with 
the major themes of (mainly) American science fiction but also with its 
qualities as fiction. Through that study, they will try to develop a sound 
definition of the genre and a set of critical principles for evaluating its 
literary worth. Finally, the course will examine the role of science fiction 
as a modern mythology through reading and discussion of short stories and 
novels by such writers as Thomas More, H.G. Wells, Tolkien, Bradbury, 
Asimov, and Vonnegut, Shelly, Orwell Creighton, PK Dick and 
others. D 
LIT 3023 THE ART OF READING 
This course prepares English majors to understand literature and to 
articulate their understanding in essays supported by close reading and 
carefully analyzed evidence.  This course introduces literary analysis by 
covering the skills necessary for literary scholarship, providing students 
with the concepts, skills, and strategies needed to succeed in upper-division 
literature courses. During the course of the class, students will learn how 
to analyze literature and interact with the historical and cultural discourses 
literary texts engage as well as learn the various schools of literary criticism 
from which they can approach a literary text. Students will develop critical-
thinking skills through interpretive and analytical essays, practice 
collaborative techniques. Consideration for pedagogical impact will be 
included for the benefit of teacher candidates. Prerequisite: ENGL 1213 
and LIT 2413. F 
LIT 3033 WORLD MYTHOLOGY 
This course leads students to define the term mythology through a study of 
multiple versions of example myths represented across various cultures, in 
film, within illustrated texts, and through artifacts utilizing various critical 
stances. Students will identify not only the overt meaning and structure of 
Myth but also the larger issues implied by the stories. Further, students will 
examine the social and psychological implications of mythology and its 
place in the modern world. Consideration of pedagogical approaches will 
also be included for teacher candidates. Prerequisite: ENGL 1213. FO 
LIT 3113 EARLY WORLD LITERATURE 
A study of representative works of world literature which contributed to 
shaping world history from antiquity, the Middle Ages, and the 
Renaissance. The course is a study of the literary, cultural, and human 
significance of works selected from both Western and non-Western literary 
traditions. The educational goals of the class are to promote an 
understanding of the works in their cultural/historical contexts, to examine 
persistent human values reflected in these works which unite all literary 
traditions, to sharpen critical reading, thinking, and writing skills, and to 
deepen cultural sensitivity. Prerequisite: ENGL 1213 and LIT 2413. FE 
LIT 3223 ROMANTIC MOVEMENT 
History of the Romantic Movement; prose and poetry of the period with 
particular attention to the works of Wordsworth, Coleridge, Byron, 
Shelley, and Keats. D 
LIT 3323 MODERN VOICES IN AMERICAN 
LITERATURE 
This survey course is an examination of American literature from the Civil 
War to the present. It traces the development of significant literary styles 
and periods during this period and examines the works of authors important 
to our contemporary understanding of America's literary history. Course 
work will examine a range of literary texts, diverse in both content and 
form, emphasizing exploration of the concept of American identity through 
the examination of literary trends, themes, and historical and political 
contexts. Pedagogical consideration of teaching American writers 
(including print and non-print texts, media texts, classic texts and 
contemporary texts that represent a range of genres, and the experiences of 
different genders, ethnicities, and social classes) will be included where 
practicable. Prerequisite: ENGL 1213. F 
LIT 3333 SHAKESPEARE IN CONTEXT 
Students will study Shakespeare's plays in the context of his times and read 
representative works by Shakespeare and by his contemporaries. Two 
theoretical approaches underpin the course design: new historicism and 
formalism. Drama and cultural history share importance in understanding 
the world that produced an unparalleled theatrical achievement. Various 
theoretical approaches will be explored during the course to illuminate the 
chosen texts. Students will develop critical-thinking skills through 
discussion, interpretive and analytical essays, practice collaborative 
techniques, informal writing and research. Consideration for pedagogical 
impact will be included for the benefit of teacher candidates. Lecture; 
discussion; interpretive papers; informal writing; research. Prerequisite: 
ENGL 1213 and LIT 2413. SO 
LIT 3343 WORLD FOLK LITERATURE 
This course examines the literary form, value, and psychological uses of 
examples of world folk literature - from the fairly simple form of proverbs 
and riddles to the more complex fairy and folk tales. Through such topics 
as the origins of folk literature, their dissemination, their social and 
psychological implications, and their place in the modern world, the course 
will explore the way orally based folk literature reflects the values, literary 
tradition, and culture of their storytellers. Students will read multiple 
versions of tales to see how they are represented across various cultures, 
will view film to compare motifs and presentation to folkloric structures, 
and will learn to decode images within illustrated texts. They will also 
examine and compare multiple versions of classic tales to explore how 
variations in plot, setting and characterization shape meaning. They will 
explore the characteristics and relationships between literary and folk 
genres, themes and motifs and study the interplay of folkloric thinking and 
formal literary expression in texts of all kinds. Consideration of 
pedagogical approaches will also be included for teacher candidates. 
Prerequisite: ENGL 1213 and LIT 2413. SO 
LIT 3443 MIDDLE ENGLISH/CHAUCER 
A study of the language and the literature of thirteenth and fourteenth 
century England with emphasis on Chaucer. D 
LIT 3453 AGE OF REASON 
A study of British works and authors of approximately the first half of the 
eighteenth century. Attention is also given to the social, political, and 
philosophical influences of the period. D 
LIT 3463 19TH CENTURY AMERICAN REALISM 
A course dealing with the broad outlines of the Age of Realism in 
American literature with special emphasis on the contributions of the three 
great realists: Mark Twain, William Dean Howells, and Henry James. D 
LIT 3493 MODERN DRAMA 
Reading and study of American, British, and European plays since Ibsen, 
with emphasis on the social and political backgrounds, dramatic structure, 
and literary trends from nationalism to absurdism. D 
LIT 3513 LITERATURE OF THE AMERICAN WEST 
Selected readings in novels, short stories, poetry, criticism and other works 
by writers of the Trans-Mississippi frontier and far West; emphasis on 
historical and cultural interpretations since 1890. D 
LIT 3523 VICTORIAN POETRY 
A study of the major poets of the Victorian era and of the conditions which 
shaped their work. Emphasis upon Tennyson, Browning, Arnold, Hardy, 
and Hopkins. D 

 
LIT 3533 BRITISH RENAISSANCE DRAMA 
A study of British theatre in the late 16th and early 17th centuries. Emphasis 
is on Kyd, Marlow, Jonson, Shakespeare, and the Jacobeans. D 
LIT 3543 LITERATURE OF THE SOUTH 
Study of selected modern-day Southern writers, with emphasis on the 
economic, sociological, and political backgrounds reflected in their works. 
D 
LIT 3613 AMERICAN ROMANTIC PERIOD 
Readings in the American Romantic period, emphasizing selected works 
by Whitman, Thoreau, Hawthorne, and Melville. D 
LIT 4001-4 INDIVIDUAL STUDY IN LITERATURE 
(TOPIC) 
Individual study of specified topic for undergraduate students. Credit one 
to four semester hours. 
LIT 4011-4 SEMINAR IN LITERATURE (TOPIC) 
Group study of specified topic for undergraduate students. Credit one to 
four semester hours. D 
LIT 4113 MODERN WORLD LITERATURE 
This course introduces students to representative and significant works of 
world literature from the Renaissance to the present, including literature 
from both the Western Cannon and the rich traditions of Africa and Asia. 
It provides students with opportunities to explore and respond to multiple 
genres from various global, historical, and social contexts. Students will 
consider the social and historical context that shaped these novels, epic 
poems, graphic texts, and plays. 
LIT 4123 BRITISH LITERATURE 1795-1950 
This survey course covers British literature from the advent of 
Romanticism to the 1950s, taking into consideration the various genres in 
which writers were working. It will also examine pertinent literary, social, 
cultural, political, and philosophical movements and trends during this 
period. One goal of this course is to understand the ways that British writers 
attempted to grapple with concepts such as empire, modernity, ontology, 
and other guiding ideas, noting the range of ways in which novelists, poets, 
dramatists, and essayists chose to give voice to these and other ideas. This 
course not only allows for a deeper appreciation for British literature and 
culture; it also aims to hone students' skills in analysis and critical 
evaluation of various ideas, arguments, and perspectives; their 
understanding of historical factors and cultural trends as well as critical 
terms and concepts; and for students to continue building upon their critical 
thinking and writing skills. Consideration of pedagogical approaches will 
also be included for teacher candidates. Prerequisite: ENGL 1213. S 
LIT 4233 YOUNG ADULT LITERATURE 
This course is a survey of young adult literature commonly read by people 
ages sixteen to twenty-five years old. Students will become knowledgeable 
about how adolescents read texts and make meaning through interaction 
with media environments (NCTE 1.2). This course considers both 
traditional and innovative young adult literature in all genres, including 
film, graphic novels, and online literature (NCTE 1.1). Emphasis will be 
on critical analysis, evaluation, the perspectives of genre, theme, 
representations of adolescence and adulthood, and approaches to 
interpretation. (NCTE 1.2) While other majors will consider the texts from 
a literary or sociocultural perspective, English education majors will 
consider pedagogical approaches and plan and implement a brief literacy 
instruction that promotes social justice and critical engagement with 
complex issues related to maintaining a diverse, inclusive, equitable 
society (NCTE 6.2). This presentation will demonstrate use of 
contemporary technologies and/or digital media to compose multimodal 
discourse (NCTE 2.1). Finally, teacher candidates will research and present 
an instructional module which reflects curriculum integration and 
incorporates interdisciplinary teaching methods and materials (NCTE 3.6) 
as well as a coherent and relevant learning experiences in reading that 
reflects knowledge of current theory and research about the teaching and 
learning of reading and that utilizes individual and collaborative 
approaches and a variety of reading strategies (NCTE 3.3). Considerations 
for pedagogical impact are included in the course. 
LIT 4473 MODERN BRITISH AND AMERICAN POETRY 
Poetry of the twentieth century. D 
LIT 4553 ISSUES IN AMERICAN LITERATURE 
This survey course familiarizes students with American literature from the 
period of American "discovery" by Europeans to the Civil War. The course 
entails close reading, analysis, interpretation, research, and writing. The 
title of the course suggests its ordering principle: a consideration of the 
historical, cultural, political, theoretical, and artistic issues that shaped the 
early part of American literary history. Students examine both traditional 
canonical texts and works by marginalized female and minority authors to 
discover the aspects of diversity and inclusiveness that existed in what is 
often seen as the "white man's world" of early American literature. The 
pedagogical implications of inclusiveness (the experiences of different 
genders, ethnicities, and social classes) and other relevant curricular 
considerations will be included. The course examines important American 
poetry, fiction, and nonfiction of the period. Prerequisite: ENGL 1213. S 
LIT 4593 DIVERSITY IN AMERICAN LITERATURE 
This course in contemporary American diversity literature enables the 
student to analyze conflicts and tensions when cultures and ethnicities 
collide, while also discovering the richness of difference. It will consider 
works by representative American authors of Hispanic/Chicano, Black, 
Native American, Asian, Jewish, and other backgrounds. Prerequisite: 
ENGL 1213. FE 
LIT 4623 17TH CENTURY ENGLISH POETRY 
Selected readings from the works of Jonson, Donne, and their followers, 
providing a background for the study of the poetry of Milton. D 
LIT 4763 BRITISH LITERARY HERITAGE TO 1800 
In this course the student will become familiar with the major genres, 
authors and works and with the historical context of British literature from 
its beginning to 1800 with special attention to their literary qualities and 
conceptual contexts. While the course explores the developments in 
language, literature, and society, it will develop appreciation of the works 
assigned, as well as allow students to read literature sensitively and 
critically.  Class discussion will focus on cultural, social, historical, and 
political issues raised by the literature and students' reactions to them. 
Consideration of the pedagogical impact of works and analysis will be 
included where appropriate.  Writers studied include the Beowulf poet, 
Chaucer, Spencer, Marie de France, Shakespeare, Milton, Pope, and 
Johnson. Prerequisite: ENGL 1213. F 
LIT 4883 WOMEN AND LITERATURE 
This course will acquaint student with literature by women from the 
medieval to the present time and from all over the world, exploring issues 
these writers raise concerning the lives and art of women. The course will 
also study images of women in literary works by both men and women. 
Prerequisite: ENGL 1213. SE 
LIT 4993 THE NOVEL 
In this course students will read and study novels of a particular period or 
type. Focus will vary from semester to semester and range in period and 
nationality (for example, 18th Century British Novel, History of the Novel, 
Victorian Novel, or focus on a particular set of writers). The course will 
discuss critical literacies which encompass skills and dispositions to 

 
understand, question, and critique ideological messages of texts. The 
course will examine how canonical texts are embedded in and shaped by 
ideologies, help students learn to use different text structures as aids to 
constructing meaning through thematic organization, demonstrate scaffold 
instruction and discuss the pedagogical impact of teaching the novel as a 
form. Prerequisite: ENGL 1213. SE 
Philosophy 
PHILO 1453 INTRODUCTION TO PHILOSOPHY 
A survey of major philosophers and their ideas, from ancient Greece to 
Rome, to Medieval Christian philosophers. Descartes and the debate over 
Rationalism and Empiricism, Kant and his followers, Marx, Utilitarianism, 
and the Existentialism of both Kierkegaard and Sartre. Attention to 
metaphysics, ontology, ethics, epistemology, axiology, and some logic. 
Primary emphasis on the Western tradition. F, S, SU 
DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS 
MATH 0124 BASIC ALGEBRA 
A developmental course for students that need extra preparation before 
College Algebra. Topics include working with variables, solving 
equations, graphing linear functions, and factoring. Prerequisite: MATH 
0174.  F, S, SU 
MATH 0162 COLLEGE ALGEBRA SUPPORT 
A course designed to help students with a more modest mathematics 
background (ACT-16-18) to progress through College Algebra. Students 
will spend an additional two hours with their instructor each week. During 
that time, they can review underlying concepts, work through extra 
examples, and engage in question-and-answer sessions. Enrollment in 
College Algebra is required. COREQUISITE: MATH 1513. 
MATH 0174 PREP FOR COLLEGE MATH 
An entry level developmental course designed to strengthen students’ math 
skills. This course will include a review of the operations of arithmetic, 
working with signed numbers, calculations with fractions, and using 
percentages. Students completing MATH 0174 can proceed directly to 
MATH CONCEPTS 1143 with concurrent support course. Those who 
need College Algebra must complete MATH 0124 Basic Algebra. F, S, SU 
MATH 0182 MATH CONCEPTS SUPPORT 
A course designed to help students with a more modest mathematics 
background (ACT 16-18) to progress through Math Concepts. Students 
will spend an additional two hours with their instructor each week. During 
that time, they can review underlying concepts, work through extra 
examples, and engage in question-and-answer sessions. Enrollment in 
Math Concepts is required. COREQUISITE: MATH 1143. 
MATH 0192 MATH APPLICATIONS SUPPORT 
A course designed to help students with a more modest mathematics 
background (ACT-16-18) to progress through Math Applications. Students 
will spend an additional two hours with their instructor each week. During 
that time, they can review underlying concepts, work through extra 
examples, and engage in question-and-answer sessions. Enrollment in 
Math Applications is required. COREQUISITE: MATH 1153. 
MATH 1143 MATH CONCEPTS 
An introduction to mathematical ideas and their applications. Topics are 
chosen from set theory, logic, probability and statistics, number theory, 
financial mathematics and graph theory. F, S, SU 
MATH 1153 MATH APPLICATIONS 
A course in mathematics designed for nursing and health science students. 
Topics covered will include solving ratios and proportions, dimensional 
analysis, dosage calculations, and working with logarithms. F, S 
MATH 1513 COLLEGE ALGEBRA 
A fundamental course including solutions of equations and inequalities, 
systems of equations, algebra of functions, polynomial functions, rational 
functions, exponential and logarithmic functions, matrices, and conic 
sections. Prerequisite: ACT Math subscore of 19 or higher, or MATH 
0133, or departmental approval, or placement by examination. F, S, 
SU 
MATH 1613 COLLEGE TRIGONOMETRY 
The basic course stressing trigonometric functions, periodicity, identities, 
and solution of triangles. Prerequisite: MATH 1513, or departmental 
approval, or placement by examination. F, S 
MATH 1834 CALCULUS I 
The first of a three-course sequence in analytical geometry and calculus. 
Limits, 
Continuity, 
differentiation, 
integration, 
applications. 

MATH 2001-3 INDIVIDUAL STUDY IN MATHEMATICS 
(TOPIC)  
Independent study of a specific topic in mathematics for undergraduate 
students. Credit one to three semester hours. D 
MATH 2823 APPLIED CALCULUS 
A survey of calculus and its applications to business, life, and social 
sciences. Limits, beginning techniques of differentiation and integration, 
exponential and logarithmic functions, maxima, minima and partial 
differentiation. Prerequisite: MATH 1513. F, S 
MATH 2834 CALCULUS II 
A continuation of Calculus I, Analytical Geometry and Calculus. 
Applications and techniques of integration, sequences, and series, conics, 
parametric equations, polar coordinates, and vectors. Prerequisite: 
MATH 1834. F, S 
MATH 3113 FOUNDATIONS IN MATHEMATICS 
An introduction to basic concepts upon which mathematics is founded. 
Logic, set theory, proof-writing techniques, equivalence relations, 
mappings. Prerequisite: MATH 2834 or departmental approval. F 
MATH 3413 STATISTICAL METHODS 
Beginning techniques for students with modest mathematical background. 
Emphasis on applications to the biological and physical sciences, business, 
and education. Prerequisite: MATH 1513. F 
MATH 3433 STATISTICS I 
An introductory probability and statistics course. The binomial, 
hypergeometric, Poisson, normal, t-, and Chi-square distributions are 
studied. Other topics include hypothesis testing, linear regression, and 
analysis of variance. Some work with the statistical software packages. 
Applications are emphasized. Prerequisite: MATH 1513. S 
MATH 3453 MATHEMATICAL STATISTICS 
Classical probability theory, discrete and continuous random variables and 
their probability distributions, properties of expectation, moment 
generating functions, sampling distributions and the central limit theorem 
are some of the topics. Prerequisite: MATH 2834. FO 

 
MATH 3473 INTRODUCTION TO PROBABILITY 
Basic concepts of discrete probability are discussed, such as counting 
techniques, independence, conditional probability, Bayes’ Rule, random 
variables, random walks, and Markov chains. Prerequisite: MATH 2834. 
SO 
MATH 3533 TECHNOLOGY AND PROGRAMMING IN 
MATHEMATICS 
This course will be an introduction to computers and calculators for 
students of mathematics. Topics will be selected from: uses of the internet 
for the study of mathematics, graphing calculators, computer software, and 
programming for solving mathematical problems. Prerequisite: MATH 
1834. F 
MATH 3553 NUMERICAL ANALYSIS 
Derivation, evaluation, and application of numerical methods of applied 
mathematics. Computer programming solutions to roots of equations, 
difference and differential equations, numerical integration, and linear 
algebra problems. Prerequisite: MATH 2834 and any scientific 
programming language. D 
MATH 3653 LINEAR ALGEBRA 
An introductory course in vector spaces, matrices, determinants, 
characteristic roots, and applications. Prerequisite: MATH 2834 or 
departmental approval. S 
MATH 3673 ELEMENTARY NUMBER THEORY 
A study including primes and composites, number theoretic functions, 
Diophantine equations, congruence classes, and mathematical induction. 
Prerequisite: MATH 2834 or departmental approval. SE 
MATH 3713 COLLEGE GEOMETRY 
An axiomatic development of the essentials of Euclidean geometry and an 
introduction to non-Euclidean geometry. Content includes the foundations 
of Euclidean geometry (points, lines, angles, triangles, quadrilaterals, 
circles), parallelism in Euclidean geometry, transformations and 
isometries, and parallelism in non-Euclidean geometry (with the focus on 
hyperbolic geometry). Prerequisite: MATH 2834 or departmental 
approval. S 
MATH 3834 CALCULUS III 
Continuation 
of 
Calculus 
II. 
Vector-valued 
functions, 
partial 
differentiation, multiple integration, line integrals, surface integrals. 
Green’s Theorem, the Divergence Theorem, and Stokes’ Theorem. 
Prerequisite: MATH 2834 or equivalent. F, S 
MATH 4001-4 INDIVIDUAL STUDY IN MATHEMATICS 
(TOPIC) 
Independent study of specific topic in mathematics for undergraduate 
students. Credit one to four semester hours. D 
MATH 4011-4 SEMINAR IN MATHEMATICS (TOPIC) 
Group study of specified topic in mathematics for undergraduate students. 
Credit one to four semester hours. D 
MATH 4013 SEMINAR IN MATHEMATICS 
The following courses are generally offered under this course number: 
Analytic Geometry 
Emphasizes the essential elements of analytic geometry with special 
attention to those topics that are needed in a college level calculus 
sequence. Content includes polynomial, rational, and transcendental 
functions. Polar and parametric equations, space coordinates and 
surfaces, lines and planes in space, applications to business, social 
and physical sciences, and curve fitting. Prerequisite: MATH 2834. 
D 
Linear Algebra for Secondary Teachers 
An introductory course on matrix algebra with applications to 
solutions of systems of linear equations, linear programming, vector 
spaces, determinants, linear transformations and applications. 
Prerequisite: MATH 2834. D 
Modern Algebra for Secondary Teachers 
Fundamental concepts of sets, mappings, binary operations, 
mathematical induction, divisibility and congruence mod n. Basic 
algebraic structures: groups, subgroups, cyclic groups, normal 
subgroups, homomorphism, and isomorphism. Introduction to rings, 
integral domains, and fields. Supportive problem sets and 
applications of special interest to teachers. Prerequisite: MATH 
3834. D 
Survey of Geometry 
Euclid’s Postulates with emphasis on Euclid’s parallel postulate. 
Historical development of non-Euclidean geometry, with emphasis 
on the work of Saccheri, Gauss, and Lobachevsky. Circular inversion 
and orthogonal circles. The Beltrami-Poincare’ half-plane and 
Poincare’ disk models of hyperbolic geometry. The spherical model 
of elliptic geometry. Prerequisite: MATH 1834. D 
MATH 4101 MATHEMATICS CAPSTONE COURSE 
The capstone course is a one credit hour course for Mathematics Education 
and Mathematics seniors. It is modular in structure, with each module 
bringing together several different mathematics subject areas in a more 
advanced and interconnected context. To some extent, it will be 
preparatory for pre-professional exams. Prerequisite: Senior Standing or 
departmental approval. F 
MATH 4133 INTRO TO MATHEMATICAL LOGIC 
A basic course in mathematical thought, simple and compound sentences, 
truth tables, deductive logic, mathematical systems, quantification, 
application of logic to puzzles and games. Prerequisite: MATH 3834. D 
MATH 4153 HISTORY OF MATHEMATICS 
A survey course on the historical development of mathematics, including 
a look at famous problems and their development over time. SE 
MATH 4213 DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS I 
Solutions 
of 
ordinary 
differential 
equations 
with 
applications. 
Prerequisite: MATH 3834 or departmental approval. S 
MATH 4223 DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS II 
A continuation of MATH 4213. Advanced ordinary differential equations 
methods and an introduction to partial differential equations including 
Fourier series, Laplace’s equation, heat and wave equations. Prerequisite: 
MATH 4213. D 
MATH 4233 VECTOR ANALYSIS 
A comprehensive course in theory and applications of vector analysis with 
an introduction to vector spaces. Prerequisite: MATH 3834. D 
MATH 4653 MODERN ALGEBRA 
An introduction to group, ring, and field theory, with an emphasis on group 
theory; permutation groups, factor groups and homomorphism theorems. 
Supportive problem sets and applications. Prerequisite: MATH 3834. F 
MATH 4753 INTRODUCTION TO POINT SET 
TOPOLOGY 
Elements of set theory, the real number system, mappings, metric spaces, 
and general topological spaces. 

 
MATH 4853 ADVANCED CALCULUS 
A course in real analysis designed to strengthen and extend the theory 
behind the calculus sequence. Prerequisite: MATH 3834. S 
MATH 4873 COMPLEX VARIABLES 
Complex numbers and their algebra. Analytic functions. Cauchy-Riemann 
conditions, differential calculus of analytic functions. Prerequisite: 
MATH 3834. FE 
MATH 4933 TEACHING SECONDARY MATHEMATICS 
An analysis of subject matter and instructional processes in current 
secondary school mathematics. Teaching methods and techniques for the 
preparation of the professional teacher of mathematics. 
Math for Elementary Teachers 
The following courses are designed to prepare elementary and middle 
school teachers and CANNOT satisfy any mathematics requirement 
for programs other than Middle School Mathematics, Bachelors in 
Elementary Education, or Masters in Elementary Education. 
MATH 1433 STRUCTURAL CONCEPTS IN 
ARITHMETIC 
A fundamental course in arithmetic concepts and basic skills. For 
elementary teachers. F, S 
MATH 1443 STRUCTURAL CONCEPTS IN 
MATHEMATICS 
A study of the structures of number systems, informal geometry, 
probability and statistics. For elementary teachers. F, S 
MATH 1503 ALGEBRA FOR ELEMENTARY TEACHERS 
An introductory algebra course appropriate to the needs of the elementary 
teacher. Structure pattern, contemporary terminology, techniques and 
methods of solving algebraic equations, systems of equations, and 
inequalities. Graphing calculators. F, S 
MATH 2133 GEOMETRY FOR ELEMENTARY 
TEACHERS 
A beginning course in geometry for the elementary teacher. The 
development is an inductive and investigative approach with emphasis on 
language, models, constructions, and application. Hands-on-activities as 
well as computer activities. F, S 
DEPARTMENT OF MUSIC 
MUSIC 1013 INTRODUCTION TO MUSIC I 
Introduction to the history of music and musical styles. F, S, SU 
MUSIC 1103 MUSIC AND CULTURE 
Introduction to history of music and musical styles from cultures around 
the world. Designed as a course for music majors. F 
MUSIC 1112 FUNDAMENTALS OF MUSIC 
Basic course in music notation for students who cannot read music 
symbols. Open to all students and majors. S 
MUSIC 1123 HISTORY OF ROCK-N-ROLL 
A course on listening, with emphasis on the relationship between musical 
style and historical context, and the history and development of rock-n-roll. 
F, S 
MUSIC 1172 INTRODUCTION TO MUSIC THERAPY 
Surveying fundamental issues of music therapy, including its definitions, 
histories, theories, trainings, served populations, and professional trends. F 
MUSIC 1213 MUSIC THEORY I 
Beginning study of diatonic theory, including intervals, chords, written 
harmony, ear training, sight singing, keyboard harmony, and form. F 
MUSIC 1221 AURAL SKILLS I 
Beginning study of aural skills including intervals, ear training, sight 
singing, and harmonic and melodic dictation. F 
MUSIC 1223 MUSIC THERAPY I: MUSIC THERAPY IN 
REHABILITATION AND MEDICAL SETTINGS 
An orientation to the biomedical theories of music therapy and principles 
of therapeutic designs in various medical and rehabilitation settings. D 
MUSIC 1313 MUSIC THEORY II 
Continuation of MUSIC 1214 Elementary Theory. Emphasis on chords, 
inversions, secondary sevenths, and modulations. S 
MUSIC 1321 AURAL SKILLS II 
Continuation of MUSIC 1221 consisting of aural skills including intervals, 
ear training, sight singing, and harmonic and melodic dictation. Emphasis 
on singing chord members, secondary functions, and modulation. S 
MUSIC 1411 BRASS CLASS 
Class instruction in one brass instrument and survey of the brass family. 
May be repeated for a total of three hours’ credit. F, S 
MUSIC 1511 WOODWIND CLASS 
Class instruction in two woodwind instruments and survey of the 
woodwind family. May be repeated for a total of three hours’ credit. F, S 
MUSIC 1611 PERCUSSION CLASS 
Class instruction in one percussion instrument and survey of the percussion 
family. May be repeated for a total of three hours’ credit. F, S 
MUSIC 1711 STRING CLASS 
Class instruction in one orchestral stringed instrument and survey of the 
orchestral string family. May be repeated for a total of three hours credit. 
F, S 
MUSIC 1911 BEGINNING GUITAR CLASS 
Beginning class instruction on the classical guitar. F, S 
MUSIC 2081 FIELD STUDIES I 
Experiential learning of the skills in observation, assessment, treatment 
design, documentation, and presentation with the focus on music therapy 
in medical and physical rehabilitation settings. One to two hours of clinical 
experience and a one-hour seminar are required each week. D 
MUSIC 2101 VOICE CLASS 
Class instruction in voice. May not be repeated for additional credit. F, S 
MUSIC 2181 FIELD STUDIES II 
Experiential learning of skills in observation, assessment, treatment design, 
documentation, and presentation with the focus on music therapy in mental 
health. One to two hours of clinical experience and a one-hour seminar are 
required each week. D 
MUSIC 2222 RECREATIONAL MUSIC 
The use of various music experiences in the therapeutic and educational 
process, including experiences in piano, guitar, body movement, 
educational rhythmics, and directing group activities. D 
MUSIC 2681 VOCAL ENSEMBLE 
Experience in performing in small vocal ensembles. D 

 
MUSIC 2811 CLASS PIANO I 
Class instruction in piano for students with no previous keyboard 
experience. Emphasis on practical keyboard facility, sight reading, and 
harmonizing folk melodies and songs. F, S 
MUSIC 2821 CLASS PIANO II 
Class instruction in piano for students with beginning private piano 
instruction or those who have completed MUSIC 2811. F, S 
MUSIC 2831 CLASS PIANO III 
Class instruction in piano for moderately advanced beginners or those who 
have completed MUSIC 2821. F, S 
MUSIC 2841 CLASS PIANO IV 
Class instruction in piano for moderately advanced students placed in this 
class by audition. D 
MUSIC 2861 ACCOMPANYING 
Training and experience in keyboard accompaniments for solos and 
ensembles. F, S 
MUSIC 2901 PIANO ENSEMBLE AND ACCOMPANYING 
Performance and review of piano literature written for more than one 
player. Continues experiences begun in MUSIC 2861. D 
MUSIC 2911 INTERMEDIATE GUITAR 
Class instruction in classical guitar for students who have completed 
MUSIC 1911. D 
MUSIC 2951 MODERN LANGUAGE DICTION 
The study of Italian, German and French diction for singers. F 
MUSIC 2981 PRINCIPLES OF CONDUCTING 
Rudiments of conducting and elements of interpretation and score reading. 
(One-hour lab) F 
MUSIC 3081 FIELD STUDIES III 
Experiential learning of skills in observation, assessment, treatment design, 
documentation, and presentation with the focus on music therapy in special 
education. One to two hours of clinical experience and a one-hour seminar 
are required each week. D 
MUSIC 3101 INSTRUMENTAL CONDUCTING 
Continuation of MUSIC 2981 emphasizing conducting skills for 
instrumental ensembles. (One-hour lab) S 
MUSIC 3113 MUSIC THERAPY II: MUSIC THERAPY IN 
MENTAL HEALTH AND ILLNESS 
Music therapy theory, research, and clinical practice in psychiatry. D 
MUSIC 3123 MUSIC THERAPY IV: THE PSYCHOLOGY 
OF MUSIC 
Study of physiological, cognitive, and affective response to music, music 
preference and ability, acoustics, and research. D 
MUSIC 3151 CHORAL CONDUCTING 
Continuation of MUSIC 2981 emphasizing conducting skills for choral 
ensembles. (One-hour lab) S 
MUSIC 3171 INTRODUCTION TO MOVEMENT 
Develop knowledge and skills of movement via leading structural and 
creative/improvisatory experiences, communicating via movement, and 
both music and non-music goals for movement activities. 
MUSIC 3181 MUSIC THERAPY COMPETENCIES AND 
PROFESSIONAL ETHICS 
Discussion of music therapy professional competencies, standards of 
clinical practices (including topics of insurance reimbursement and 
job/internship searching), and ethics dilemmas that should be resolved in 
compliance with Code of Ethics by AMTA and CBMT. 
MUSIC 3202 MUSIC METHODS FOR ELEMENTARY 
TEACHERS 
Training in music for the non-musician teacher who will teach in a self-
contained elementary classroom or who will support the work of a general 
music specialist. Activities include singing, listening, rhythmic and 
creative activities, and experience in playing instruments used in the K-6 
classroom. F, S, SU 
MUSIC 3231 BAND INSTRUMENT REPAIR 
Practical course in instrument repair. D 
MUSIC 3253 MUSIC THEORY III 
The study of chromatic theory. Emphasis is given to altered chords, chords 
of the augmented sixth, enharmonic spellings, and various non-harmonic 
tones. 
MUSIC 3261 AURAL SKILLS III 
Continuation of MUSIC 1321 consisting of aural skills including intervals, 
ear training, sight singing, and harmonic and melodic dictation. Emphasis 
on chromaticism and modes. F 
MUSIC 3303 MUSIC THEORY IV 
Continuation of MUSIC 3253 with opportunity for creative experience in 
writing these styles. S 
MUSIC 3311 AURAL SKILLS IV 
Continuation of MUSIC 3261 consisting of aural skills including intervals, 
ear training, sight singing, and harmonic and melodic dictation. Emphasis 
on chromaticism and modes. S 
MUSIC 3331 JAZZ IMPROVISATION 
Application of the elements of basic harmony and theory to jazz 
improvisation. S 
MUSIC 3353 HISTORY OF MUSIC I 
Study of the historical eras from antiquity through the eighteenth-century 
A.D., with emphasis on analytical study of the musical forms and styles of 
these periods. F 
MUSIC 3403 HISTORY OF MUSIC II 
Continuation of MUSIC 3353 with emphasis on the eras from 1800 to 
1900. S 
MUSIC 3452 HISTORY OF OPERA 
History of the development of opera from 1600 to the present. D 
MUSIC 3553 HISTORY OF MUSIC III 
Continuation of MUSIC 3403 with emphasis on the eras from 1900 to the 
present. S 
MUSIC 3940 JUNIOR RECITAL 
Non-credit course required for all performance majors. Performance of 
traditional solo repertoire in a public concert. The junior recital must be 
taken concurrently with applied lessons. F, S, SU 

 
MUSIC 4001-4 INDIVIDUAL STUDY IN MUSIC 
Individual study in various areas of musical knowledge. By permission of 
chair only. D 
MUSIC 4011-4 SEMINAR IN MUSIC (TOPIC) 
Group study of specified topic in music for undergraduate students. Credit 
one to four semester hours. D 
MUSIC 4020 SENIOR RESEARCH PROJECT 
Non-credit course required for all students who seek registration in music 
therapy. D 
MUSIC 4021 WOODWIND ENSEMBLE 
Performance of chamber music for woodwind instruments. Two rehearsals 
each week. Enrollment by permission of the instructor. F, S 
MUSIC 4031 BRASS ENSEMBLE 
Performance of chamber music for brass instruments with emphasis on the 
brass choir. Two rehearsals each week. Enrollment by permission of the 
instructor. F, S 
MUSIC 4041 PERCUSSION ENSEMBLE 
Performance of music written for percussion ensemble with emphasis on 
“total” percussion. Two rehearsals each week. Enrollment by permission 
of the instructor. F, S 
MUSIC 4051 ORCHESTRA 
One full orchestra and two string rehearsals each week. Enrollment by 
permission of the instructor. F, S 
MUSIC 4061 SMALL INSTRUMENTAL ENSEMBLES 
Performance of chamber music for small instrumental ensembles. Two 
rehearsals each week. Enrollment by permission of the instructor. D 
MUSIC 4071 JAZZ ENSEMBLE 
Performance of the literature of jazz. Two or three rehearsals a week, 
depending on ensemble assignment. Enrollment by audition and 
permission of instructor. F, S, SU 
MUSIC 4081 BAND 
The performance of band literature in an ensemble situation. F, S, SU 
MUSIC 4102 FORMS AND ANALYSIS 
A course which provides the basic tools for the analysis of music from any 
period style. Emphasis of study is upon forms developed by common 
practice in western music from 1700 to the present. Prerequisite: MUSIC 
1314. D 
MUSIC 4112 ORFF AND KODALY TECHNIQUES IN 
ELEMENTARY 
A survey of method and materials developed by Carl Orff, Zoltan Kodaly, 
and their interpreters for the elementary general music classroom. 
Emphasis is on rhythmic activities and music literacy. D 
MUSIC 4122 BASIC ORFF I 
Beginning, detailed study of the music education system developed by Carl 
Orff. D 
MUSIC 4132 BASIC ORFF II 
Continuation of MJSIC 4122. D 
MUSIC 4141 SOUTHWESTERN SINGERS 
Choral ensemble performance for music majors and non-music majors. 
Non-music major students are placed in the ensemble at the discretion of 
the director through an audition. F, S 
MUSIC 4151 ORFF PRACTICUM 
Supervised application in an elementary classroom of the general music 
procedures studied in MUSIC 4122 and MUSIC 4132. D 
MUSIC 4182 RESEARCH AND STATISTICS 
Survey of Research in Music in APA style, emphasizing both quantitative 
as well as qualitative techniques, and elementary statistics. F 
MUSIC 4202 COMPOSITION 
Practical experience in musical composition in various forms and styles. 
Prerequisite: MUSIC 3303. D 
MUSIC 4213 MUSIC THERAPY III: MUSIC THERAPY IN 
SPECIAL EDUCATION 
Survey of common physiological and psychological characteristics of 
special education recipients, music therapy assessment and treatment that 
correspond with the Individual Education Plan (IEPs) or other care plans, 
as well as crucial legal considerations in the special education setting. S 
MUSIC 4222 INSTRUMENTAL PEDAGOGY 
Physical and psychological problems associated with teaching wind, 
percussion, and stringed instruments. FO 
MUSIC 4232 ARRANGING 
A practical course in the technique of arranging for instrumental and vocal 
groups. Prerequisite: MUSIC 3303. S 
MUSIC 4242-4 MUSIC THERAPY V-CLINICAL 
TRAINING 
A six-month supervised internship. Credit: two to four semester hours; may 
be repeated for not more than a total of eight semester hours. Prerequisite: 
Completion of all undergraduate course work. F, S, SU 
MUSIC 4251 OPERA WORKSHOP 
Practical experience in all phases of opera and musical theater production. 
F 
MUSIC 4302 ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY 
GENERAL MUSIC 
A course for music majors which emphasizes materials and methods for 
teaching elementary and secondary music in general education. A portion 
of the course is devoted to discussion of various philosophies of music 
education and standardized testing in music. FE, S 
MUSIC 4311 FIELD STUDIES IV 
Experiential learning of skills in observation, assessment, treatment design, 
documentation, and presentation with the focus on music therapy in special 
education. One to two hours of clinical experience and a one-hour seminar 
are required each week. S 
MUSIC 4352 PIANO PEDAGOGY 
Teaching methods and materials for all levels of piano instruction, from 
grade school through high school. Discussion of private and class 
techniques. FO 
MUSIC 4362 MUSIC HISTORY SURVEY 
A survey course of all stylistic eras of Western music from antiquity to the 
present. D 

 
MUSIC 4372 MUSIC THEORY PRACTICUM 
A review of the undergraduate music theory curriculum and an introduction 
of analytical techniques. D 
MUSIC 4402 BAND METHODS 
A study of techniques for teaching public school instrumental music. 
Emphasis is on methods and materials, marching band shows, and various 
problems of administration. FO 
MUSIC 4423 HALL MANAGEMENT & TECHNOLOGY 
An introduction to audio, lighting, video, and other aspects of running a 
show within a concert venue. Previous or concurrent enrollment in 
MUSIC 4463 Technology in Music. FE 
MUSIC 4452 VOCAL METHODS 
A study of music teaching techniques for junior and senior high school 
music programs, including large choral groups, small ensembles, the 
changing voice, vocal solos, the voice class, programming, and public 
relations. FE 
MUSIC 4463 TECHNOLOGY IN MUSIC 
This course will foster an understanding of the basics of several software 
applications, including MIDI sequencing software, MIDI accompaniment 
software, loop-based music creation software, digital audio editing 
software, music notation software and electronic music instrument 
overview. In addition, students will cover Word, Excel and the Apple 
equivalent. F, S 
MUSIC 4502 CHORAL LITERATURE 
A review of music written for choral ensembles. Emphasis is on 
compositions appropriate for use in public school music programs. SO 
MUSIC 4512 APPLIED INSTRUMENTAL PEDAGOGY 
Pedagogical techniques and physical and psychological problems 
associated with teaching specific wind, percussion, and string instruments 
in an applied setting. D 
MUSIC 4523 ARTS ENTREPRENEURSHIP 
Introduction to concepts in entrepreneurship applicable to the arts. 
Designed as a course for music, theater, and art majors. SO 
MUSIC 4552 PIANO LITERATURE 
A historical survey of the literature for the piano. SE 
MUSIC 4602 INSTRUMENTAL LITERATURE 
A review of music written for instrumental ensembles. Emphasis is on 
instructional material suitable for beginning, intermediate, and advanced 
students in the public schools. The class will review music for both private 
and group instruction. SE 
MUSIC 4732 CHURCH MUSIC 
A study of music as practiced by the various religious organizations in the 
U.S. which commonly employ professional musicians. Emphasis is on 
music literature and procedures used in formal worship. D 
MUSIC 4812 ADVANCED MUSIC ANALYSIS 
A course which provides the basic tools for the analysis of music from any 
style period. Emphasis of study is upon forms developed by common 
practice in western music from 1700 to the present. 
MUSIC 4900 RECITAL ATTENDANCE 
A non-credit course required each semester for music majors and minors. 
The course provides listening and performance opportunities in formal and 
informal concert settings. F, S 
MUSIC 4901 RECITAL ATTENDANCE 
Provides the same experience as MUSIC 4900 but carries one-hour credit. 
F, S 
MUSIC 4950 SENIOR RECITAL 
Non-credit course required for senior music education majors. The public 
or private performance of an approved concert in the principal applied 
music area. F, S, SU 
MUSIC 4951 SENIOR RECITAL 
Required of performance and composition majors in the Bachelor of Music 
degree program. Public performance of an approved concert in the 
principal applied music area. F, S, SU 
MUSIC INDIVIDUAL MUSIC LESSONS (APPLIED 
MUSIC) 
Individual lessons in piano, voice, organ, guitar, or any of the orchestral 
instruments. Students enrolled in one hour’s credit will receive twenty-five 
minutes of instruction each week. Students enrolled in two hour’s credit 
will receive fifty minutes of instruction each week. All enrollments by 
signature from the chair of the music department. Enrollment in individual 
lessons is by permission of the department. Non-majors may apply for 
individual lessons, but music majors, minors, and endorsement students in 
good standing hold a higher priority for teacher assignment. F, S, SU 
DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SCIENCES 
Criminal Justice 
CRMJS 1113 INTRO TO CRIMINAL JUSTICE 
An overview of the agencies and processes involved in the administration 
of justice to those accused and convicted of violating the criminal law. 
Agency problems and due process issues related to law enforcement, 
prosecution, adjudication, sentencing and confinement of offenders are 
discussed. F 
CRMJS 1223 INTRODUCTION TO LAW 
ENFORCEMENT 
A description and analysis of law enforcement history and current practice. 
The complex role of American police agents at all levels of government, 
models of police service, critical issues affecting law enforcement and 
practice, and the progress toward professionalism are emphasized. D 
CRMJS 2013 TOPICS IN CRIMINAL JUSTICE 
This is a course with a focus on critical issues and contemporary debates 
in crime and justice. F, S 
CRMJS 2503 CRIMINAL JUSTICE ADMINISTRATION 
A study of the organization and management of Criminal Justice agencies. 
D 
CRMJS 3163 SOCIOLOGY OF DEVIANT AND 
CRIMINAL BEHAVIOR 
A general study of causes, effects and the nature of deviant behavior; 
special attention is given to criminal behavior as a type of deviance. F 
CRMJS 3243 COMPARATIVE CRIMINAL JUSTICE 
SYSTEMS 
A trans-national study of criminal justice systems focusing on law 
enforcement, adjudication, and corrections for comparison with U.S. 
system. S 
CRMJS 3353 THE CRIMINAL MIND 
This course will explore the mind of those who commit criminal acts and 
attempt to understand their motives, backgrounds, and psyches. Additional 

 
topics discussed in the course will include the mind of the murderer, the 
stalker, the terrorist, the sex offender, the rapist, and the cyber stalker. D 
CRMJS 3523 CRIMINOLOGY 
The study of the etiology, classification, social control and theoretical 
analysis of criminal behavior. D 
CRMJS 3803 PRIVATIZATION OF CRIMINAL JUSTICE 
A study of the historical and contemporary involvement of citizens and 
business and industry (i.e., non-government) in law enforcement, 
investigation, security, surveillance, detention, corrections, and treatment. 
D 
CRMJS 4012 SEMINAR IN CRIMINAL JUSTICE 
Intensive study on selected topic in criminal justice. May be repeated with 
change of subject. D 
CRMJS 4013 SEMINAR IN CRIMINAL JUSTICE 
Intensive study on selected topic in Criminal Justice. D 
CRMJS 4103 JUVENILE JUSTICE 
The study of delinquency and agencies of delinquency control; juvenile 
courts, probation, institutions and community organizations. S 
CRMJS 4143 CRITICAL ISSUES IN CRIMINAL JUSTICE 
Analysis of selected critical issues facing the criminal justice system. D 
CRMJS 4153 U.S. CORRECTIONS 
A study of corrective social responses to adult criminal behavior; focuses 
largely on the process of institutionalization, along with alternative 
treatment strategies. F 
CRMJS 4333 VICTIMOLOGY 
A sociological analysis of victimization, the social response to 
victimization, and the victim movement. D 
CRMJS 4903 DIRECTED READINGS IN CRIMINAL 
JUSTICE 
Scope of project determined by instructor. May be repeated for a total of 
six hours. Permission required. 
CRMJS 4913 INTERNSHIP IN CRIMINAL JUSTICE 
Qualified students will be assigned to cooperating criminal justice agencies 
during appropriate academic periods to observe and to apply previous 
course work. Permission required. F, S, SU 
Economics 
ECONO 2263 INTRODUCTION TO MACROECONOMICS 
Study of the economy as a whole. Topics include national income 
accounting, the determination of the levels of income, output, employment, 
and price; money and banking; stabilization policies; international 
economics. F, S, SU 
ECONO 2363 INTRODUCTION TO MICROECONOMICS 
Fundamental microeconomic principles involving behavior of consumers, 
business firms, and resource owners as they relate to the allocation of 
resources; individual price and output determination. F, S, SU 
ECONO 2463 BUSINESS STATISTICS 
Study of the relationship of data collection, analysis, and decision-making; 
emphasis on data collection, tabular and graphical methods, numerical 
methods, probability, discrete and continuous probability distributions, 
sampling methods and distributions, interval estimation, hypothesis 
testing, statistical inference, and linear regression and analysis. F, S, SU 
ECONO 3863 MONEY AND BANKING 
The study of the role of money, financial markets, and monetary policy in 
the overall economy; monetary theory. ECONO 3123 ECONOMICS OF AGRICULTURE 
A study of economic principles with emphasis on their application to the 
solution of farm agribusiness and agricultural industry problems in relation 
to the role of agricultural sciences within the United States economy. 
ECONO 4003 INDEPENDENT STUDY IN ECONOMICS 
(TOPIC) 
Individual study of selected topics under the supervision of an economics 
faculty member. Permission required. D 
ECONO 4013 SEMINAR IN ECONOMICS (TOPIC) 
Group study of specified topics in economics. Permission required. D 
ECONO 4563 MANAGERIAL ECONOMICS 
An application of economic analysis and theory to the decision-making 
process which faces the manager. Topics covered include consumer and 
business firm behavior; demand theory; production; cost analysis; market 
structure; pricing. Prerequisite: ECONO 2363. D 
ECONO 4963 INTERNATIONAL ECONOMICS 
Fundamentals of trade theory and international finance. Survey of 
important current economic problems of an international nature. 

GEOG 1103 WORLD CULTURAL GEOGRAPHY 
Study of world’s cultural regions. Cultural development is surveyed for 
such topics as populations, technologic-economic systems, and socio-
cultural beliefs and practices. F, S 
History 
HIST 1003 EARLY WORLD HISTORY 
Introductory survey of the political, social, and cultural developments of 
the world’s major civilizations from the beginning of human civilization 
through 1500. 
HIST 1023 MODERN WORLD HISTORY 
Introductory survey of the political, social, and cultural developments of 
the world’s major civilizations from the Age of Exploration through the 
20th Century. 
HIST 1033 WORLD HISTORY 
An introduction to the history of world civilizations with an emphasis on 
the development of ideas, institutions, and religions as well as an 
examination of the impact particular individuals and movements have had 
in history. Students will also be introduced to the study of primary sources. 
F, S, SU 
HIST 1043 UNITED STATES HISTORY TO 1877 
This course is an introductory survey of American history from the nation’s 
origins as a fledgling group of British colonies until the end of the 
Reconstruction period after the Civil War. This course will cover a broad 
range of topics that affected the nation’s development, social trends, etc., 
that all contributed to the creation of the American nation. By the end of 
the course, students should have a basic understanding of their nation’s 
history and heritage. F, S, SU 

 
HIST 1053 UNITED STATES HISTORY SINCE 1877 
A survey of American history from the end of reconstruction to the present. 
F, S, SU 
HIST 2603 WRITING HISTORY 
The method and practice of writing history. F 
HIST 3003 WORLD WAR I 
An examination of the origins, course, and consequences of the Great War. 
D 
HIST 3043 EARLY MODERN EUROPE 
History of European states from the late medieval period to the outbreak of 
the French Revolution. D 
HIST 3063 HISTORY OF IRELAND 
A history of Ireland with an emphasis on the period since the 17th century. 
D 
HIST 3083 NATIONALISM AND ETHNICITY 
An examination of the theories of national and ethnic community, and the 
violent application of such theories in 19th and 20th century Europe. D 
HIST 3103 MEDIEVAL ENGLAND 
Intensive examination of English history from the Anglo-Saxon era 
through the reign of King John with an emphasis on the detailed study of 
chronicles, laws, and other primary sources. F 
HIST 3113 TUDOR ENGLAND 
A study of selected topics from the history of 16th century England. D 
HIST 3173 HISTORY OF IDEAS 
This course uses a seminar method to examine some of the influential texts 
and ideas of the modern age. Beginning with great humanist texts and 
working through writings of Marx, Freud, and others, students will use a 
Socratic method to examine primary sources. D 
HIST 3193 THE EUROPEAN UNION 
This course adopts a lively, interactive approach to study of the European 
Union, its institutions, member states, historical and legal background, and 
current issues. Students participate in debates, presentations, and a “Model 
EU”. D 
HIST 3203 HISTORY OF GERMANY: 9 A.D. – 1989 
The history of the German people and states from ancient tribal society, 
through the Holy Roman Empire, the reformation of Martin Luther, to 
modern nationalism, Hitler’s Reich, and the divided Germany of the Cold 
War. F 
HIST 3303 HISTORY OF IMPERIAL RUSSIA 
Social, political, economic, and cultural developments from Muscovy to 
Bolshevik Revolution of 1917; emphasizing principal Muscovite regimes, 
Russian expansion, revolutionary movements, and World War I. D 
HIST 3313 WORLD WAR II 
An examination of the origins, course, and consequences of the second 
World War. D 
HIST 3403 MODERN FRANCE 
Surveys developments of modern France from the collapse of the ancient 
regime through the French revolution, the Napoleonic empire, the rise of 
the bourgeoisie, the Third Republic, the First and Second World Wars, the 
Fifth Republic, and contemporary French society as part of the European 
economic community. D 
HIST 3503 EARLY CHRISTIAN THOUGHT 
A historical introduction to early Christian writings and the development 
of Christian doctrine during Christianity’s first centuries. D 
HIST 3603 20th CENTURY WORLD HISTORY 
A history of the 20th century and the early years of the new millennium. 
The emphasis will be on traditionally non-western nations and regions such 
as China, Japan, India, Russia, and Africa. The role of the United States 
and Europe in this period will also be examined. D 
HIST 4011-4 SEMINAR IN HISTORY 
Intensive study on selected topic in history. Credit from one to four hours. 
May be repeated with change of subject for total of 12 hours. D 
HIST 4023 COLONIAL AMERICA: 1492-1765 
A study of the European Colonies north of Mexico from earliest European 
exploration to the victory of the British in the Wars for North American 
Empire. D 
HIST 4033 REVOLUTIONARY AMERICA: 1765-1808 
Study of the revolutionary process in the British colonies and the 
Revolutionary War, the creation of the 1st American Republic under the 
Articles of Confederation and a 2nd under the Constitution, the revolution 
1800 and the stabilization of the republic in the presidency of Thomas 
Jefferson. D 
HIST 4043 NEW NATION AND AGE OF JACKSON: 1808-
1850 
America from the Age of Good Feeling through the Age of Jackson 
including the War of 1812, the second Great Awakening, the rise of social 
reform movements, the rise and decline of the second party system and 
developing tensions between nationalism and sectionalism. D 
HIST 4053 CIVIL WAR AND RECONSTRUCTION: 1850-
1877 
Causes of Civil War, forming of Southern Confederacy, major events of 
war, political, economic, and social problems associated with restoration 
of the union. S 
HIST 4063 GILDED AGE/PROGRESSIVE ERA 
Study of the transformation of America from rural society “isolated” from 
world affairs into highly industrialized power. Social change will be 
stressed. D 
HIST 4073 20th CENTURY AMERICA: 1915-1950 
The 1920’s, Depression and New Deal, WWII, Cold War, Korea, and 
McCarthyism. D 
HIST 4083 AMERICA SINCE 1970 
Study of Vietnam, Counterculture, Nixon, Watergate, “me generation”, 
and Ronald Reagan’s America through 9/11. D 
HIST 4093 HISTORICAL RESEARCH AND WRITING 
The process of historical research, including methods of locating materials, 
criticizing sources, analyzing and organizing notes, and writing results and 
presenting findings. Prerequisite: HIST 2603. S 
HIST 4103 AMERICAN INDIANS 
Emphasis is on Native American cultures and societies in the United States 
and federal Indian policy from 1830 to the present. F 
HIST 4123 AMERICA IN THE 1950s AND 1960s 
The study of the “liberal decade” including the administrations of 
Eisenhower, Kennedy, Johnson, Nixon, as well as King, Civil Rights, 
Vietnam, 1968, and the counterculture. D 

 
HIST 4133 WOMEN IN AMERICAN HISTORY 
The changing role of women in American society from colonial times to 
the present. Emphasis on cultural values and attitudes, the suffrage 
movement, feminism and antifeminism in the 20th century as well as the 
contemporary economic, legal, political, social, and intellectual issues 
facing women today. D 
HIST 4203 OLD SOUTH 
Study of antebellum South. Emphasis on role which South and Southerners 
played in national affairs and development of southern societal 
characteristics. S, D 
HIST 4213 NEW SOUTH 
Survey of postbellum South with emphasis on economic, political, and 
social forces which have changed culture of this region. D 
HIST 4313 AMERICAN WEST 
Study of the Trans-Mississippi West with emphasis on the impact of the 
frontier on American life, environmental issues, and the 20th Century West. 
D 
HIST 4353 HISTORY OF OKLAHOMA 
Oklahoma history from its beginning to present, including Indian 
background, formation into territories, achievement of statehood, and 
general cultural, economic, and political development. S, SU 
HIST 4503 AMERICAN DIPLOMATIC HISTORY 
This course covers the history of foreign relations of the United States from 
the colonial period to the present. This course takes a thematic view with 
emphasis on the Cold War and policy towards the Middle East. It 
emphasizes the complexities involved in making foreign policy by 
focusing on the major themes, personalities, and events that shaped the 
nation’s status as a world power. D 
HIST 4803 PUBLIC HISTORY INTERNSHIP 
Readings, essays, and an internship in a public history setting. Permission 
required. D 
HIST 4901-4 DIRECTED READINGS IN HISTORY 
(TOPIC) 
Scope of project determined by instructor. Credit from one to four hours. 
May be repeated for a total of six hours. Permission required. D 
Political Science 
POLSC 1103 AMERICAN GOVERNMENT AND 
POLITICS 
Survey of origin, structure, and functions of national government with 
emphasis on Constitution and the American political process. F, S, SU 
POLSC 2303 COMPARATIVE POLITICS 
Introduction to the systematic study of comparative government and 
politics. 
Analytical 
topics 
include 
political 
change, 
political 
communication, political culture, and political socialization. Prerequisite: 
POLSC 1103. F 
POLSC 2623 CRIMINAL LAW AND PROCEDURE 
An introduction to the elements of the criminal law and procedural rights 
of defendants. Prerequisite: POLSC 1103. F 
POLSC 2803 THE JUDICIAL PROCESS 
Introduction to the legal system with emphasis on organization and 
jurisdiction of federal and state courts, judicial process, and basic principles 
of American jurisprudence. Prerequisite: POLSC 1103. S 
POLSC 3003 FEDERAL CONSTITUTION  
Decisions through which the Supreme Court has developed judicial review 
and defined the scope of federal power. Prerequisite: POLSC 1103. F 
POLSC 3033 POLITICAL PARTIES 
Survey of the origin and development of the parties of the United States 
including an analysis of contemporary policies and issues. Prerequisite: 
POLSC 1103. S 
POLSC 3113 POLITICAL THEORY 
Examines classic and current views on the nature of authority, liberty, and 
justice. Prerequisite: POLSC 1103. F 
POLSC 3163 PRINCIPLES OF INTERNATIONAL 
RELATIONS 
Basic survey of international relations, including a consideration of the 
basis of national power and the fundamentals of international politics, law, 
and organization. Prerequisite: POLSC 1103. D 
POLSC 3323 LEGISLATIVE-EXECUTIVE RELATIONS 
The study of the organization and functioning of Congress and the 
Executive Branch. Prerequisite: POLSC 1103. F 
POLSC 3343 THE ROAD TO EQUALITY 
This course examines the political struggles of disenfranchised groups, 
primarily in the United States, focusing on race, gender, and class. Primary 
and secondary readings will concentrate on civil rights and the struggle for 
equal participation in employment, education, and other political and social 
institutions. Prerequisite: POLSC 1103. D 
POLSC 3353 MODEL UNITED NATIONS I 
Inform students about the United Nations system; consideration of the 
political, social, economic, and environmental issues, as well as 
disarmament and other issues within the international community. 
Participation in the Midwest Model United Nations is required. 
Prerequisite: POLSC 1103. FO 
POLSC 3363 PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION THEORY AND 
PRACTICE 
Introduction to principles and problems of public administration, 
organization, planning, supervision, budgeting, and administration 
responsibility. Prerequisite: POLSC 1103. D 
POLSC 3373 MODEL UNITED NATIONS II 
Along with Model United Nations I, explores the United Nations in action, 
represents different nations at the Midwest Model United Nations and hosts 
SWOSU Model United Nations. Prerequisite: POLSC 1103 and POLSC 
3353. SE 
POLSC 4013 SEMINAR IN POLITICAL SCIENCE 
(TOPIC) 
Intensive study on selected topic in Political Science. May be repeated with 
change of subject for a total of 12 hours. Prerequisite: POLSC 1103. D 
POLSC 4233 STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT 
An exploration of Oklahoma’s political journey to statehood, state-federal 
relations, and local and tribal relations. Prerequisite: POLSC 1103. D 
POLSC 4253 INTERNATIONAL LAW 
An analysis of international organizations, international courts, issues of 
sovereignty, diplomatic relations, treaties, human rights, economic 
policies, and when the use of force is justified. The course will review cases 
from the United States Supreme Court, the International Court of Justice 
and other courts throughout the world. Prerequisite: POLSC 1103. D 

 
POLSC 4303 INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS 
Development and operation of international organizations from League of 
Nations to present, with emphasis on UN but including regional and 
nongovernmental organizations. Prerequisite: POLSC 1103. D 
POLSC 4403 PUBLIC POLICY FORMATION 
A survey of the development and administration of public policy. 
Prerequisite: POLSC 1103. D 
POLSC 4613 CIVIL RIGHTS AND LIBERTIES 
Limitations placed on federal and state governments by the Constitution. 
Emphasizes First Amendment freedoms and the Fourteenth Amendment. 
Prerequisite: POLSC 1103. S 
POLSC 4903 DIRECTED READINGS IN POLITICAL 
SCIENCE (TOPIC) 
Scope of project determined by instructor. May be repeated for a total of 
six hours. Prerequisite: POLSC 1103. Permission required. D 
POLSC 4933 POLITICAL SCIENCE INTERNSHIP 
Qualified students will be assigned to cooperating government, legal, or 
other offices during appropriate academic periods to observe and to apply 
previous coursework. A final outcome assessment will be determined by 
the instructor. Prerequisite: POLSC 1103 in addition to 12 or more 
POLSC credits, 2000 level and above. D 
Social Sciences 
SOCSC 3853 STATISTICS FOR THE SOCIAL SCIENCES 
Introduction to statistical methods in the social sciences. Emphasis on 
analyzing and presenting data utilized by social scientists; survey of 
descriptive techniques. F, S 
SOCSC 3863 FUNDAMENTALS OF RESEARCH 
Use of scientific method in social science research. PREREQUISITE: 
SOCSC 3853. S 
SOCSC 4011-3 SEMINAR IN SOCIAL SCIENCES 
Intensive study on selected topic in social sciences. Credit from one to three 
hours. May be repeated with change of subject for total of 12 hours. D 
SOCSC 4133 TEACHERS COURSE IN THE SOCIAL 
SCIENCES 
Resources, methods and problems in teaching the social sciences in 
secondary schools. Required for certification in this field. F 
Sociology 
SOCIO 1003 INTRODUCTION TO SOCIOLOGY 
A general education course covering the fundamental concepts of 
sociology; foundations of group life; social change, processes, and 
problems. F, S, SU 
SOCIO 3043 RACIAL AND CULTURAL MINORITIES 
An interdisciplinary examination of the causes and consequences of 
prejudice and discrimination. D 
SOCIO 3163 SOCIOLOGY OF DEVIANT AND CRIMINAL 
BEHAVIOR 
A general study of the causes, effects and the nature of deviant behavior; 
special attention is given to criminal behavior as a type of deviance. F 
SOCIO 4013 SEMINAR IN SOCIOLOGY 
Intensive study on selected topic in Sociology. D 
SOCIO 4033 ADVANCED ANALYSIS OF SOCIAL 
PROBLEMS 
Contemporary U.S.A. and international social problems are examined 
through use of contemporary sociological theories. (The course is designed 
to give an in-depth understanding of a structural approach to a changing 
social milieu. D 
 

 
 
COLLEGE OF PHARMACY 
PHARM 3001 INTRODUCTION TO PHARMACY 
One hour lecture. Required in the first professional semester, orientates 
entering students for the College of Pharmacy and initiates concepts of 
professionalism and professional responsibility. Prerequisite: Admission 
to the College of Pharmacy 
PHARM 3010 PHARMACY SEMINAR I 
Zero hours lecture. Required in the second semester of the first professional 
year. Students will participate in professional program activities, which 
may include continuing professional development, interprofessional 
education, co-curricular activities, assessment, and portfolio development. 
Prerequisite: PHARM 3001. 
PHARM 3012 PHARMACY CALCULATIONS 
Two hours lecture. Calculations applicable to the practice of pharmacy 
including metric and common systems of measurement, dosages, specific 
gravity, expressions of concentration, pharmaceutical formulas, and 
determination of patient parameters. Prerequisite: Admission to the 
College of Pharmacy 
PHARM 3023 PHARMACEUTICS I 
Three hours lecture. A study of the applications of physical chemical and 
biopharmaceutical principles in pharmacy and pharmaceutical sciences, 
especially in designing various stable pharmaceutical dosage forms. 
Discussions involving pertinent mathematical concepts, development 
issues, processes, regulatory issues and compendial methods of evaluation 
of commonly administered dosage forms are included. Prerequisite: 
Admission to the College of Pharmacy. Concurrent enrollment: 
PHARM 3012 
PHARM 3123 PHARMACEUTICS II 
Three hours lecture. A continued study of pharmaceutical dosage forms 
with emphasis on novel and targeted drug delivery systems. Discussions 
focusing on transforming proteins, genes, and other biotechnology driven 
compounds into therapeutic products including the role of high throughput 
screening, molecular modeling, and new drug therapies in fabricating 
rational drug delivery systems are included. 
PHARM 3213 INTRODUCTORY PHARMACY PRACTICE 
EXPERIENCE – COMMUNITY 
Full-time, three-week practicum conducted in a community pharmacy; 
provides introductory experiences in contemporary pharmacy practice 
including: dispensing, prescription processing systems, management, and 
patient counseling. PHARM 3311 PHARMACEUTICAL CARE 
LABORATORY I 
Introduction to the prescription, dispensing processes, patient counseling, 
and pharmaceutical compounding. Prerequisite: Admission to the 
College of Pharmacy. Prerequisite or concurrent enrollment: PHARM 
3012, PHARM 3023, PHARM 3813. 
PHARM 3321 PHARMACEUTICAL CARE 
LABORATORY II 
Students develop the ability to fill prescriptions rapidly and accurately. 
Students are presented with numerous written and phoned prescriptions 
during each lab session, many of which contain intentional errors. Students 
develop methods to correct prescription errors through appropriate 
physician communications. Students practice computerized prescription 
filling and develop patient counseling skills. Students refine their skills in 
pharmaceutical compounding.
PHARM 3405 FUNDAMENTALS OF DRUG ACTION 
Five 
hours 
lecture. The 
topic 
areas include 
introduction to 
pharmacodynamics and receptor pharmacology, principles of medicinal 
chemistry, absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion and basics of 
biopharmaceutics, 
introduction 
to 
pharmacogenomics 
and 
pharmacogenetics, an introduction to toxicology of drugs and other 
chemicals and drug resistance. 
PHARM 3614 PHYSIOLOGY 
Four hours lecture. This course focuses on the structures of the human body 
and the integrative regulatory mechanisms through which these structures 
work together to sustain the normal functions of a living organism. Topics 
that will be covered during the course include the following: cellular and 
molecular physiology, as well as the nervous, cardiovascular, respiratory, 
kidney, digestive, and endocrine systems. Prerequisite: Admission to the 
College of Pharmacy. 
PHARM 3813 COMMUNITY PHARMACY I 
Three hours lecture. An introduction to various aspects of pharmacy 
practice in a retail or community setting. A discussion of prescription 
format and interpretation, drug standards and drug laws, communication 
skills and patient counseling, as well as important characteristics and 
counseling information for the most commonly dispensed prescription 
products will be included. Prerequisite: Admission to the College of 
Pharmacy. 
PHARM 3823 HEALTH AND BIOSTATISTICS 
Three hours lecture. A practical application of health-related statistical 
analysis providing students with the knowledge and skills needed to read, 
interpret, and evaluate quantitative findings in the pharmacy and medical 
literature. Prerequisite: PHARM 3012. 
PHARM 4010 PHARMACY SEMINAR II 
Zero hours lecture. Required in the first and second semesters of the second 
professional year. Students will participate in professional program 
activities, which may include continuing professional development, 
interprofessional education, co-curricular activities, assessment, and 
portfolio development. Prerequisite: PHARM 3010 and second 
professional year standing. 
PHARM 4142 HEALTH-SYSTEM PHARMACY 
Two hours lecture. An introduction to institutional pharmacy practice and 
products. Emphasis on preparation, administration and storage of 
parenteral or enteral products employing aseptic techniques. General 
principle of primary and secondary engineering control and sterilization 
methods are covered as they pertain to the maintenance of proper aseptic 
conditions. This is followed by importance of documentation, policies and 
procedures relevant to institution, home infusion and compounding 
practices. Prerequisite: PHARM 3123. Prerequisite or concurrent 
enrollment: PHARM 4331. 
PHARM 4223 INTRODUCTORY PHARMACY PRACTICE 
EXPERIENCE – INSTITUTIONAL 
Full-time, three-week practicum conducted in an institutional pharmacy; 
provides introductory experiences in contemporary institutional pharmacy 
practice including: dispensing; medication management systems; policies 
and procedures in institutional pharmacy. 
PHARM 4302 DRUG INFORMATION 
Two hours lecture. An overview of drug information sources, retrieval 
processes, and analysis. 

 
PHARM 4323 PHARMACOTHERAPY 1 
Three hours lecture. An introduction to the clinical role of the pharmacist 
with emphasis on patient interviewing and counseling technique, 
evaluating physical assessment and clinical laboratory data, and problem 
list development with SOAP note documentation. Prerequisite: PHARM 
4302, Blood pressure certification. Prerequisite or concurrent 
enrollment: PHARM 4341. 
PHARM 4331 PHARMACEUTICAL CARE 
LABORATORY III 
This course will provide students with hands on experience in preparing 
and dispensing parenteral and sterile products and admixtures using aseptic 
techniques. Emphasis will be given on proper garbing, use of laminar flow 
hood, handling and labeling of sterile products in institutional dispensing 
systems. Prerequisite: PHARM 3321. Prerequisite or concurrent 
enrollment: PHARM 4142. 
PHARM 4332 BASIC PHARMACOKINETICS 
Two hours lecture. An introduction to pharmacokinetic terminology, 
particular emphasis on understanding, mathematical and conceptual 
aspects of basic pharmacokinetics. General principles of pharmacokinetic 
models are presented as they pertain to the process of absorption, 
distribution and elimination of drugs in humans and the significance of 
these processes in drug therapy. Prerequisite: PHARM 3405. 
PHARM 4341 PHARMACEUTICAL CARE 
LABORATORY IV 
Development of pharmaceutical care plans; medication therapy 
management; drug information retrieval and application; patient 
interviewing and assessments; patient case studies. Prerequisite: 
PHARM 4302, PHARM 4331. Prerequisite or concurrent enrollment: 
PHARM 4323. 
PHARM 4512 MEDICINAL CHEMISTRY I 
Two hours lecture. A study of medicinal chemistry of drug classes 
involving discussion of important physiochemical parameters, their effects 
on biochemical including receptors and/or enzymes, pharmacological and 
pharmacokinetic processes. The study of structure activity relationship 
(SAR) of the drugs is an important component of the whole course. 
Prerequisite: PHARM 3405. Prerequisite or concurrent enrollment: 
PHARM 4612, PHARM 4634. 
PHARM 4522 MEDICINAL CHEMISTRY II 
Two hours lecture. A study of medicinal chemistry of drug classes 
involving discussion of important physiochemical parameters, their effects 
on biochemical including receptors and/or enzymes, pharmacological and 
pharmacokinetic processes. The study of structure activity relationship 
(SAR) of the drugs is an important component of the whole course. 
Prerequisite: PHARM 4512. Prerequisite or concurrent enrollment: 
PHARM 4622, PHARM 4644. 
PHARM 4612 PATHOPHYSIOLOGY I 
Two hours lecture. A study of the pathology, pathophysiology, and clinical 
manifestations of human disease states. Prerequisite: PHARM 3614. 
Prerequisite or concurrent enrollment: PHARM 4512, PHARM 4634, 
BIOL 4213.  
PHARM 4622 PATHOPHYSIOLOGY II 
Two hours lecture. A study of the pathology, pathophysiology, and clinical 
manifestations of human disease states. Prerequisite: PHARM 4612. 
Prerequisite or concurrent enrollment: PHARM 4522, PHARM 4644. 
PHARM 4634 PHARMACOLOGY I 
Four hours lecture. A study of the classification, mechanism of action, 
pharmacological 
effects, 
and 
therapeutic 
uses 
of 
medications. 
Prerequisite: PHARM 3405, PHARM 3614. Prerequisite or 
concurrent enrollment: PHARM 4512, PHARM 4612. 
PHARM 4644 PHARMACOLOGY II 
Four hours lecture. A study of the classification, mechanism of action, 
pharmacological 
effects, 
and 
therapeutic 
uses 
of 
medications. 
Prerequisite: PHARM 4634. Prerequisite or concurrent enrollment: 
PHARM 4522, PHARM 4622. 
PHARM 4712 HEALTH ISSUES I 
Two hours lecture. The Health Issues courses are intended to promote 
awareness of emerging topics and concepts in pharmacy, medicine, and 
public health. This course will focus on public health policy and the social 
and behavioral aspects of pharmacy and medicine. Prerequisite: PHARM 
4302. 
PHARM 5010 PHARMACY SEMINAR III 
Zero hours lecture. Required in the first and second semesters of the third 
professional year. Students will participate in professional program 
activities, which may include continuing professional development, 
interprofessional education, co-curricular activities, assessment, and 
portfolio development. Prerequisite: PHARM 4010 and third 
professional year standing. 
PHARM 5054 COMMUNITY PHARMACY II 
Four hours lecture. This course provides an in-depth examination of 
medical conditions for which nonprescription products are safe and 
effective. Emphasis is placed on the role of the pharmacist in pharmacist-
assisted self-care, including referral to another practitioner when 
necessary. Active learning strategies are used to develop medication 
therapy management (MTM) skills. 
Prerequisite or concurrent enrollment: PHARM 5204, PHARM 5351. 
PHARM 5204 PHARMACOTHERAPY II 
Four hours lecture. Predominately lecture-based course which lays the 
foundation for the principles and application of evidence-based medicine, 
with an emphasis placed on therapy selection rational, medication and 
disease monitoring, and drug interactions for common acute and chronic 
diseases seen in the inpatient and ambulatory care setting. 
PHARM 5234 PHARMACOTHERAPY III 
Four hours lecture. Predominately lecture-based course which builds upon 
the basic sciences and clinical based prerequisites. This course further 
develops knowledge of the principles and application of evidence-based 
medicine, with an emphasis placed on therapy selection rational, 
medication and disease monitoring, and drug interactions for additional 
common acute and chronic diseases seen in the inpatient and ambulatory 
care setting. 
PHARM 5301 CLINICAL PHARMACOKINETICS 
One hour lecture. The absorption, distribution metabolism and elimination 
of common medicinal agents will be reviewed. Mathematical modeling 
will be used to predict the pharmacokinetic behavior of selected medicinal 
agents in a variety of patient populations. 
PHARM 5204, PHARM 5351. 
PHARM 5351 PHARMACEUTICAL CARE 
LABORATORY V 
Interactive, advanced patient care course focused on the collection and 
interpretation of patient specific data, the identification of pharmaceutical 
care related problems and therapeutic recommendations based on case 
scenarios. Introductory topics related to patient care not covered elsewhere 
will be introduced at the beginning of the course. 

 
PHARM 5361 PHARMACEUTICAL CARE 
LABORATORY VI 
Capstone course with increased independent learning via patient case 
studies focused on the development and implementation of pharmaceutical 
care plans with emphasis on therapeutic recommendations, monitoring, 
and adjustments in patients with multiple concomitant diseases. This 
course is also designed to improve upon professional skills such as 
problem-solving, presentation skills, writing skills, and drug information 
skills. Prerequisite: PHARM 5204, PHARM 5351, PHARM 5301. 
Prerequisite or concurrent enrollment: PHARM 5234. 
PHARM 5753 TOXICOLOGY 
Three hours lecture. An introduction to the general principles of toxicology 
focusing on organ systems response to toxic chemicals; classes of toxic 
compounds including drugs, industrial chemicals, heavy metals, pesticides, 
food additives, natural toxins and venoms, and environmental pollutants; 
and clinical assessment and treatment of poisoning and toxicant exposure. 
PHARM 5812 HEALTH ISSUES II 
Two hours lecture. A continuation of the Health Issues series, intended to 
promote awareness of emerging topics and concepts in pharmacy, 
medicine, and public health. This course will review the basic concepts of 
pharmacognosy and focus on current topics in the areas of alternative and 
complementary medicine, nutrition, disease prevention, and wellness. 
Prerequisite: PHARM 4712. 
PHARM 5822 HEALTH ISSUES III 
Two hours lecture. The Health Issues courses are intended to promote 
awareness of emerging topics and concepts in pharmacy, medicine, and 
public health. This course will focus on principles of pharmacogenomics 
and contemporary issues in personalized medicine including drug efficacy 
and medication safety. Prerequisite: PHARM 5812. 
PHARM 5823 PHARMACY ADMINISTRATION  
Three hours lecture. An introduction to basic management and 
administrative processes essential for pharmacy operations. The role of 
managed care in the delivery of health care at the local and national level 
is developed. The interface of pharmaceutical care delivery and managed 
care policy is examined. Prerequisite or concurrent enrollment: 
PHARM 5361. 
PHARM 5844 JURISPRUDENCE 
Four hours lecture. A survey of federal and state laws and regulations 
which pertain to the practice of pharmacy. Prerequisite or concurrent 
enrollment: PHARM 5234. 
PHARM 5853 PHARMACY MANAGEMENT & 
MARKETING 
Three hours lecture. A study of the basic principles of management with 
an emphasis on financial accounting, operations analysis, and human 
resources. The use of basic marketing principles for product acquisition 
and promotion of pharmaceutical care services is developed. Prerequisite: 
First professional year standing. 
PHARM 5914 and 5924 ADVANCED PHARMACY 
PRACTICE EXPERIENCE - COMMUNITY A & B 
Each is a full-time monthly practicum conducted in an independent and/or 
chain community pharmacy. Instruction and supervised pharmacy practice 
training is provided by an instructor in off-campus affiliated teaching 
community pharmacies. The advanced student applies the knowledge and 
skills from previous coursework and training to demonstrate 
pharmaceutical care in ambulatory patients. 
PHARM 5934 ADVANCED PHARMACY PRACTICE 
EXPERIENCE - INSTITUTIONAL  
A full-time monthly practicum conducted in an institutional setting. The 
advanced student utilizes their previous coursework and training to 
demonstrate the application of pharmaceutical care. Drug policy 
management, distribution systems and administrative activities are also 
covered. 
PRACTICE EXPERIENCE - SELECTIVE A & B 
Each is a full-time monthly practicum conducted at a pharmacy practice 
site. Instruction and supervised pharmacy practice training is provided by 
an instructor at a pharmacy practice site. The advanced student selects from 
a variety of optional pharmacy practice experiences including medicine 
and/or home health care, consulting practice, nuclear pharmacy, Indian 
health services, specialty compounding pharmacies, managed care, 
administrative rotations, additional community or institutional rotations. 
Prerequisite: Fourth professional year standing.  
PHARM 5954, 5964 and 5974 ADVANCED PHARMACY 
PRACTICE EXPERIENCE - MEDICINE SELECTIVE A, 
MEDICINE SELECTIVE B, & GENERAL MEDICINE 
Each is a full-time monthly practicum with supervised instruction in a 
patient care setting, including ambulatory care. The advanced student must 
demonstrate the application of pharmaceutical care to patients throughout 
the rotation experience. This is accomplished by Socratic faculty teaching 
utilizing low student to faculty ratios and intense problem solving 
activities. PHARM 5994 ADVANCED PHARMACY PRACTICE 
EXPERIENCE - AMBULATORY CARE 
A full-time monthly practicum with supervised instruction in an 
ambulatory care setting. The advanced student must demonstrate the 
application of pharmaceutical care to patients throughout the rotation 
experience. This is accomplished by Socratic faculty teaching utilizing low 
student to faculty ratios and intense problem solving activities. 
Prerequisite: Fourth professional year standing.
PROFESSIONAL ELECTIVES 
PHARM 4101-2 PHARMACEUTICAL RESEARCH 
One-two hours credit. Under guidance and supervision by a College of 
Pharmacy faculty member, pharmacy students will participate in original 
research projects in the pharmaceutical sciences or in the area of 
pharmacotherapeutics. 
PHARM 4602 SUBSTANCES OF ABUSE & ADDICTION 
A study of misused or abused substances, including addiction theories and 
mechanisms of addictive behaviors, the action and consequences of 
substance abuse, and the methods used by society and the medical 
establishment to treat addictive behaviors. Open to pharmacy, upper 
division, and graduate non-pharmacy students.  
PHARM 4702 CULTURAL COMPETENCY FOR 
PATIENT-CENTERED CARE 
Two hour lecture. An elective course that examines historical and 
sociological ideas related to the development of cultural competence. A 
culturally competent healthcare provider, who fully understands the 
patient’s values, preferences, and beliefs about health and wellness, is 
essential to providing patient-centered care. Culturally competent 
healthcare providers are self-aware, respectful of others, lifelong learners 
and provide high quality care to all. Prerequisite: Second professional 
year standing or permission of the instructor.  

 
PHARM 4732 PHARMACY CASE STUDIES 
Two-hour lecture. Using an active-learning approach, pharmacy students 
will evaluate patient information in both community and health-system 
pharmacy scenarios, identify clinically significant problems, and consult 
appropriate guidelines from the medical literature to determine solutions to 
patient problems. The course serves as an introduction to case study 
analysis for students transitioning to pharmacotherapy course work, but 
also provides advanced students additional opportunities to apply 
knowledge and to practice case study skills. 
PHARM 4811-2 SPECIAL PROBLEMS IN PHARMACY 
ADMINISTRATION 
One-two hour’s credit. Seminar/discussion/special projects format of 
current topics and research in pharmacy administration. Prerequisite: 
First professional year standing. 
PHARM 4842 LEGAL ISSUES IMPACTING 
PHARMACISTS 
Two-hour lecture. An elective course that addresses and prepares 
pharmacy students for many of the challenges facing future leadership and 
management in the profession. Students will be involved in case 
discussions, mock events, and a review of laws involving pharmacy 
employers/employees, business and personal life. Prerequisite: Second 
professional year standing or permission of the instructor. 
PHARM 4852 ISSUES IN BUYING AND SELLING A 
PHARMACY 
Two-hour lecture. An elective course that addresses issues when buying 
and/or selling a pharmacy and prepares the pharmacy student for many of 
the challenges expected when involved in such a transaction. Students will 
be exposed to all aspects of such transactions including asset transfer, 
contract review, financing, and development of the business plan. 
Prerequisite: Second professional year standing or permission of the 
instructor.  
PHARM 4862 INTRODUCTION TO INFECTIOUS 
DISEASES 
Two hours lecture. Interactive elective course that introduces the pharmacy 
student to basic principles of infectious disease pharmacotherapy. A strong 
emphasis will be given to the mechanism of action, spectrum of activity, 
pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, adverse effects, and drug 
interactions associated with various antimicrobial drug classes. This course 
is designed to develop the skills necessary to formulate appropriate 
antimicrobial regimens to treat common infectious diseases. 
PHARM 5172 CURRENT CONCEPTS IN 
PHARMACEUTICS 
An elective course dealing with current topics in pharmaceutics. 
Prerequisite: PHARM 3123 or consent of instructor.  
PHARM 5312 POST GRADUATE PREPARATION 
Two-hour lecture/online. An elective course focused on professional 
preparation for students interested in pursuing residency or other post-
graduate opportunities. Focus on development of curriculum vitae, letters 
of intent, personal statements, and presentation and interviewing skills. 
Development of other pertinent professional attitudes will be covered. 
Involvement in pharmacy organizations, volunteerism, and student 
scholarship will also be discussed and encouraged. There is a service 
learning requirement as well as encouraged attendance of two state or 
national pharmacy organizational meetings during the semester. 
Prerequisite: Third professional year standing and instructor 
approval. 
PHARM 5342 CURRENT CONCEPTS IN PHARMACY 
PRACTICE 
An elective course dealing with current topics in pharmacy practice. 
Prerequisite: PHARM 4323 or consent of instructor.  
PHARM 5422 CURRENT CONCEPTS IN MEDICINAL 
CHEMISTRY 
Two-hour lecture. An elective course dealing with new processes and 
techniques in medicinal chemistry and drug discovery. After giving a brief 
introduction about different processes in drug discovery, some important 
drug discovery cases will be studied. Prerequisite: PHARM 3405, 
PHARM 4512 or permission of instructor. 
PHARM 5712 VETERINARY PHARMACOLOGY 
Two-hour lecture. An elective course dealing with the overview of drugs 
and/or drug use that is unique to veterinary practice as well as discussion 
of the pathophysiology and pharmacology of veterinary diseases. 
Prerequisite or concurrent enrollment: PHARM 4644 or consent of 
instructor. 
PHARM 5772 CURRENT CONCEPTS IN 
PHARMACOLOGY 
An elective course dealing with current topics in pharmacology. 
Prerequisite: PHARM 4634 or permission of the instructor. 
PHARM 5802 CURRENT TOPICS IN PHARMACY 
ADMINISTRATION 
Two-hour lecture. The exploration of current administrative principles 
which affect the practice of retail, home health and institutional pharmacy 
with the objective of orienting the student to the latest developments in 
areas of risk management, business enhancement and management theory. 
Prerequisite: Second professional year standing or permission of the 
instructor. 
PHARM 5902 FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT FOR THE 
PHARMACIST 
Two-hour lecture. A study of financial planning, investment analysis, tax 
analysis, budgeting, and other aspects of personal and business finances. 

ALTERNATIVE PROFESSIONAL ELECTIVES 
SPAN 3023 SPANISH FOR HEALTHCARE 
PROFESSIONALS 
Course designed to develop language skills with a focus on listening and 
speaking to provide vocabulary and conversational practice in realistic 
healthcare, pharmacy and/or emergency situations with emphasis on real-
life vocabulary. Spanish-language media and public-service opportunities; 
planned and spontaneous activities augment course text. F, S 
 

 
PROFESSIONAL ELECTIVES 
PharmD/MBA Dual Program Students Only 
Successful completion of any two of the following ten business courses will meet the professional elective requirements for the doctor of pharmacy program. 
ACCTG 5633 FINANCIAL ACCTG FOR DECISION 
MAKING 
ECONO 5653 ADVANCED MANAGERIAL ECONOMICS 
ECONO 5763 ADVANCED BUSINESS STATISTICS 
FINAN 5263 ADVANCED FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
MNGMT 5xx3 MANAGEMENT ELECTIVE 
MNGMT 5433 ADV HUMAN RESOURCE 
MANAGEMENT 
MNGMT 5533 MNGMT & ORGANIZATIONAL 
BEHAVIOR 
MNGMT 5643 ADV QUANT METHODS & OPER 
ANALYSIS 
MNGMT 5923 BUSINESS STRATEGY & POLICY 
MRKTG 5623 MARKETING STRATEGY 
LEADERSHIP DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM ELECTIVE COURSES 
PHARM 5432 LEADING TRANSFORMATIONAL 
CHANGE IN PHARMACY  
Two-hour lecture. This course develops participant’s knowledge and 
expertise in leading transformational change. Some change happens 
incrementally, while others are disruptive requiring transformation to 
achieve positive outcomes. The transformational change model is a 
systems approach that addresses human behavior, social systems, and 
organizational structures. Leaders of transformational change must 
develop skills in the development of resilience, creation of a compelling 
vision, collaboration, and development of a learning culture. Prerequisite: 
Second professional year standing. 
PHARM 5443 LEADING IMPACTFUL INNOVATION IN 
PHARMACY 
Three-hour lecture/group work. Innovation is a creative process that allows 
individuals within an organization the freedom to think beyond the current 
boundaries of practice. Leading Impactful Innovation is designed to 
develop scholar practitioners that have knowledge of the principles of 
innovation and an understanding of the way that leaders influence the 
development of a culture open to the risks necessary for impactful 
innovation. Emphasis is placed on application using systems theory and an 
evidence-based approach to innovation in the field of pharmacy. 
Prerequisite: PHARM 5432, Instructor approval. 
PHARM 5454 QUALITY OUTCOME EVALUATION IN 
PHARMACY 
Four-hour lecture/group work. This course produces scholar practitioners 
that understand the challenges associated with leading a pharmacy/health 
care organization to overcome the quality gap. Students review quality 
from the organizational and patient/customer perspective focusing on 
improvement of process, procedure, and structure to address quality as 
reliability and excellence. Students connect the process of continuous 
quality improvement within the organization to the need to address 
outcome measures. Prerequisite: PHARM 5443, Instructor approval. 

 
 
COLLEGE OF PROFESSIONAL AND GRADUATE STUDIES 
(F = Classes offered in the Fall, S = Classes offered in the Spring, SU = Classes offered in the Summer, 
D = Classes offered upon Demand, O = Odd years, E = Even years) 
SCHOOL OF BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES AND EDUCATION 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Early Childhood 
ECED 4163 PERCEPTUAL DEVELOPMENT IN INFANTS 
AND TODDLERS 
Study of hereditary and environmental determinants of perceptual 
development of infants and toddlers and their effects on the learning 
process of children with and without disabilities. S 
ECED 4423 PLAY METHODS AND MATERIALS IN 
PRESCHOOL AND KINDERGARTEN 
A survey of the use of play as a learning and socializing process. Special 
emphasis will be given to topics such as theories, types, stages of play, and 
play materials and equipment in relationship to various play environments 
and therapies. F 
ECED 4463 THE EXPRESSIVE ARTS 
Development of concepts and methods in art, music and literature 
appropriate for early childhood education. F 
ECED 4483 EXPLORING THE CHILD'S WORLD 
Development of concepts and methods in math, science and social studies 
appropriate for early childhood education. S 
ECED 4533 GUIDANCE OF THE PRESCHOOL CHILD 
An introduction to developmentally appropriate practice in the guidance of 
young children; emphasis on developmental needs, behavior of preschool 
children, methods and principles of guidance. Two hours laboratory 
participation per week. S 
ECED 4583 EARLY CHILDHOOD AND KINDERGARTEN 
EDUCATION 
A survey of current practices, programs, and innovations in early childhood 
education. Emphasis is placed upon the young child's cognitive, social, 
emotional, and physical development. Prerequisite: Admission to 
Teacher Education Program and PSYCH 3413. F, SU 
ECED 4612 PRACTICUM IN EARLY CHILDHOOD 
EDUCATION 
Observation experiences; planning and conducting the early childhood 
education program under instructor's supervision. (Four hours per week 
laboratory participation; one hour conference.) Corequisite: ECED 
4612L. 
Educational Foundations 
EDUC 2113 FOUNDATIONS OF EDUCATION 
Introduction to the historical, philosophical, and social foundations of 
education and their relationships to teaching as a profession. Current issues 
in education are also introduced and discussed. Laboratory experiences as 
an observer/aid in the public schools and procedures for admission to 
teacher education are included. F, S, SU 
EDUC 3321 MULTICULTURAL/SPECIAL POPULATION 
Study of multicultural education and how teachers work with students of 
different backgrounds and cultures. Also, will study concepts of inclusion, 
mainstreaming, and least restrictive environment, for students who have 
been identified as handicapped. Prerequisite: Admission to Teacher 
Education Program, the Pre-professional semester, and concurrent 
enrollment in Student Teaching and the Four Week Block sequence of 
EDUC 3321, EDUC 4021, and EDUC 4041. F, S 
EDUC 4021 CONTEMPORARY ISSUES IN EDUCATION 
A four-week block course required of all students seeking a degree or 
certification in Teacher Education. The class provides candidates with 
essential knowledge, skills, and resources needed during the student 
teaching block experience. The class also includes two days of observation 
in the assigned cooperating classroom and one field trip to diversely 
populated school sites.
EDUC 4041 CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT 
Students learn to effectively manage attention, momentum, discipline, 
space, time, and routines in the classroom in order to facilitate optimal 
student learning. Students learn to understand and apply principles of 
motivation to enhance student achievement through knowledge of the role 
of expectations, climate, and personal relationship building. Students 
develop a personal management system tailored to their individual 
philosophies and personalities as well as to the needs and traits of students 
and the social realities of schools and communities.
Educational Psychology 
EDPSY 3413 CHILD PSYCHOLOGY 
Study of the phases of growth and development from conception through 
childhood. Emphasis is placed on cognitive and personality changes as they 
relate to educational environments. Prerequisite: PSYCH 1003. F, S, SU 
EDPSY 3433 ADOLESCENT PSYCHOLOGY 
A realistic examination of the categories of behavior, developmental 
growth stages, family relationships, and social influences from late 
childhood through early adulthood as they apply to the school and 
classroom environments. Major emphasis is also directed to competency 
mastery of the Competencies for Licensure and Certification and to the 
objectives for the Professional Teaching Examination presented by the 
Oklahoma Commission for Teacher Preparation. 
EDPSY 3653 EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY 
A study of the theoretical foundational concepts and practical applications 
of developmental factors, learning capability, principles and techniques, 
and teacher roles and responsibilities are presented as they apply to the 
secondary classroom. Major emphasis is also directed to competency 
mastery of the Competencies for Licensure and Certification and to the 
objectives for the Professional Teaching Examination as presented by the 
Oklahoma Commission for Teacher Preparation. Prerequisite: PSYCH 
1003. F, S, SU 
Elementary Education 
ELEM 3453 LANGUAGE ARTS IN THE ELEMENTARY 
SCHOOL 
A course considering the scope and nature of an exemplary program of 
instruction in the language arts. F, S, SU 
ELEM 3513 CONTENT, METHODS AND MATERIALS IN 
MATHEMATICS FOR ELEMENTARY TEACHERS 
Study of the scope of mathematics in the elementary school with emphasis 
on developmental learning, methods and materials for teaching. F, S, SU 

 
ELEM 3522 CONTENT, METHODS AND MATERIALS IN 
SOCIAL STUDIES FOR ELEMENTARY TEACHERS 
Emphasis is placed upon organization of a unified and correlated social 
studies program and the development of resource units. F, S, SU 
ELEM 4222 PHONICS AND PENMANSHIP 
A study of the phonetic elements in the English language, in addition to 
instruction in cursive and manuscript writing. F, S, SU 
ELEM 4352 TEACHING SCIENCE IN ELEMENTARY 
SCHOOLS 
A course that emphasizes the inquiry-discovery approach to the teaching 
of elementary science. Course content includes: the structure and processes 
of science; thinking skills; intellectual development of children; organizing 
science activities and curricula; and teacher responsibilities. 
ELEM 4463 CHILDREN'S LITERATURE 
Survey of appropriate children's literature and a study of interests and 
abilities governing the choice of literature for K-8 grades. Prerequisite: 
RDNG 3423. F, S, SU 
ELEM 4613 EDUCATIONAL TESTS & MEASUREMENTS 
Study of assessment procedures to improve the teaching-learning process 
through the utilization of norm-referenced and criterion-referenced 
measures. Students construct, administer, score, and/or interpret tests. F, S, 
SU 
ELEM 4665-4765 STUDENT TEACHING IN THE 
ELEMENTARY SCHOOL 
Directed observation, participation, and student teaching under the 
guidance of an assigned elementary classroom teacher.
ELEM 4833 PRINCIPLES OF TEACHING IN THE 
ELEMENTARY SCHOOL 
An in-depth study of the elementary school and its roles/purposes in 
American society with major emphasis toward subject integration, content 
delivery techniques and overall responsibilities of elementary teachers. F, 
S, SU 
Library Media 
LIBED 3423 MEDIA AND TECHNOLOGY 
A study of the use of computers and other media equipment in an 
instructional setting. The main vehicle of instruction will be modular and 
include the procedures to produce instructional materials using Microsoft 
Office Application Programs. Integration of the Internet with Microsoft 
Office is an integral part of the instruction. F, S, SU 
Reading 
RDNG 0122 IMPROVEMENT OF READING 
Designed for self-improvement in basic reading skills. Designated 
materials are utilized for correction of reading skill deficiencies, 
vocabulary development and phonetic analysis. F, S 
RDNG 3423 THE TEACHING OF READING I 
Basic principles of reading instruction; techniques and materials for 
teaching reading; a study of readiness, word recognition skills, 
comprehension, critical reading, study skills, and vocabulary development. 
F, S, SU 
RDNG 3432 THE TEACHING OF READING II 
A continuation of RDNG 3423, with emphasis on word recognition, 
vocabulary, and comprehension. Prerequisite: RDNG 3423. F, S, SU 
RDNG 4443 DIAGNOSTIC PRACTICES IN TEACHING 
OF READING 
Practice course with actual reading disability cases with whom the 
techniques of diagnosis and treatment of reading difficulties are used. 

SECED 4813 EDUCATIONAL TESTS/MEASUREMENTS 
Use of test instruments in evaluation of the secondary student. Students 
select and interpret norm-referenced tests; construct and interpret criterion-
referenced tests. F, S, SU 
SECED 4823 PRINCIPLES OF TEACHING IN THE 
SECONDARY SCHOOLS 
An in-depth study of the secondary school and its roles/purposes in 
American society with major emphasis toward subject integration, content 
delivery techniques, and overall responsibilities of secondary teachers. F, 
S, SU 
SECED 4843 TEACHER’S COURSE IN SCIENCE 
Methods, problems, and resources in teaching science in the secondary 
school. Problems and topics in the middle school and high school are 
presented. Required for teacher certification in science areas. 
Prerequisite: Admission to Teacher Education Program. FO 
SECED 4865-4965 STUDENT TEACHING IN THE 
SECONDARY SCHOOL 
Directed observation, participation, and student teaching in the major 
content area under the guidance of an assigned secondary classroom 
teacher.  
SPCED 3132 EXCEPTIONAL CHILDREN 
An overview of the development of special education, with a major focus 
on the intellectual, psycho-social behavior, educational need and programs 
for exceptional children and adolescents. F, S, SU 
SPCED 3213 FOUNDATIONS OF MILD/MODERATE 
DISABILITIES 
A comprehensive overview of characteristics, identification, and 
placement of students with mild and moderate disabilities. The course 
offers a study of causative-correlation factors and the effect they have on 
students throughout the various developmental stages. The course involves 
various educational trends and issues facing students, parents, and teachers 
that fall under this category. S, SU 
SPCED 3312 PROCEDURES FOR TEACHING 
MILD/MODERATE INTELLECTUAL DISABILITIES 
The course offers a study and development of teaching techniques, 
scientific-based instructional strategies and curriculum models for teaching 
preschool to adult students with mild/moderate intellectual disabilities. 
Note: Requirement of 16 hours of supervised field experience. 
Prerequisite: SPCED 3213. S 
SPCED 3432 ASSESSMENT, DIAGNOSIS/EVALUATION 
OF EXCEPTIONAL CHILD 
Study of formal and informal assessment procedures appropriate for the 
evaluation of students of all ages with exceptional learning needs. Students 
construct, administer, score and/or interpret norm-referenced tests and 
informal assessment procedures. Response to intervention and alternative 
testing criteria is emphasized. F 
SPCED 3433 ASSESSMENT OF EXCEPTIONAL 
INDIVIDUALS 
Study of formal and informal assessment procedures appropriate for the 
evaluation of all ages with special learning needs. Students construct, 
administer, score and/or interpret norm-referenced tests, and informal 
assessment procedures. Prerequisite: Admission to Teacher Education 
Program. F, SU 

 
SPCED 4323 PROCEDURES FOR TEACHING 
MILD/MODERATE EMOTIONAL/BEHAVIORAL 
DISORDERS 
Scientifically and research-based strategies to prevent, alter, improve, and 
maintain social, emotional, and academic behaviors of students with 
exceptional learning needs in a variety of classroom settings. Curriculum 
covers Manifestation Determinations, Functional Behavior Assessments, 
Behavior Intervention Plans, and IEP goals for students in a variety of 
classroom settings. Note: This course includes a requirement of 16 hours 
of supervised field experience. SU 
SPCED 4362 SEMINAR IN LEGAL & ETHICAL 
PRACTICES 
Study of Special Education law as it affects teachers and professionals in 
the public school. Special emphasis is placed on policies and procedures, 
Manifestation Determinations, Alternate placements, Individual Education 
Planning (IEP) and due process. This course is team taught by 
administration and special education faculty. F 
SPCED 4422 PROCEDURES FOR TEACHING AUTISM 
SPECTRUM DISORDERS 
A comprehensive overview of the characteristics, identification, and 
placement of students with Autism Spectrum Disorders. The course offers 
a study of causative-correlation factors and the effect they have on the 
students throughout the various developmental stages. The course involves 
scientific-based teaching strategies and techniques which includes various 
educational trends and issues facing students, families, and teachers. F 
SPCED 4623 PROCEDURES FOR TEACHING 
MILD/MODERATE LEARNING DISABILITIES 
Study and development and practice of scientific and research-based 
teaching techniques, instructional strategies and curriculum models for 
teaching students with mild or moderate learning disabilities in a variety of 
educational settings throughout the lifespan. Note: This course includes a 
requirement of 16 hours of supervised field experience. F 
SPCED 4821 PRACTICUM – MILD OR MODERATE 
DISABILITIES 
Supervised experiences in designing and implementing educational, 
recreational, and leisure time activities. 
SPCED 4862 COLLABORATION AND PLANNING IN 
SPECIAL EDUCATION 
Study of curriculum issues and instructional strategies for teaching students 
with exceptional learning needs in a variety of classroom settings. 
Emphasis is placed on the understanding of Oklahoma state special 
education policies and procedures and completion of state forms. 
Prerequisite: SPCED-3213. S 
SPCED 4872 TRANSITIONAL PLANNING AND 
TEACHING AT THE SECONDARY LEVEL 
Study of scientific research-based educational strategies and curriculum 
models for secondary students with exceptional learning needs and 
transitional programs from birth to adulthood. Introduction to the 
components and development of the Transition Service Plan component of 
the Individualized Education Program. SU 
DEPARTMENT OF KINESIOLOGY 
Kinesiology 
KINES 1133 WELLNESS CONCEPTS AND EXERCISE 
APPLICATIONS 
The course is designed to provide the student with a philosophy of living 
that encourages a higher quality of life and a state of well-being. Lifestyle 
choices are identified and explained in regard to proper exercise, weight 
management, stress management, substance use, sexually transmitted 
diseases, health care, nutrition, cardiovascular disease prevention, and 
cancer prevention. Assessment techniques and development of individual 
prescriptions in the areas of muscular strength, muscular flexibility, 
cardiovascular endurance, body composition, and nutrition are studied. 
Lifetime leisure skills are identified and developed to provide a well-
rounded exposure to wellness. F, S, SU 
KINES 1153 NUTRITION 
A study of the basic principles of nutrition including dietary standards, food 
habits, nutrients, metabolism, special diets, food fads, and dietary needs of 
all age groups. F, SU 
KINES 1161 WELLNESS CONCEPTS/EXERCISE 
APPLICATIONS LAB 
Designed to develop assessment techniques and to develop individual 
prescriptions in the areas of muscular strength, muscular flexibility, 
cardiovascular endurance, body composition, and nutrition. Lifetime 
leisure skills are identified and developed to provide a well-rounded 
exposure to wellness. D 
KINES 1201 ELEMENTARY SWIMMING 
Instruction in the basic strokes: American crawl, elementary back, side 
stroke, back crawl, and breaststroke. For non-swimmers, adjustment to 
water, floating, and treading. D 
KINES 1351 ELEMENTARY BOWLING 
The fundamental skills of bowling including instruction in stance, 
approach, delivery, aiming, and follow-through. Practice in etiquette, 
scoring, terminology, and forms of competition. F, S  
KINES 1391 CROSS COUNTRY 
Prerequisite: Varsity participation. F 
KINES 1411 ELEMENTARY GOLF 
The fundamental skills of golf including instruction in stance, strokes, 
clubs, rules, terminology, etiquette, scoring, etc. D 
KINES 1471 ELEMENTARY TENNIS 
Basic instruction in the theory and practice of skills, rules, terminology, 
etiquette, and game strategy for singles and doubles play. D 
KINES 1511 PHYSICAL FITNESS 
Theory and practice of aerobic and weight training activities with learning 
experiences designed to promote individual fitness. F 
KINES 1621 SOFTBALL 
Prerequisite: Participation in varsity intercollegiate softball. F 
KINES 1631 BASEBALL 
Prerequisite: Varsity participation. F, S 
KINES 1661 BASKETBALL 
Prerequisite: Varsity participation. F, S 
KINES 1681 VOLLEYBALL 
Prerequisite: Varsity participation. F, S 
KINES 1691 FOOTBALL 
Prerequisite: Varsity participation. F, S 
KINES 1711 SOCCER 
Prerequisite: Varsity participation. F, S  
KINES 1751 TEAM SPORTS 
Designed more for women students. Theory and practice of soccer, 
volleyball, and selected team sports; basic skills, rules, strategy and game 
play. D 
KINES 1781 TEAM SPORTS 
Instruction and practice in the following team sports: Basketball, softball, 
and track and field. D 
KINES 1811 INDIVIDUAL SPORTS 
Instruction and practice of fundamental skills of badminton, racketball, 
tennis, and track and field; knowledge of rules, techniques and strategies 
associated with play. D 

 
KINES 1932 TECHNIQUES AS APPLIED TO 
GYMNASTICS, FITNESS, & AQUATICS 
A study of basic skills, techniques, practices, and methodologies of 
gymnastics, aquatics, and fitness. The gymnastics component includes 
work in tumbling and on the various apparatus. The aquatic component will 
stress progressive learning techniques and aquatic skills of necessity. The 
fitness component will focus on techniques for attainment as well as 
assessment of wellness/fitness criteria. The course is designed primarily 
for the practitioner and is required of all Physical Education and Recreation 
Majors. F, S  
KINES 1942 TECHNIQUES AS APPLIED TO 
INDIVIDUAL  
SPORTS 
A study of basic skills, techniques and practices utilized in various 
individual sports. Emphasis on application and analysis of principles 
essential for successful participation in the various sports. The course is 
designed primarily for the practitioner and is required of all Physical 
Education and Recreation Majors and endorsement students. F, S 
KINES 1952 TECHNIQUES AS APPLIED TO TEAM 
SPORTS 
A study of basic skills, techniques and practices utilized in various team 
sports. Emphasis on application and analysis of principles essential for 
successful participation in the various sports. The course is designed 
primarily for the practitioner and is required of all Physical Education and 
Recreation Majors and endorsement students. F, S 
KINES 2111 RACQUETBALL 
Designed for both male and female participants. Basic instruction in skills, 
techniques, and strategies essential for play in the sport. D 
KINES 2141 RODEO  
Prerequisite: Varsity participation. F, S 
KINES 2151 WALKING FITNESS 
Learn the basic skills for walking. Learn the proper warm-up and cool 
down procedures. Work on self-assessment of your personal fitness. 
Monitor your walking with a pedometer. S 
KINES 2212 FIRST AID 
Knowledge in accident prevention, emergency treatment, and care of 
injuries and illness. American Red Cross standards. F, S, SU 
KINES 2222 INTRODUCTION TO KINESIOLOGY 
An introduction to the discipline. The course includes the study of program 
organization and management; history and philosophy; trends and issues; 
career potential and planning; and an introduction to physical education, 
health, recreation and exercise science. F, S 
KINES 2242 SPORTS OFFICIATING 
Designed to provide an exposure in both women’s and men’s sport 
officiating. The course will provide theory and practice in officiating sports 
like softball, flag football, basketball, volleyball, and other appropriate 
women’s and men’s intramural sports. Practical experience in officiating 
women’s and men’s intramurals. F, S 
KINES 2502 CARE AND PREVENTION OF ATHLETIC  
INJURIES 
A study of preventive measures in the athletic and physical education 
programs. F, S, SU 
KINES 2601 PARTICIPATION IN INTERCOLLEGIATE  
SPORTS 
Designed for students participating in varsity sports: football, basketball, 
baseball, track, tennis, golf, softball, rodeo, and soccer. Prerequisite: 
Approval by the coach of the respective sport. S 
KINES 3133 TEACHING HEALTH IN PUBLIC SCHOOLS 
A course designed to study the science of personal and community health, 
the psychology of teaching health elements of child growth and 
development and adolescent health problems; planning and organizing for 
teaching mental health, nutrition, disease control and program appraisal. 
Understanding the role of health education in the total educational effort. 
S  
KINES 3333 SAFETY EDUCATION 
Safety Education is a course of study designed to provide safety 
information of a general nature appropriate to today's living. A knowledge 
base is developed in the areas of home safety, driver safety, job safety, 
recreation safety, and skill development as well as coping techniques for 
each. D 
KINES 3353 HEALTH AND AGING 
This course is an interdisciplinary introductory course in geriatrics which 
examines the processes of normal human aging as well as the common 
diseases and disorders that affect older persons. This course is designed to 
provide upper division undergraduate students with an overview of critical 
issues related to aging and health. Topics covered include: physiology of 
aging, health behaviors, age-related diseases, managing illness, medical 
care, and death and dying. Particular attention is given to preventive 
strategies that maximize function to help more individuals achieve a 
healthy old age. F 
KINES 3393 NUTRITION FOR CHILDREN 
A study of the basic knowledge of nutrition with emphasis on the 
nutritional needs of children and ways of implementing nutrition 
education. Health and fitness related games and activities appropriate for 
elementary and early childhood levels will also be addressed. S, SU 
KINES 3443 KINESIOLOGY AND ANATOMY 
The study of anatomy, osteology and the muscular system which affect 
and/or are affected by movement and sports related performance. F, S, SU 
KINES 3553 METHODS AND MATERIALS IN 
ELEMENTARY HEALTH, PHYSICAL EDUCATION & 
RECREATION 
Theory and practice in teaching physical education activities at the 
elementary level with emphasis on methods, materials, planning, and 
conducting elementary programs. Health-related subject matter appropriate 
for elementary level will also be addressed. Prerequisite: Admission to 
Teacher Education Program. F 
KINES 3662 EXERCISE PROGRAMMING FOR SPECIAL 
POPULATIONS 
This course is designed to increase the understanding in the areas of 
exercise and special populations. This course will provide current 
information regarding exercise programming, fitness assessment and 
evaluation. The student will learn to modify exercise for individuals and 
groups based on age, medical conditions, and special needs. The areas 
covered will include but are not limited to: coronary heart disease, diabetes, 
asthma, obesity, osteoporosis, arthritis, pregnancy, and physically and 
mentally challenged. F 
KINES 4001-4 INDIVIDUAL STUDY IN HEALTH, 
PHYSICAL EDUCATION AND RECREATION (TOPIC) 
Independent study of specified topic in health, physical education, and 
recreation for undergraduate students. Credit one to four semester hours. D 
KINES 4011-4 SEMINAR IN HEALTH AND PHYSICAL 
EDUCATION 
Group study of specified topic for health, physical education and recreation 
for the undergraduate student. Credit one to four semester hours. D 
KINES 4043 HEALTH AND WELLNESS 
PROGRAMMING 
This course provides the student with scientifically proven methods on 
creating and maintaining healthy programs in diet and exercise. It will also 
provide the student with ways to choose and match different people with 
different exercise and dietary needs to maximize the success of the 

 
programs. Factors involved in controlling and managing health and 
wellness in different stages of life are also addressed. F, S, SU 
KINES 4052 SOCIOLOGY OF SPORTS 
Study of sports in society as they relate to: Competition at all levels, sports 
for youngsters, minorities in sports and future of sports. S 
KINES 4063 LEGAL ASPECTS IN PHYSICAL 
EDUCATION, RECREATION, AND ATHLETICS 
An in-depth analysis and study of legal liability for the practitioner as it 
relates to physical education, recreation and athletics. The course presents 
an overview of legal issues, duties and liability as they relate to student 
rights, teacher rights, and conduct of programs, as well as causes and 
prevention of accidents which could result in liability suits. F 
KINES 4073 EVALUATION IN PHYSICAL EDUCATION 
Knowledge and principles in techniques of evaluation and measurement 
and test construction in physical education. S 
KINES 4083 OBESITY AND WEIGHT MANAGEMENT 
This course provides the student with knowledge collected on one of the 
leading preventable causes of death in the world, obesity. The course looks 
at causation of the epidemic, problems associated with the condition, 
economic impact, and treatments available. Practical methods of 
prevention, behavioral and lifestyle modifications are also discussed. The 
student will also examine individual needs and create plans to combat the 
condition. F, S, SU 
KINES 4113 ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION 
OF HEALTH, PHYSICAL EDUCATION & RECREATION 
A study of the organization and administration of physical education 
programs in the public schools, colleges, and with special populations. D 
KINES 4122 ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION 
OF ATHLETICS 
A study of the organization and administration of athletic programs for the 
public schools and colleges. F 
KINES 4212 WEIGHT AND CIRCUIT TRAINING 
This course is designed to provide the student with the knowledge, 
organization and technique to create, maintain and adjust weight training 
programs in individual and team settings. The student will also be asked 
to evaluate workout facilities, create total programs for individuals and 
create sport specific/goal specific programs for themselves, individuals 
and teams. 
KINES 4222 ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT OF 
INTRAMURALS 
A study of the content and conduct of intramural sports. Practical 
experience. D 
KINES 4234 EXERCISE PHYSIOLOGY 
A study of conditions that are related to the learning of movement-oriented 
skills, improvement of motor performance, and physiological effects of 
exercise. F, S  
KINES 4243 THERAPEUTIC AND PRESCRIPTIVE 
PHYSICAL EDUCATION 
A course designed to increase knowledge and understanding of the 
uniqueness of individuals with special needs. Emphasis in modifying 
physical activities for exceptional children; motor testing; analyses of skill 
development and principles in techniques of evaluation/assessment in 
physical education. F 
KINES 4251 INTERMEDIATE RODEO 
Varsity rodeo participation. F, S 
KINES 4262 MOTOR LEARNING 
A study of the body of knowledge underlying the development of 
successful instruction and training strategies critical for skill acquisition. 
Motor learning issues are viewed from a behavioral perspective with 
emphasis on application and performance. S  
KINES 4283 PRINCIPLES OF COACHING 
This course is designed for the coaching profession both on and off the 
court. It entails coaching philosophy, motivational and communication 
techniques, team management, and much more. This course is for future 
coaches in the public or private school, club teams, municipal parks (youth 
sports) and other sports areas. S 
KINES 4333 PRINCIPLES AND HISTORY OF HEALTH 
AND PHYSICAL EDUCATION 
Introduction to physical education, history of physical education; concepts 
and principles related to biological, psychological, and sociological factors 
that affect development of the individual. D 
KINES 4353 MOTOR DEVELOPMENT 
The study of the acquisition and development of motor skills such as 
standing, balancing, moving, and manipulating objects as encountered in a 
child's environment. The further identification and study of the various 
developmental stages as children pass from early childhood to middle 
childhood and to late childhood. D 
KINES 4383 DEVELOPMENT OF PROGRAMS, 
FACILITIES AND MANAGEMENT 
This course will incorporate the study of programs, facilities and 
management skills to meet the demands of working in exercise science, 
fitness, sports management or recreation. It will include an in-depth look 
into areas such as program and facility design, budget issues, personnel, 
etc. S 
KINES 4443 METHODS OF TEACHING SAFETY 
EDUCATION 
Methods and materials in the conduct of public school safety program. D 
KINES 4533 CONSUMER HEALTH EDUCATION 
A course designed to identify facts and to establish knowledge important 
to the consumer of today regarding products such as foods, drugs, services, 
facilities, practices and health information in order to make educated 
decisions in our everyday lives. S 
KINES 4541 CAPSTONE EXPERIENCE IN HPE 
The Capstone Experience in Health and Physical Education course is 
designed to be a capstone experience for the HPE major in Teacher 
Education. The course is the academic crowning point for the major. 
Information is offered to the student regarding entry into the teaching 
professional semester and the profession. State comprehensive testing and 
information is also covered. Additionally, opportunities in the profession 
and the professional application of the knowledge they have acquired are 
addressed. Corequisite: KINES 4553. F 
KINES 4553 TEACHERS COURSE IN HEALTH AND 
PHYSICAL EDUCATION 
Problems, methods, and materials for teaching physical education in grades 
K-12. Corequisite: KINES 4541. F 
KINES 4793 RESEARCH IN EXERCISE SCIENCE 
Working with the instructor, the student completes a research-based project 
utilizing the varied knowledge he or she has acquired from previous 
courses, internships, and labs. The goal of the research course is to increase 
the student’s connection to the learned material, real world applications and 
aid in the transition to meaningful contribution by the student to the 
profession of Exercise Science. The student will prepare and submit a final 
project and report to the department for approval. F, S, SU 
KINES 4802 THEORY OF COACHING FOOTBALL 
Designed more for male students. Knowledge and preparation in 
techniques and methods of coaching football. F 
KINES 4832 THEORY OF COACHING BASKETBALL 
Fundamentals and techniques applied to coaching basketball. F, S  
KINES 4842 THEORY OF COACHING WOMEN'S 
BASKETBALL 
Fundamentals and techniques applied to coaching women's basketball. D 

 
KINES 4862 THEORY OF COACHING BASEBALL 
Knowledge and preparation in techniques and methods applied to coaching 
baseball. S  
KINES 4873 CURRICULUM CONSTRUCTION IN 
HEALTH, PHYSICAL EDUCATION AND RECREATION 
A study of the methodology of developing curriculum materials in health, 
physical education and recreation. D 
KINES 4883 EXERCISE PRESCRIPTION AND TESTING 
This course is designed to give the student an introduction to field and 
laboratory tests used to assess physical fitness components as well as the 
utilization of principles of exercise prescription. The student will develop 
the knowledge and skills to design exercise prescription programs for 
apparently healthy individuals as well as individuals who have a cardiac, 
pulmonary or metabolic condition. Prerequisite: KINES 4234. S 
KINES 4892 THEORY OF COACHING TRACK AND 
MINOR SPORTS 
A study of the techniques of coaching track and minor sports. D 
KINES 4993, 4995, 4997 PRACTICUM IN EXERCISE 
SCIENCE 
A practicum provides the Exercise Science major with a field experience 
where the student has an opportunity for “hands on” work in one of the 
many avenues of Exercise Science. The goal of the professional experience 
is to introduce the major to practicing professionals and their respective 
organizations, involving 120, 200, or 280 hours of practicum experience in 
Exercise Science. These experiences give the student a personal look at 
their future professional occupations. Their skills and knowledge are 
enhanced, and they have an opportunity to confirm or modify their career 
goals. F, S, SU 
Sports Management 
SPRTM 3402 CURRENT EVENTS IN RECREATION AND 
SPORTS MANAGEMENT 
The course will be an analysis on current events in the business, finance, 
economy, education, athletics, (public schools, private high schools, high 
schools, college and intramural programs), international sports, 
professional sports, and any other arena in which trends are having an 
effect on sports in general. Special attention to how these affect the 
perception of the sport, the rules of the sport, and those involved will be 
given. D 
SPRTM 3412 EVENT SAFETY IN SPORTS AND 
RECREATION 
This course is designed to give the student a knowledge base to develop, 
design and implement courses of action to ensure safe production, 
promotion and execution of sporting events at various facilities. 
SPRTM 3503 SPORTS MANAGEMENT 
Theory and practice of sports management. Topics include sports 
management, marketing, human resource management, contracting, and 
related areas. F, S, SU 
SPRTM 3513 SPORTS FINANCE 
The student examines the use of sport organization’s financial information 
for decision making. It is structured around both financial accounting and 
management accounting technologies. The student will concentrate on 
analysis of financial statements, structured analysis using internal 
accounting information, and budgeting and control issues for parks and 
recreation, collegiate athletics and professional sport. F 
SPRTM 3523 LEADERSHIP IN SPORT 
This course is designed to provide an examination of effective sport 
leadership techniques and practices. Student will examine general concepts 
of leadership (theories, principles, traits and skills), study examples of team 
bonding, create and construct exercises which will enhance team work, 
team interaction, or problem solving. This course is also designed to give 
students a practical look at the different types of leadership so the student 
may see how successful those types are in given situations. F, SU 
SPRTM 3533 OLYMPISM AND OLYMPICS 
This course is designed to give the student the basic understanding of the 
ideals and ideas that encompass the Olympic movement, the histories of 
the Modern Olympic games. The student will also be given critical thinking 
exercises to research the Olympic movement throughout the world. S, SU 
SPRTM 4001-4 INDIVIDUAL STUDY IN SPORTS 
MANAGEMENT 
Individual study of specified topics for Sports Management. F, S, SU 
SPRTM 4122 RECREATION & SPORTS MANAGEMENT 
LAW 
An intense study of legal issues relating to recreation and sports 
management. F 
SPRTM 4132 RECREATION & SPORTS EMPLOYMENT 
LAW 
An intense study of legal issues relating to employment/human resource 
management in parks, recreation and sports agencies. F 
SPRTM 4142 ETHICS IN RECREATION AND SPORTS 
MANAGEMENT 
The course is dedicated to the study of sports management ethics and the 
manner in which ethics can be applied and implemented in an individual’s 
personal and professional life. Ethics in sports can dictate coaching 
philosophies, business transactions, contract negations and professional 
relationships, and therefore is one of the key components in sport 
management. D 
SPRTM 4152 RECREATION AND SPORTS 
MANAGEMENT STATISTICS 
Designed to provide the student with a solid foundation in the field of 
statistics. The course is taught through the lens of recreation and sport 
management. Topics include measures of central tendency, analysis of 
variance, multiple regression analysis, etc. D 
SPRTM 4163 SPORTS NUTRITION 
This course is to equip the student with the tools necessary for counseling 
an athlete in the area of nutrition. Although this course is strongly sports 
oriented, it is also helpful to those people who want to know how to 
maximize the body’s movement potential through nutrition. S 
SPRTM 4502 RODEO MANAGEMENT 
Theory and practice of rodeo management. Includes rodeo planning, 
marketing, and execution. F, S 
SPRTM 4513 GOLF MANAGEMENT 
Theory and practice of golf course management. Special emphasis will be 
placed on fiscal and human resource management issues, PGA standards, 
marketing, and turf management practices. F, S 
SPRTM 4523 SPORTS REPRESENTATION 
This course is designed to give the student the basic understanding of the 
ideals and processes involved with representation of athletes in the four 
major sport arenas of MLB, NFL, NBA and NHL. This is not a certification 
course of any of those sports but instead a theory course as to how to 
proceed in representing an athlete and what pitfalls to look for when talking 
with representatives from teams. F, S 
SPRTM 4533 SPORTS INFORMATION MANAGEMENT 
Sports Information Management will provide the student with an overview 
of the sports information field. Topics will include marketing, fundraising, 
statistics, and media contact. F, S 
SPRTM 4573 FITNESS PROGRAM MANAGEMENT 
This course is designed to provide the student with the knowledge, 
organization, and techniques to create, maintain and adjust fitness 
programs in individual and team settings. The student will also be asked to 
evaluate workout facilities, create total programs (including cardio, 
resistance, and nutrition) for individuals, create sport specific/goal specific 
programs for individuals and teams using budgetary considerations. F, S 

 
DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND 
RECREATION MANAGEMENT 
Natural Resource Management 
NRM 2103 WILDLAND FIRE MANAGEMENT 
This course will provide the student with extensive exposures to the theory 
and practice of wildland fire management. 
NRM 2112 ADVANCED FIREFIGHTING METHODS 
This course is designed to further the student’s knowledge of portable 
pumps, the use of water, and the use of fireline reference tools. 
Prerequisite: NRM 2103. 
NRM 2122 IGNITION OPERATIONS 
This course provides instruction relating to the functional roles and 
responsibilities associated with wildland firing operations. Prerequisite: 
NRM 2103. 
NRM 2132 FIRELINE LEADERSHIP & ICS 
Prepare student for leadership role in firefighting with a detailed look into 
the incident command system. Student will complete courses that are 
recognized by federal governmental agencies that participate in wildland 
fire activities. Prerequisite: NRM 2103. 
NRM 2143 WILDLAND FUEL REDUCTION 
This course combines classroom instruction with practical field exercises 
to demonstrate effective fuel reduction on wildlands. Prerequisite: PRM 
2122 or PRM 2143. 
NRM 2222 LAND NAVIGATION 
Navigating with a compass and map is an essential skill for professionals 
in the field. Topics and exercises will include overview of maps, reading 
topographic maps and making calculations, using geographic location 
systems, coordinating systems, map projections and datum, and use of a 
compass and clinometer. Also included will be Global Positioning System 
(GPS) use, overview and functionality, error sources, setting up and using 
a GPS receiver – key pads/touchscreens and menus as well as the Wide 
Area Augmentation System (WAAS). 
NRM 2993, 2995, 2996 INTERNSHIP IN WILDLAND FIRE 
MANAGEMENT 
Practical application devoted to serving an apprenticeship in a wildland fire 
management setting. Student will serve under selected wildland fire 
professionals in a local, state, federal or non-profit agency. Prerequisite: 
NRM 2103. 
NRM 3112 INTRODUCTION TO PARKS AND WILDLIFE 
LAW ENFORCEMENT 
This course provides an overview of the Parks and Wildlife Law 
Enforcement Field. 
NRM 4001-4 INDIVIDUAL STUDY IN NATURAL 
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 
Individual study in a natural resource management area and/or associated 
field. 
NRM 4011-4 SEMINAR IN NATURAL RESOURCE 
MANAGEMENT 
Group study of specified topic in Natural Resource Management for the 
undergraduate student. 
NRM 4162 MOUNTAIN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 
This course will explore the diversity of mountain environments, the geo-
ecological processes that shape them, and the role that people play in using, 
transforming, and conserving them. The course is divided into two broad 
sections: physical geography of mountain environments and human 
geography of mountain environments. It will examine physical processes, 
including plate tectonics and mountain building, along with volcanism, 
mountain climate, landforms, and geomorphology. It will also look at 
climate change, mountain resource use practices and the conservation of 
mountain environments. 
NRM 4172 NATURAL RESOURCE LAW 
An intensive study of federal and Oklahoma Laws relating to land, water, 
wildlife and environmental management.  
NRM 4192 BIRD IDENTIFICATION FOR WILDLIFE 
MANAGERS 
This course is designed to teach students how to identify commonly 
managed wild bird species within the context of wildlife management. 
Topics will include identification of migratory birds and resident birds with 
an emphasis on game birds, species of concern, and species of legal 
significance. This course will be conducted in the classroom and in the field 
with hands-on demonstrations and activities. 
NRM 4201 THE PARK RANGER 
Theory and practice of park law enforcement. 
NRM 4211 GAME AND FISH LAW 
Introduction to federal and state laws pertaining to game and fish 
management. 
NRM 4773 NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 
Theory and practice of natural resource and park area management. Special 
attention is placed on the organization and administration of state and 
federal level natural resource areas. Interpretive techniques in natural, 
cultural, and historical sites are discussed as well. F, S 
NRM 4782 RESOURCE INTERPRETATION 
This course provides the student with knowledge, skills, and abilities in the 
field of resource interpretation. Topics will include interpretation of 
natural, cultural, and historic resources. 
NRM 4792 LAND USE PLANNING 
Land use planning is the study of uses of land both urban and rural 
including protection of agricultural land. Protection of wildlife through 
land use planning is studied. Land use issues also include water rights and 
usage, conservation, eminent domain, zoning, and environmental concerns 
with particular emphasis on land use laws and regulations applicable to 
Oklahoma. 
NRM 4802 WILDLAND FIRE ECOLOGY 
This course will explore the field of wildland fire ecology. Topics will 
include fire dependent wilderness ecosystems and the restoration of fire 
dependent ecosystems through the use of prescribed fire. 
NRM 4812 WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT 
This course explores the process of balancing the needs of wildlife with the 
needs of humans. 
NRM 4832 WILDLIFE HABITAT MANAGEMENT 
This course is designed to expose students to wildlife habitats and give 
them experiences in those fields. 
NRM 4852 RANGE MANAGEMENT 
Range Management is the study of the conservation and management of 
rangelands. Emphasis is placed on sustainable management for the benefit 
of present and future generations. 
NRM 4993-4998 INTERNSHIP IN NATURAL RESOURCE 
MANAGEMENT 
Practical application devoted to serving an apprenticeship in a natural 
resource management setting. Student will serve under selected natural 
resource management professional in a local, state, federal or non-profit 
agency. 
Parks and Recreation Management 
PRM 2102 FOUNDATIONS OF PARKS AND 
RECREATION 
An introduction to the field of parks and recreation management. Provides 
an overview of the historical and philosophical foundations of the 
discipline. 

 
PRM 2122 WILDERNESS FIRST AID 
Designed to provide the student with a solid background in backcountry 
medicine. Emphasis is placed on practical, improvised wilderness first aid 
techniques. F 
PRM 2143 EMERGENCY RESPONSE 
This course deals with the fundamentals of response to emergency 
situations. Successful completion of the course leads to American Red 
Cross certification in Emergency Response and CPR for the Professional 
Rescuer. F 
PRM 2151 PRINCIPLES OF SWIMMING 
Recreational swimming; instruction in basic and advanced strokes. 
PRM 2201 BASIC HANDGUN 
This course is designed to expose the Parks and Wildlife Law Enforcement 
student to the fundamentals of handgun safety and field use. 
PRM 2212 WILDERNESS SURVIVAL 
Theory and practice of survival/primitive living in remote, wilderness 
settings. Topics include edible plants, shelter building, snare construction, 
bow and drill construction/fire starting, implement construction, etc. F, S 
PRM 2441 HIGH ANGLE RESCUE 
Rope rescue techniques and practices. Including rappelling, rappelling self-
rescue, rappelling pick-offs, victim stokes basket packaging, lowering and 
raising. SU 
PRM 3113 SAILING, CANOEING, HIKING, AND 
CLIMBING  
Basic instruction and practice in techniques applied to sailing, canoeing, 
hiking, rappelling, and other adventure activities. F, S 
PRM 3142 ADVANCED WILDERNESS SURVIVAL 
Theory and practice of advanced survival in remote, wilderness settings. 
Topics 
include 
advanced 
foraging, 
water 
procurement, 
shelter 
construction, and fire starting. This course is held entirely in wilderness 
settings. Three nights of camping are required. Students will procure the 
entirety of their meals and water from the surrounding environment. SU 
PRM 3152 SCUBA 
Theory and practice of skills and techniques, selection of equipment, safety 
procedures, and physics of scuba diving. Prerequisite: Advanced 
swimming skills. F, S 
PRM 3161 LIFEGUARDING 
Theory and practice of lifeguarding. Leads to American Red Cross 
certification in Lifeguarding, First Aid, CPR for the Professional Rescuer, 
and Automated External Defibrillator. S 
PRM 3181 ROCK CLIMBING 
Theory and practice of rock climbing. This physically demanding, 
overnight course involves instruction in knot tying, natural and artificial 
anchor rigging, top-rope climbing techniques, and placement of artificial 
climbing protection. SU 
PRM 3211 OUTDOOR EDUCATION / ADVENTURE 
PROGRAMMING 
Designed to increase knowledge and understanding of a variety of activities 
associated with outdoor education and adventure programming including: 
low and high challenge course, artificial rock climbing, canoeing, sailing, 
rappelling, and rappelling self-rescue. Historical background and 
theoretical perspectives of outdoor education and adventure programming 
will be discussed. SU 
PRM 3221 OUTDOOR EDUCATION FOR TEACHERS 
Designed to expose current and prospective teachers to a variety of outdoor 
education and adventure activities that can be conducted on or near school 
grounds. Topics include: initiative games, low ropes course activities, 
group processing, knot tying, topographic map reading, compass 
techniques, field guide use, and hiking. Exposure to historical background 
and theoretical perspectives of outdoor education and adventure 
programming. D 
PRM 3262 ADVANCED SCUBA / SLAM 
Theory and practice of advanced SCUBA techniques including SCUBA 
lifesaving and accident management techniques. Leads to YMCA 
certification in Advanced SCUBA and SLAM (SCUBA Lifesaving and 
Accident Management). S 
PRM 3432 ROPES COURSE FACILITATION 
Theory and practice of challenge course facilitation. Topics include low 
and high course facilitation, knot tying, climbing wall facilitation, 
rappelling, rappelling self-rescue, rope rigging, ropes course rescue, and 
prussiking. Emphasis placed on psychological and sociological outcomes 
associated with challenge course programming. F, S 
PRM 3452 ADVANCED ROPES 
Theory and practice of advanced challenge course facilitation, rock, and 
rescue site management. Topics include all areas of high challenge course 
facilitation, knot tying, high element rigging and ropes course rescue. Other 
topics will include rappelling, rappelling self rescue, and fixed line 
ascension. Special attention will be given to rock climbing and rappelling 
anchor rigging as well as high angle rescue techniques including rappelling 
pick-off rescues, victim stokes basket packaging, lowering, and raising. S 
PRM 3552 BACKPACKING 
This course provides the student with knowledge, skills and abilities in 
backpacking. This off-campus course includes map and compass reading, 
route finding, weather interpretation, and expedition leadership. 
PRM 3562 WHITE WATER RAFTING 
This course provides the student with knowledge, skills and abilities in 
white water rafting. This off-campus course includes map reading, weather 
interpretation, and expedition leadership. 
PRM 3663 RECREATION MANAGEMENT 
Theory and practice of parks, recreation, and leisure service management. 
Topics include fiscal management, human resource management, and risk 
management in the parks and recreation field. F, S 
PRM 3692 PRINCIPLES OF ARCHERY 
This course is designed to expose the student to the theory and practice of 
traditional and modern archery 
PRM 3702 RECREATIONAL AREAS AND FACILITIES 
MANAGEMENT 
Theory and practice of recreational areas and facilities management. 
Special emphasis is placed on planning and design of parks, recreational, 
and sporting areas and facilities. S 
PRM 4001-4 INDIVIDUAL STUDY IN PARKS AND 
RECREATION MANAGEMENT 
Individual study of specified topic for Parks and Recreation Management 
for the undergraduate student. Credit 1-4 semester hours. 
PRM 4011-4 SEMINAR IN PARKS AND RECREATION 
MANAGEMENT 
Group study of specified topic for the Parks and Recreation Management 
undergraduate student. Credit of one to four semester hours. D 
PRM 4113 RISK MANAGEMENT IN RECREATION 
Designed to expose parks and recreation management/park law 
enforcement majors and minors to current trends and issues relating to risk 
management and legal liability minimization. F, S 
PRM 4163 COMMUNITY RECREATION 
Organization and administration of community-based parks and recreation 
areas, facilities, and programs. F, S 
PRM 4221 SMALL CRAFT SAFETY 
Theory and practice of small craft safety and boating law. 
PRM 4231 CUSTODY AND CONTROL 
Theory and practice of criminal custody and control techniques. Special 
emphasis is placed on compliance, handcuffing, and defensive techniques. 

 
PRM 4241 FIREARM SAFETY 
Theory and practice of law enforcement firearm use and safety. Special 
emphasis is placed on defensive handgun and shotgun safety, management, 
deployment, and marksmanship. 
PRM 4343 INTRODUCTION TO CRIMINAL 
INVESTIGATIONS 
General principles of police investigation, evaluation, processing and 
assignment of complaints, methods of obtaining evidence and interviewing 
techniques. 
PRM 4383 TACTICAL FIELD CRAFT 
Tactical Field Craft is designed to increase knowledge, skills, and abilities 
in the field of law enforcement and search and rescue tracking. 
PRM 4404 LEGAL ISSUES 
This course deals with the criminal law portion of the Oklahoma Basic 
Council on Law Enforcement, Education and Training Academy. 
PRM 4421 TRAFFIC LAW 
Police responsibility in traffic control, organization of traffic and patrol 
division, routine traffic duties and accident reports. Organization and 
operations of centralized records division; study of standard police forms 
and reports. Prerequisite: Legal Issues PRM 4404. 
PRM 4433 CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS I 
General principles of police investigation, evaluation, processing and 
assignment of complaints, methods of obtaining evidence and interviewing 
techniques. Corequisite: PRM 4633 Criminal Investigations II. 
PRM 4441 RADAR OPERATIONS 
Basic operation and theory of Laser and/or RADAR units as a tool for 
purposes of determining speed of moving vehicles. Develop understanding 
of underlying principles for proper operation and evaluation of visual and 
audio cues for assessing speed. 
PRM 4452 SFST/DRUG RECOGNITION 
Recognition and evaluation of impaired driving suspects, from initial 
observation of the vehicle to the arrest and processing of the suspect. 
Enforcement strategies and issues surrounding Miranda, Implied Consent, 
and documentation of observations and evidence for the purpose of 
courtroom testimony. 
PRM 4512 COMMUNITY POLICING 
This course deals with the community policing and community relations 
portion of the Oklahoma Basic Council on Law Enforcement, Education 
and Training Academy. 
PRM 4633 CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS II 
General principles of police investigation, evaluation, processing and 
assignment of complaints, methods of obtaining evidence and interviewing 
techniques. Corequisite: PRM 4433 Criminal Investigations I. 
PRM 4641 TERRORISM 
Inform the student of various terrorist indicators, probable targets, 
investigative 
resources, 
and 
appropriate 
response. 
Develop 
an 
understanding of the historical roots of modern-day terrorism. Become 
familiarized with various terrorist groups and the religious ideology of 
militant extremists. 
PRM 4663 OUTDOOR RECREATION 
A study of philosophy, principles, and concepts of outdoor recreation 
program planning. Focuses on the development of outdoor recreation, 
outdoor adventure, and organized camping programs. F 
PRM 4664 FIREARMS 
Care and use of police firearms including legal provisions and restrictions. 
Open only to Collegiate Officer Program (COP) students. 
PRM 4674 DEFENSIVE TACTICS 
The study and practice of methods of defense employed by police officers. 
Lab: three hours per week. Open only to Collegiate Officer Program (COP) 
students. 
PRM 4683 PATROL PROCEDURES 
An examination of the types and methods of patrol activities. Studies 
include patrol techniques, hazard awareness, decision-making and tactical 
considerations. 
PRM 4691 EMERGENCY VEHICLE OPERATIONS 
Students will receive instruction in basic law enforcement drivers training. 
This will include an intro to case law and how it applies to driving, as well 
as information on vehicle tactics during non-emergency, emergency and 
pursuit driving. Practical application of skills to assist in all driving modes, 
to include basic driving skills and off-road driving techniques. 
PRM 4712 OUTDOOR LEISURE EDUCATION SEMINAR 
Group study in assigned topics of outdoor leisure education: Basic outdoor 
skills and techniques with emphasis on camping, adventure activities and 
environmental education. D 
PRM 4722 ALPINE ADVENTURE EDUCATION 
This course provides the opportunity to gain knowledge, skills and abilities 
in the area of alpine adventure education. 
PRM 4881 TACTICAL CARBINE 
This course is designed to expose the Parks and Wildlife Law Enforcement 
student to the tactical use of the modern law enforcement carbine. 
PRM 4993-8 INTERNSHIP IN PROFESSIONAL 
RECREATION 
Practical application devoted to serving an apprenticeship in a professional 
parks and recreation setting. Students serve under selected recreational 
professionals in a variety of local, state, federal and non-profit agencies. F, 
S, SU 
DEPARTMENT OF PSYCHOLOGY 
PSYCH 1003 GENERAL PSYCHOLOGY 
A general education course which provides an overview of psychology 
with an emphasis on the applied areas in the field.  
F, S, SU 
PSYCH 2323 STATISTICAL REASONING 
A course designed to increase familiarity with concepts related to the use 
of data description, analysis, and use in making assertions that involve data 
and statistics. An emphasis on the development of skills related to 
calculating and interpreting descriptive statistics within context as well as 
interpreting statistical analyses within context. F, SU 
PSYCH 2423 SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY 
A scientific survey of the social determinants of behavior including a 
review of contemporary theory and methodology involved in studying 
social behavior. Prerequisite: PSYCH 1003. F 
PSYCH 2433 PSYCHOLOGICAL STATISTICS 
Statistical methods applied to the behavioral sciences. An introduction to 
the concepts and applications of descriptive and inferential statistics. 
Covers topics from central tendency to analysis of variance. F, S, SU 
PSYCH 3201-4 CONTEMPORARY PROBLEMS IN 
PSYCHOLOGY (TOPIC) 
Analysis of current topics in psychology. This course offers the student and 
instructor an opportunity to explore in depth selected problems of current 
interest. Credit one to four semester hours. Prerequisite: PSYCH 1003. 
F, S, SU 
PSYCH 3213 DEVELOPMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY 
A study of the physical, cognitive, psychological, and social development 
of the individual from the prenatal period through the aging adult. 
Prerequisite: PSYCH 1003. F, S, SU 
PSYCH 3224 RESEARCH METHODS 
Introduce students to the common psychological methods and process of 
studying theories of human behavior and mental processes as they apply to 
multiple settings. The course emphasizes evaluating research in everyday 

 
environments. Prerequisite: PSYCH 1003 and PSYCH 2433. 
Corequisite: PSYCH3224L Research Methods Lab. F, S 
PSYCH 3224L RESEARCH METHODS LAB 
Introduce students to the common psychological methods and process of 
studying theories of human behavior and mental processes as they apply to 
multiple settings. The course emphasizes hands on evaluation of research 
in everyday environments. Prerequisite: PSYCH 1003 and PSYCH 
2433. Corequisite: PSYCH 3224. F, S 
PSYCH 3233 LEARNING AND MEMORY 
Overview of traditional and contemporary principles and theories of 
learning and memory. Prerequisite: PSYCH 1003. S 
PSYCH 3243 CROSS-CULTURAL PSYCHOLOGY 
Identifies psychological similarities and differences among various cultural 
groups within American society and explores cultural issues in a 
psychotherapeutic setting. Prerequisite: PSYCH 1003. F 
PSYCH 3253 PSYCHOLOGICAL TESTS 
The construction, validation, and interpretation of psychological tests with 
emphasis on the application of tests to the clinical evaluation of the 
individual. Prerequisite: PSYCH 1003 and PSYCH 2433. F 
PSYCH 3323 ABNORMAL PSYCHOLOGY 
A study of the history, theories, principles, and causes of abnormal 
behavior including an analysis of various therapy techniques. 
Prerequisite: PSYCH 1003. F, S, SU 
PSYCH 3333 BEHAVIOR MANAGEMENT 
Provides an introduction to behavior modification techniques in applied 
settings. The major focus of the course is on the application of operant 
conditioning principles, the implementation of behavior modification 
techniques, and the measurement and evaluation of program effectiveness 
in a variety of settings. Prerequisite: PSYCH 1003. F, S 
PSYCH 3363 PSYCHOLOGY OF PERSONALITY 
An analysis and comparison of major personality theories including a 
review of research that tests propositions from the various theories. 
Prerequisite: PSYCH 1003. F, SU 
PSYCH 3503 INDUSTRIAL/ORGANIZATIONAL 
PSYCHOLOGY 
A study of psychological principles relevant to business and industry. 
Major topics include employee selection, training and evaluation, 
leadership, motivation, social groups, human factors, stress, and consumer 
psychology. Prerequisite: PSYCH 1003. SU 
PSYCH 4011-4 SEMINAR IN PSYCHOLOGY (TOPIC) 
Seminar in selected areas of psychology with special emphasis placed upon 
theories and application in the topic areas. Prerequisite: PSYCH 1003. F, 
S 
PSYCH 4113 ISSUES IN CHEMICAL DEPENDENCY  
TREATMENT 
Explores issues related to chemical abuse, dependency, and addictive 
behaviors with a focus on current treatment approaches. Prerequisite: 
PSYCH 1003. S 
PSYCH 4123 THEORIES AND PRINCIPLES OF  
PSYCHOTHERAPY 
Fundamental skills and principles of therapy are derived from the major 
theories of psychotherapy. Includes experiential teaching such as role 
playing and simulated problems. Prerequisite: PSYCH 1003. S 
PSYCH 4133 PSYCHOLOGY OF SPORTS 
A lecture/seminar course that will examine the effect of psychological and 
emotional factors on sport and exercise performance, and the effect of sport 
and exercise involvement on psychological and emotional factors. The 
course will examine educational, research and applied information on the 
topic. Prerequisite: PSYCH 1003. SU 
PSYCH 4203 PSYCHOLOGY OF WOMEN 
This course is designed to examine the differences in behaviors and mental 
experiences of women and men. An emphasis will be placed on developing 
an understanding of how differences between men and women are 
explained both by various professions and the public. By Signature Only. 
Prerequisite: PSYCH 1003. S 
PSYCH 4223 MEDIA AND MENTAL ILLNESS 
Designed to develop an increased student understanding of the impact of 
psychological dysfunctions demonstrated by areas of instruction which 
include interactive effects, interpersonal relationships, cultural attitudes 
toward psychological disorders, effects of institutional treatment, and 
responses to abnormal behavior. Prerequisite: PSYCH 1003 and PSYCH 
3323. F, SU 
PSYCH 4313 INTRODUCTION TO CLINICAL 
PSYCHOLOGY 
Broad overview of diagnosis and treatment of major psychological 
disorders and psychotherapeutic interventions (treatment). Emphasis 
placed on professional and theoretical problems and goals of 
psychotherapy. Prerequisite: PSYCH 1003. F 
PSYCH 4323 FORENSIC PSYCHOLOGY 
This course is designed to examine the psychological issues inherent in the 
various legal processes found in the United States. The central focus is 
developing an understanding of the research methods psychology uses to 
address the questions of human behavior; from this starting point we will 
examine the social, cognitive, clinical and developmental psychological 
research that is most helpful in evaluating current legal practices and 
explanations of human behavior. Prerequisite: PSYCH 1003. 
PSYCH 4333 PHYSIOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY 
A study of the physiological basis of behavior. Emphasis placed on the 
structure and function of the neuron, synapse and different components of 
the nervous system as well as sensory and motor processes and 
physiological substrate of sleep. Prerequisite: PSYCH 1003. F 
PSYCH 4533 LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT 
Covers the general issues and theories pertaining to language development 
as well as an overview of language and speech disorders. Prerequisite: 
PSYCH 1003. F 

 
EVERETT DOBSON SCHOOL OF BUSINESS AND TECHNOLOGY 
DEPARTMENT OF BUSINESS 
Accounting 
ACCTG 2213 PRINCIPLES OF FINANCIAL 
ACCOUNTING 
Financial accounting concepts related to the processes and principles of 
accrual accounting and the preparation of financial statements and reports 
for parties external to the firm. Prerequisite: F, S, SU 
ACCTG 2313 PRINCIPLES OF MANAGERIAL 
ACCOUNTING 
Continuation of ACCTG 2213 to include further discussion of 
corporations, managerial accounting concepts and objectives, planning and 
control of sales and costs, analysis of costs and profits. Prerequisite: 
ACCTG 2213. F, S, SU 
ACCTG 3213 ACCOUNTING INFORMATION SYSTEMS 
An introduction to the application of information technology to accounting 
systems, including decision-making processes, transaction cycles, and 
internal control. Course includes application of accounting software. 
ACCTG 3313 INTERMEDIATE ACCOUNTING I 
An introduction to the conceptual framework of accounting and generally 
accepted accounting principles. Emphasis upon current asset and liability 
relationships. Prerequisite: ACCTG 2313. F, S 
ACCTG 3323 INTERMEDIATE ACCOUNTING II 
Continuation of course ACCTG 3313, with emphasis upon the remaining 
balance sheet accounts. Prerequisite: ACCTG 3313. F, S 
ACCTG 3493 ANALYZING FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
How financial data are generated and their limitations, techniques for 
analyzing the flow of business’ funds, and methods for selecting and 
interpreting financial ratios. Prerequisite: FINAN 3343. D 
ACCTG 3713 COST ACCOUNTING 
A study of the processes used for cost accumulation, measurement and use. 
Emphasis is placed on planning and controlling of costs, report preparation 
and cost analysis. ACCTG 4003 INDIVIDUAL STUDY IN ACCOUNTING 
(TOPIC) 
Independent study of selected topics under the supervision of an accounting 
faculty member. Prerequisite: Instructor, Advisor, and Chair approval. 
D 
ACCTG 4013 SEMINAR IN ACCOUNTING (TOPIC) 
Group study of specified topics in accounting. Prerequisite: Instructor 
and Advisor approval. D 
ACCTG 4113 ACCOUNTING FOR GOVERNMENT/NON-
PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS 
A study of fund accounting and reporting in relation to government entities, 
health care and educational institutions. Prerequisite: ACCTG 3313. D 
ACCTG 4213 AUDITING I 
Audit procedure, classification of audits, audit working papers and reports, 
methods of verification of financial statements, practical applications, 
maintenance, and improvement of internal controls. 
ACCTG 4223 COMPUTERIZED ACCOUNTING 
This course provides applied exercise with computerized integrated 
accounting systems. Students will be using popular professional software 
packages. The emphasis will be on the concept of computerized accounting 
in general rather than on specific software. Prerequisite: ACCTG 2313 
or equivalent. D 
ACCTG 4253 INTRODUCTION TO COMPUTER 
FORENSICS 
The course focuses on clear and authoritative instructions about the field 
of computer forensics as it applies to the investigative process; from the 
collection of digital evidence to the presentation of Computer Forensic 
Examination findings in a court of law. Upon successful completion of the 
course, students will have a basic understanding of the computer forensic 
process, the scientific procedure involved in accounting, law enforcement, 
and computer sciences. Topics also include the science of computer 
forensics and how it relates to and is utilized within the judicial system of 
the United States. Prerequisite: ACCTG 2313 or equivalent. D 
ACCTG 4313 INCOME TAX ACCOUNTING I 
Introduction to general concepts of federal income tax law as it applies to 
individuals, corporations, partnerships, fiduciaries and estate gift tax. 
Prerequisite: ACCTG 2313. ENTRP 3123 is recommended. F 
ACCTG 4323 INCOME TAX ACCOUNTING II 
A continuation of the study of federal income tax law as it applies to 
corporations, partnerships, fiduciaries and estate and gift tax. Prerequisite: 
ACCTG 4313. S 
ACCTG 4333 INTERNSHIP IN ACCOUNTING 
Directed experience working in an organization at a level requiring 
professional duties and responsibilities. Open only to students 
majoring/minoring in a business degree who have completed a minimum 
of 60 credit hours. Student must complete at least 200 hours of directed 
experience. A detailed journal and term report are required. Prerequisite: 
Approval of the supervising faculty, advisor, and Chair. D 
ACCTG 4513 AUDITING II 
Continuation of Auditing I to include Computer Assisted Audit Tools 
(CAAT) and case studies in auditing. ACCTG 4613 ADVANCED ACCOUNTING 
A study of accounting topics of an advanced nature including partnerships, 
fiduciaries, parent and subsidiary accounting. Prerequisite: ACCTG 
3323. S  
ACCTG 4623 ACCOUNTING THEORY 
Advanced accounting concepts and standards. Emphasis is placed on both 
a historical and contemporary perspective of the development of generally 
accepted accounting principles. Prerequisite: ACCTG 3323. D 
ACCTG 4643 GLOBALIZATION OF ACCOUNTING, 
FINANCE & INVESTMENTS 
A study of accounting for operations of multinational enterprises as they 
relate to a wide variety of regulatory, social, and environmental influences. 
Subjects include the foreign currency translation, foreign exchange risk 
management, financing tools, and investments related to global entities. 

ACCTG 4733 BUSINESS PLAN DEVELOPMENT I 
This course develops the analytical and conceptual skills necessary to 
create a plan for the implementation of a new venture. Students will design 
a new venture and create a complete and complementary business plan. In 
this course students will examine specific business plan components, 
including environmental analysis, marketing plans, financial summaries, 
and organizational structures. F 
ACCTG 4763 ADVANCED COST/MANAGERIAL TOPICS 
Topics of an advanced nature dealing with special cost analyses and 
decision-making techniques. Prerequisite: ACCTG 3713. D 
 
 

 
ACCTG 4853 COMPUTER FORENSICS ANALYSIS 
This course will offer students the knowledge and skills necessary to 
install, configure, and effectively use AccessData’s Forensic Toolkit 
(FTK). Students will demonstrate proficiency in the skills needed to 
conduct an effective Windows-based computer forensic examination to 
locate and analyze evidence found during the examination of computer 
systems. Students will take the AccessData Certified Examiner (ACE) 
certification course as the final examination and, if the proficiency 
requirements are met, receive the ACE Certification at the conclusion of 
the course. Prerequisite: ACCTG 4253. D 
Entrepreneurship 
ENTRP 1123 INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS 
Introductory course for students of all business disciplines and undecided 
majors. Survey of basic principles, forms, and practices involved in 
administration of a business firm. Not open to junior or senior majors or 
minors in the School of Business. D 
ENTRP 1133 INTRODUCTION TO AGRICULTURAL 
BUSINESS 
This course introduces the fundamental concepts of agricultural business 
and will include a survey of basic principles, forms, and practices involved 
in administration of agribusiness organizations 
ENTRP 3113 INTRODUCTION TO MIS 
Introduce issues relevant to management, information, and computer 
systems. Intended to provide students with an overview of information 
systems. Students will gain knowledge in organizing, monitoring, and 
controlling information systems resources and addressing management 
problems using computerized information systems. Prerequisite: Basic 
knowledge and ability to use a computer system and COMSC1023. F, 
S, SU 
ENTRP 3123 LEGAL ENVIRONMENT OF BUSINESS 
An introduction to the legal system in the United States. Students are 
encouraged to analyze case law and legal precedent. Primary legal topics 
covered include constitutional, administrative, contract, tort and criminal 
law. Prerequisite: Junior standing. F, S 
ENTRP 3133 BUSINESS ETHICS 
An introduction to business ethics. Students will study business ethics in 
accounting, finance, management, and marketing. Prerequisite: Junior 
standing. F, S 
ENTRP 3173 INFORMATION/RECORDS MANAGEMENT 
SYSTEMS 
Introduction to the field of records management, awareness of the rapid 
changes in records management technology, and the growing career 
opportunities available in the records management field. Content includes 
a study of various filing systems and use of database software. D 
ENTRP 3213 LEGAL ISSUES IN AGRICULTURE 
An overview of legal issues, with an emphasis on their application to the 
needs of farm, agribusiness and agricultural industry practitioners at a state, 
national and global level. Prerequisite: Junior standing. D 
ENTRP 3223 COMMERCIAL LAW 
A study of the Uniform Commercial Code dealing with the sale of goods, 
commercial paper, secured transactions, debtor-creditor relations, 
documents of title and agency. Prerequisite: ENTRP 3123. S 
ENTRP 3313 REAL ESTATE 
Introduction to the principles of real estate in the United States, including 
the nature and description of real estate, rights and interests in land, forms 
of ownership, contract law, mortgages and notes, types of financing, 
sources of mortgage funds, and other laws governing the financing, 
management, and marketing of real estate. Prerequisite: Junior standing. 
F 
ENTRP 3353 BENEFITS AND COMPENSATION 
This course examines the strategic choices involved in establishing and 
maintaining ethical, legal and competitive compensation systems and 
employee benefit programs. It also offers students the skills with which to 
establish and maintain personnel records and forms in compliance with the 
law. In addition, it provides knowledge needed for student professional 
certification examinations. Prerequisite: Junior standing. 
ENTRP 3413 REAL ESTATE II 
Continuation of Real Estate. Topics include licensing laws, listing, laws 
impacting real property, risk management, and investments in real 
property. Prerequisite: FINAN 3313 or MNGMT 3313 or MRKTG 
3313. 
ENTRP 3423 BUSINESS COMMUNICATION 
A survey course of communication skills needed in the business 
environment. Content includes writing memoranda, letters, reports, 
resumes, and electronic messages; delivering oral presentations; and 
developing interpersonal skills. Critical thinking and problem-solving 
skills are emphasized. Development of these skills is integrated with the 
use of technology. ENTRP 3723 INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 
An examination of international business theory and practices. 
Prerequisite: MNGMT 3233. D 
ENTRP 3823 QUANTITATIVE METHODS IN BUSINESS 
This course addresses the component of quantitative skills needed in all 
areas of business. These skills include mathematical, statistical, forecasting 
and operations research. Computer utilization is used in analyzing and 
solving business related problems. Prerequisite: ECONO 2463. F, S, SU 
ENTRP 3923 ADVANCED COMPUTER BUSINESS 
APPLICATIONS 
An advanced study of computer software to prepare students for computer 
applications used in business courses and in the workplace. Content 
includes word processing, spreadsheet, database, and presentation 
software. Prerequisite: COMSC 1023. D 
ENTRP 4003 INDIVIDUAL STUDY IN 
ENTREPRENEURSHIP (TOPIC) 
Independent study of selected topics under the supervision of a general 
business faculty member. Prerequisite: Instructor, Advisor, and Chair 
approval. D 
ENTRP 4013 SEMINAR IN ENTREPRENEURSHIP 
(TOPIC) 
Group study of special topics in general business. Prerequisite: 
Instructor and Advisor approval. D 
ENTRP 4123 PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
In-depth study of human relations, job search, job interviewing, resume 
writing, etc., along with a study of current research/publications on 
workplace developments. S 
ENTRP 4133 EMPLOYMENT LAW 
This course is an introduction to employment law in the United States. The 
course will examine the employment relationship, discrimination in the 
workplace, and laws relating to: recruitment and applications, background 
checks and testing, hiring, wages and benefits, performance, and 
terminating the employment relationship. Prerequisite: ENTRP-3123. D 
ENTRP 4233 LEADERSHIP AND GENDER 
Students will examine the framework that gender and other factors play in 
defining and determining access to leadership in the U.S. workplace. 
Students will focus on leadership positions with the corporate, political, 
and non-profit sectors. The course will be interactive with discussions, 
outside readings, and videos. D 
ENTRP 4323 INTERNSHIP IN AGRICULTURE 
Directed experience working in an organization at a level requiring 
professional duties and responsibilities. Open only to students 
majoring/minoring in a business degree who have completed a minimum 
of 60 credit hours. Student must complete at least 200 hours of directed 
experience. A detailed journal and term report are required Prerequisite: 
Approval of supervising faculty, advisor, and Chair. D 

 
ENTRP 4333 INTERNSHIP IN ENTREPRENEURSHIP 
Directed experience working in an organization at a level requiring 
professional duties and responsibilities. Open only to students 
majoring/minoring in a business degree who have completed a minimum 
of 60 credit hours. Student must complete at least 200 hours of directed 
experience. A detailed journal and term report are required. Prerequisite: 
Approval of the supervising faculty, advisor, and Chair. D 
ENTRP 4433 ENTREPRENEURSHIP & NEW VENTURE 
A comprehensive course that examines entrepreneurial attitudes and 
understandings. It focuses on the application of management functions to 
the operation of small firms: feasibility of owning a business; financial 
planning and credit management; production and marketing decision 
making; the role of e-commerce; and human resources management. It 
focuses on the various steps and procedures necessary for the building of a 
successful venture. Students are introduced to the theory and practice of 
entrepreneurship through readings, case studies, web assignments, and a 
business plan project. 
ENTRP 4513 BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE 
Provide a managerial perspective to business analytics continuum 
beginning with descriptive analytics (e.g., the nature of data, statistical 
modeling, data visualization, and business intelligence), moving on to 
predictive analytics (e.g., data mining, text/web mining, social media 
mining), and then to prescriptive analytics (e.g., optimization and 
simulation), and finally finishing with Big Data, and future trends, privacy, 
and managerial considerations. Prerequisite: ENTRP 3113. F, S 
ENTRP 4733 BUSINESS PLAN DEVELOPMENT I 
This course develops the analytical and conceptual skills necessary to 
create a plan for the implementation of a new venture. Students will design 
a new venture and create a complete and complementary business plan. In 
this course students will examine specific business plan components, 
including environmental analysis, marketing plans, financial summaries, 
and organizational structures. F 
ENTRP 4743 BUSINESS PLAN DEVELOPMENT II 
This course is a seminar designed to prepare students to compete in a 
business plan competition. The contest simulates the real-world process of 
researching a market, writing a business plan, and presenting it to potential 
investors. Prerequisite: ENTRP 4733. S 
Finance 
FINAN 2113 PERSONAL FINANCIAL PLANNING 
An introductory course exploring personal financial management. Course 
topics may include personal budgeting, consumer loans, credit card usage, 
insurance, savings accounts, investments, social security, home ownership, 
financial institution services, personal taxes, wills, estate planning, 
retirement planning, career planning, financial planning, and leasing 
arrangements.  
FINAN 3213 RISK MANAGEMENT 
How do executives manage risk and plan for uncertainty? Enterprise Risk 
Management (ERM) tools and processes are increasingly becoming the 
answer. Analytical ERM techniques (using tools such as Excel) will be 
applied to model risks, leading to more effective decision making. 
FINAN 3313 REAL ESTATE 
Introduction to the principles of real estate in the United States, including 
the nature and description of real estate, rights and interests in land, forms 
of ownership, contract law, mortgages and notes, types of financing, 
sources of mortgage funds, and other laws governing the financing, 
management, and marketing of real estate. Prerequisite: Junior standing. 
F  
FINAN 3343 BUSINESS FINANCE 
A survey course with emphasis on the financial characteristics of modern 
U.S. corporations. Course topics may include financial planning and 
forecasting, capital budgeting, time value of money, cost of capital, 
financial statement analysis, security valuation, risk analysis, capital 
structure theory, working capital management, business taxation, asset 
mix, and sources of capital. 
 
FINAN 3353 FINANCIAL PLANNING 
An introduction to concepts and techniques for financial planners. Topics 
may include the general principles of financial planning, professional 
conduct and regulation, education planning, risk management and 
insurance planning, investment planning, tax planning, retirement and 
income planning, estate planning, and financial plan development. 
Prerequisite: FINAN-3343. D 
FINAN 3413 REAL ESTATE II 
Continuation of Real Estate. Topics include licensing laws, listing, laws 
impacting real property, risk management, and investments in real 
property. Prerequisite: FINAN 3313. 
FINAN 3493 ANALYZING FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
A comprehensive analysis of a firms' financial statements. Topics may 
include the limitations and generation of financial data, techniques for 
analyzing the flow of funds through a business, methods for the use and 
interpretation of financial ratios, and firm valuation. Prerequisite: 
FINAN-3343. D 
FINAN 3663 INVESTMENTS 
The nature of investments (including the characteristics of stocks, bonds, 
and other financial instruments) will be examined. Empirical evidence and 
analytical tools will be applied to the investment decision process and the 
construction of efficient portfolios. Prerequisite: FINAN-3343. S 
FINAN 4003 INDIVIDUAL STUDY IN FINANCE (TOPIC) 
Independent study of specified topics under the supervision of a finance 
faculty member. Prerequisite: Instructor, Advisor, and Chair approval. 
D 
FINAN 4013 SEMINAR IN FINANCE (TOPIC) 
Group study of specified topics in finance. Prerequisite: Instructor and 
Advisor approval. D 
FINAN 4063 FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS AND 
MARKETS 
The study of financial markets and institutions, government regulation, 
planning, and analysis. Prerequisite: FINAN 3343. F 
FINAN 4123 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE AND ETHICS 
An introduction to corporate governance and ethics. Topics may include 
stakeholder versus stockholder theory, agency theory, executive 
compensation, internal and external auditing, corporate boards of directors, 
the role of credit and equity market participants, governmental regulations 
and oversight, as well as best practices and codes of conduct prevalent 
within the financial services section. Prerequisite: FINAN-3343. D 
FINAN 4213 BANK MANAGEMENT 
Financial management of the banking firm including theories and practices 
of bank asset management, banking markets and competition. 
Prerequisite: FINAN 3343. F  
FINAN 4233 SMALL BUSINESS FINANCE 
Small businesses may not have access to the same financial tools as large 
corporations; however, finance is still used to enhance predictability and 
profitability. The effective financial management of small business and 
entrepreneurial firms will be examined through case studies.  Prerequisite: 
FINAN-3343. D 
 

 
FINAN 4253 FINANCIAL ISSUES IN AGRICULTURE 
Are agribusiness operations using their resources efficiently? Develop your 
financial skills and tools to analyze the performance of these businesses, 
more effectively manage their resources, and enhance their profitability.  
Prerequisite: FINAN 3343 
FINAN 4263 FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
Advanced study of finance applying financial modeling through case 
studies. 
FINAN 4333 INTERNSHIP IN FINANCE 
Directed experience working in an organization at a level requiring 
professional duties and responsibilities. Open only to students 
majoring/minoring in a business degree who have completed a minimum 
of 60 credit hours. Student must complete at least 200 hours of directed 
experience. A detailed journal and term report are required. Prerequisite: 
Approval of the supervising faculty, advisor, and Chair. D 
FINAN 4393 INTERNATIONAL FINANCE 
An examination of international financial markets and their impact on 
macroeconomic institutions. Designed to develop an understanding of 
exchange rate determination, foreign exchange policy, and international 
macroeconomic policy. FINAN 4513 PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT I 
Addresses the tools and processes available to manage the cash resources 
and meet the financial goals of the individual investor/enterprise. Students 
will construct, manage, track, and report results of an investment portfolio. 
FINAN 4523 PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT II 
The emphasis of this course is on constructing complex efficient portfolios 
along with the management of (and reporting about) those portfolios. 
Prerequisite: FINAN 4513 and Instructor approval. D 
FINAN 4733 BUSINESS PLAN DEVELOPMENT I 
This course develops the analytical and conceptual skills necessary to 
create a plan for the implementation of a new venture. Students will design 
a new venture and create a complete and complementary business plan. In 
this course students will examine specific business plan components, 
including environmental analysis, marketing plans, financial summaries, 
and organizational structures. Prerequisite: FINAN 3343. F 
FINAN 4743 BUSINESS PLAN DEVELOPMENT II 
This course is a seminar designed to prepare students to compete in a 
business plan competition. The contest simulates the real-world process of 
researching a market, writing a business plan, and presenting it to potential 
investors. Prerequisite: FINAN 4733. S 
FINAN 4763 DERIVATIVE SECURITIES 
A comprehensive course in the valuation and trading of all derivative 
securities with an emphasis on futures and options. Prerequisite: FINAN-
3663. D 
Management 
MNGMT 3233 MANAGEMENT 
An introductory management course dealing with the fundamental 
principles of management such as planning, organizing, directing, 
controlling and evaluation. This course addresses fundamental theory and 
the applications. Prerequisite: 45 hours completed. F, S, SU 
MNGMT 3243 PROMOTIONAL STRATEGY 
The course provides an in-depth study of the promotional tools available 
to the firm, individual, or organization including personal selling, sales 
promotion, advertising, and public relations and publicity. There is 
particular emphasis on strategic elements of the choices in developing the 
presentations. Prerequisite: MNGMT 3233. S 
MNGMT 3253 LEADERSHIP 
This course examines the impact of leadership on organizational 
effectiveness through a study of numerous theories of leadership. A 
historical review of leadership theory and research will be accompanied by 
current developments in understanding leadership. An assessment of the 
students’ own leadership provides the framework for self-awareness and 
potential perspective transformation using various questionnaires, 
structured feedback, and self-analysis assignments. The course develops 
leadership skills and planning for each student’s on-going development as 
a leader. Prerequisite: 45 hours completed. 
MNGMT 3313 REAL ESTATE 
Introduction to the principles of real estate in the United States, including 
the nature and description of real estate, right and interests in land, forms 
of ownership, contract law, mortgages and notes, types of financing, 
sources of mortgage funds, and other laws governing the financing, 
management, and marketing of real estate. Prerequisite: Junior standing. 
F 
MNGMT 3333 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 
Introduces the student to modern methods of selection, testing, training, 
and solving basic personnel and human resource management problems. 
Prerequisite: Junior standing. F, S 
MNGMT 3343 TALENT MANAGEMENT 
This course is designed for students interested in learning more about 
training as a tool for human resource development in organizations. This 
course will help students prepare and implement workshops, seminars, and 
training programs for professional development. In addition to 
instructional design, the course will focus on methods of teaching skills to 
adult learners and instruction and practice in conducting experiential 
activities. Methods of assessing learning outcomes and evaluation of 
training programs will also be covered. 
MNGMT 3413 REAL ESTATE II 
Continuation of Real Estate. Topics include licensing laws, listing, laws 
impacting real property, risk management, and investments in real 
property. Prerequisite: MNGMT 3313. S 
MNGMT 3433 DYNAMICS OF ORGANIZATIONAL 
MANAGEMENT 
In this course learners will examine governance and control, social 
responsibility, organizational structure and design, culture, the global 
environment, effects of technology, and change as it relates to 
organizations. Prerequisite: MNGMT 3233. F, S 
MNGMT 3533 ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR 
Provides an understanding to behavior in organizational settings. Emphasis 
will be given to understanding, predicting, and controlling human behavior 
in both traditional as well as group- and team-oriented organizational 
structures. Application is accomplished through extensive use of group 
interaction and in-class experiential exercises. Prerequisite: MNGMT 
3233. F, S 
MNGMT 4003 INDIVIDUAL STUDY IN MANAGEMENT 
(TOPIC) 
Independent study of selected topics under the supervision of a 
management faculty member. Prerequisite: Instructor, Advisor, and 
Chair approval. D 
MNGMT 4013 SEMINAR IN MANAGEMENT (TOPIC) 
Group study of special topics in management. Prerequisite: Instructor 
and Advisor approval. D 
MNGMT 4103 NEGOTIATION AND CONFLICT 
This course is designed to develop learners’ practical skills necessary for 
success in the world of business. Communication and negotiation strategies 
are implemented to manage conflict and difficult personalities. Application 
is accomplished through extensive use of group interaction and in-class 
experiential exercises. 
MNGMT 4113 GENDER ISSUES IN HR MANAGEMENT 
& DEVELOPMENT 
Survey course into gender issues in the workplace. This course will 
explore the legal and cultural aspects of work environments, policies and 
practices surrounding gender differences and equality. D 

 
MNGMT 4123 MANAGERIAL ETHICS 
The study of managerial ethics in a dynamic and changing environment. 
Stakeholders and issues management approaches are reviewed in the 
decision-making process. Both classical and contemporary concepts are 
explored as an aspect of managerial ethics. Management decisions that are 
value-laden will be assessed in the moral context. The student will gain 
knowledge in managing corporate social responsibility and individual 
ethical leadership. Prerequisite: MNGMT 3233. S 
MNGMT 4133 PRODUCTION/OPERATIONS 
MANAGEMENT 
Production and operations problems of manufacturing and service firms; 
use of quantitative techniques to aid in decision making; decision areas 
include strategy, process and capital planning, facility layout, design of 
work systems, quality, just-in-time inventory systems, transportation, 
location planning, learning curves, linear programming and reliability. 
MNGMT 4143 ETHICS, BEHAVIOR, AND LEADERSHIP 
This course is an examination of ethics in organizations and the role of 
organizational leaders in fostering ethical behavior. Case studies, 
discussion, self-assessment exercises and reading assignments explore the 
basic frameworks of ethical leadership. Students will demonstrate a 
competency in critical thinking skills to both identify and remedy ethical 
issues typically encountered in organizational settings and interactions. 
Prerequisite: 45 hours completed. 
MNGMT 4153 SPECIAL TOPICS IN LEADERSHIP 
An introduction to a special topic, theme, or issue related to leadership. The 
subject will vary from semester to semester, depending on current trends 
and emerging best practices from the field. Prerequisite: 45 hours 
completed. 
MNGMT 4163 MANAGERIAL LEADERSHIP 
This course examines the impact of leadership on organizational 
effectiveness through a study of numerous theories of leadership. A 
conceptual understanding of the individual, interpersonal, and institutional 
impact of strong moral leadership in relation to strategic objectives is 
discussed. Emphasis is placed on exploring contemporary leadership issues 
and the development of effective leadership skills. Prerequisite: 
MNGMT 3233 or ORGL 4333. S 
MNGMT 4173 SALES SKILLS MANAGEMENT IN 
AGRICULTURE 
The course will focus on the terminology, principles, practices, and 
processes involved in sales and sales management. The course is a fun way 
to develop the necessary skill set to successfully sell products and learn the 
unique nature of sales management. Extensive case studies, group work, 
and oral presentations will be involved. The hands-on final project will 
require students to create a sales skills management deliverable for an 
agricultural business or organization. 
MNGMT 4183 SALES SKILLS & MANAGEMENT 
The course will focus on the terminology, principles, practices, and 
processes involved in sales and sales management. The course is a fun way 
to develop the necessary skill set to successfully sell products and learn the 
unique nature of sales management. Extensive case studies, group work, 
and oral presentations will be involved. 
MNGMT 4213 CRISIS MANAGEMENT 
Crisis occurs at the personal, organized, local, state, and national level. All 
organizations, private, public and not-for-profit are faced with the 
possibility of disasters that impact their ability to successfully continue 
operations. On a smaller scale, crisis can create convenient planning, 
preparation, response, recovery, and the organizational transition that must 
occur after recovery from a crisis. Prerequisite: MNGMT 3233. D 
MNGMT 4223 INNOVATIVE MANAGEMENT 
TECHNOLOGIES 
Innovation is a concern in all organizations. In fact, innovation is a building 
block to the creation of sustainable competitive advantage. All 
organizations must learn to incorporate and use technology to innovate all 
systems and processes in their organizations. This course will discuss the 
use of technology in management functions. The focus is on innovative 
collaborative technologies that increase creativity and efficiency. 
Technologies discussed will include: Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP), 
Human Resource Information Systems (HRIS), problem solving and 
decision-making software, brainstorming software, web conferencing, 
SMART boards, Joomla and Drupal. Prerequisite: MNGMT 3233. D 
MNGMT 4233 SERVICES MARKETING 
This course examines the special attributes of services that make the 
marketing and management of services different and more challenging than 
the marketing of goods. As services dominate the economics of the 
industrialized world, students will learn a managerial approach to 
competing in an ever-increasing competitive and technological world. The 
course is lecture, discussion, and project based. Prerequisite: MNGMT 
3233. S 
MNGMT 4243 PRACTICAL MANAGEMENT SKILLS 
This course will focus on developing practical management skills that 
transfer knowledge from theoretical courses into practical application. 
Each student will have an opportunity to address: time management, 
organization methods, managing meetings, leading a team through a 
problem-solving initiative, creating a change management plan – Gap 
analysis, communicating a plan in writing and verbally, interviewing and 
appraising performance, and providing verbal feedback. Prerequisite: 
MNGMT 3233. D 
MNGMT 4283 TEAM LEADERSHIP MANAGEMENT 
This course focuses on developing essential leadership and team building 
skills needed for success in organizations. Designed to help students to 
master skills using a five-step active learning model containing steps of 
skill assessment, skill learning, skill analysis, skill practice, and skill 
application. Topics include creating a team, planning, and communicating 
in a team, leading a team, gaining power and influence, developing self-
awareness, managing stress, creative problem-solving, motivation, and 
effective team performance. Prerequisite: 45 hours completed. 
MNGMT 4313 EVENT MANAGEMENT 
This course gives learners the opportunity to conceptualize, plan, and 
manage an event for a charitable organization during the course period. 
This provides learners with hands-on experience in managing a team, 
managing the creative process, managing the development of a plan of 
action, managing a budget, managing communication channels, and 
managing the event. The goal of this course is to learn how to create and 
manage a successful event while providing a service to our community. 
Prerequisite: MNGMT 3233. D  
MNGMT 4323 PROJECT MANAGEMENT 
This course gives learners the opportunity to conceptualize, plan, and 
manage an individual project. The project may be personal or business 
related. This provides learners with hands-on experience in planning the 
management of a team, management of the creative process, management 
of the development of a plan of action, management of a budget, 
management of communication channels, and management of the entire 
project. The goal of this course is to learn how to create and manage a 
successful project using project management methodology. Prerequisite: 
MNGMT 3233. D 
MNGMT 4333 INTERNSHIP IN MANAGEMENT 
Directed experience working in an organization at a level requiring 
professional duties and responsibilities. Open only to students 
majoring/minoring in a business degree who have completed a minimum 
of 60 credit hours. Student must complete at least 200 hours of directed 
experience. A detailed journal and term report are required. Prerequisite: 
Approval of the supervising faculty, advisor, and Chair. D 
MNGMT 4433 ENTREPRENEURSHIP & NEW VENTURE 
A comprehensive course that examines entrepreneurial attitudes and 
understandings. It focuses on the application of management functions to 
the operation of small firms: feasibility of owning a business; financial 
planning and credit management; production and marketing decision 
making; the role of e-commerce; and human resources management. It 
focuses on the various steps and procedures necessary for the building of a 
successful venture. Students are introduced to the theory and practice of 
entrepreneurship through readings, case studies, web assignments, and a 

 
business plan project. 
MNGMT 4633 INTERNATIONAL MANAGEMENT 
A course designed to involve the student with the theories, concepts, 
problems, and practices encountered in managing the multi-national 
business firm. Prerequisite: MNGMT 3233. F 
MNGMT 4733 BUSINESS PLAN DEVELOPMENT I 
This course develops the analytical and conceptual skills necessary to 
create a plan for the implementation of a new venture. Students will design 
a new venture and create a complete and complementary business plan. In 
this course students will examine specific business plan components, 
including environmental analysis, marketing plans, financial summaries, 
and organizational structures. F 
MNGMT 4743 BUSINESS PLAN DEVELOPMENT II 
This course is a seminar designed to prepare students to compete in a 
business plan competition. The contest simulates the real-world process of 
researching a market, writing a business plan, and presenting it to potential 
investors. Prerequisite: MNGMT 4733. S 
MNGMT 4923 STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT AND 
POLICY 
A comprehensive course in business policy formulation and strategy 
development, integrating all aspects of business management. The course 
is designed to introduce students to the theory and practice of strategic 
management using a variety of readings and cases and other pedagogical 
tools and techniques. 
during the last semester of undergraduate coursework. F, S, SU 
Marketing 
MRKTG 3113 PERSONAL BRANDING 
Personal Branding means becoming the “CEO of You, Inc.” (Butler, 2012). 
Whether your major is accounting, art, agriculture, or undecided, this class 
has been designed to encourage and empower you to develop your personal 
brand in a way that adds real value. This is a hands-on, heads-on class. You 
will meet industry leaders, participate in panel discussions, and interact 
with your peers as you research what makes your personal brand important. 
We will also investigate marketing concepts such as competitive 
advantage, product development, and promotional strategies as it relates to 
your personal brand development. Finally, you will leave this course with 
a personal branding plan that will help you excel in college and in the 
workplace. S 
MRKTG 3143 PRINCIPLES OF MARKETING 
The course provides an overview of the Marketing process structured 
around the concept of the “Four P’s of Marketing.” The course is intended 
as a foundation course for those who will pursue further coursework in the 
discipline and as a survey course of Marketing’s importance to the firm for 
those who will not. Prerequisite: 45 hours completed. F, S, SU 
MRKTG 3243 PROMOTIONAL STRATEGY 
The course provides an in-depth study of the promotional tools available 
to the firm, individual, or organization including personal selling, sales 
promotion, advertising, and public relations and publicity. There is 
particular emphasis on strategic elements of the choices in developing the 
Promotional Mix. The course may require case studies and oral 
presentations. Prerequisite: MRKTG 3143. S 
MRKTG 3263 RETAIL MANAGEMENT 
This course is designed to help students understand the nature and function 
of retailing, as well as the strategies used by retailers. To analyze 
environmental influences on retailing, including consumers, competition, 
and legal regulations. To understand the management aspect of retailing, 
including finances, organization, and facilities, and relates principles of 
retailing to accounting, marketing, and management principles. To explore 
the selection process of retail markets. To demonstrate knowledge and 
understanding of the process of managing the retail mix. To become 
familiar with the five buying functions. Prerequisite: MNGMT 3233 and 
MRKTG 3143. D 
MRKTG 3313 REAL ESTATE 
Introduction to the principles of real estate in the United States, including 
the nature and description of real estate, rights and interests in land, forms 
of ownership, contract law, mortgages and notes, types of financing, 
sources of mortgage funds, and other laws governing the financing, 
management, and marketing of real estate. Prerequisite: Junior standing. 
F 
MRKTG 3413 REAL ESTATE II 
Continuation of Real Estate. Topics include licensing laws, listing, laws 
impacting real property, risk management, and investments in real 
property. Prerequisite: MRKTG 3313. 
MRKTG 3443 CONSUMER BEHAVIOR 
An examination of individual and family behaviors in the marketplace 
using research methods, principles, and theories found in the social 
sciences with specific focus on demographics, family life cycle, family 
dynamics, roles, cultural & ethnic influences, and individual and group 
decision making. Prerequisite: MRKTG 3143. F 
MRKTG 4001 INDIVIDUAL STUDY IN MARKETING 
(TOPIC) 
Independent study of selected topics under the supervision of a marketing 
faculty member. Prerequisite: Instructor, Advisor, and Chair's 
approval. D 
MRKTG 4003 INDIVIDUAL STUDY IN MARKETING 
(TOPIC) 
Independent study of selected topics under the supervision of a marketing 
faculty member. Prerequisite: Instructor, Advisor, and Chair's 
approval. D 
MRKTG 4013 SEMINAR IN MARKETING (TOPIC) 
Group study of specified topics in marketing. Prerequisite: Instructor 
and Advisor approval. D 
MRKTG 4123 SERVICES MARKETING 
This course examines the special attributes of services that make the 
marketing and management of services different and more challenging than 
the marketing of goods. As services dominate the economics of the 
industrialized world, students will learn a managerial approach to 
competing in an ever-increasing competitive and technological world. The 
course is lecture, discussion, and project based. Prerequisite: MRKTG 
3143. S 
MRKTG 4133 SPORTS MARKETING 
An in-depth study of the application of marketing principles and concepts 
in the sports industry. Includes sponsorships, branding, promotions, public 
relations, licensing, and sports consumer research and behavior from the 
perspective of both participants and spectators. Prerequisite: MRKTG 
3143. D 
MRKTG 4143 MARKETING MANAGEMENT 
The purpose of this course is to prepare and apply the concepts learned in 
previous marketing classes to actual marketplace conditions. Future 
marketing managers will apply marketing concepts to plan, implement, and 
control programs designed to bring about desired exchanges with target 
markets for the purpose of achieving organizational objectives. Marketing 
management includes designing the organization’s offerings in terms of the 
target market’s needs and desires and effective product development, 
pricing, promotion, and distribution channels as they apply to the 
marketing plan. 
The purpose of this course is to prepare students to apply the concepts 
learned in previous marketing classes to actual marketplace conditions. 
Future marketing managers will apply marketing concepts to plan, 
implement, and control programs designed to bring about desired 
exchanges with target markets for the purpose of achieving organizational 
objectives. Marketing management includes designing the organization’s 
offerings in terms of the target market’s needs and desires and effective 
product development, pricing, promotion, and distribution channels as they 
apply to the marketing plan. The hands-on final project will require 

 
students to create a marketing management deliverable for an agricultural 
business or organization. 
MRKTG 4183 SALES SKILLS & MANAGEMENT 
The course will focus on the terminology, principles, practices, and 
processes involved in sales and sales management. The course is a fun way 
to develop the necessary skill set to successfully sell products and learn the 
unique nature of sales management. Extensive case studies, group work, 
and oral presentations will be involved. 
MRKTG 4243 MARKETING RESEARCH 
The course is designed to prepare the student to be an informed, effective 
user of marketing research; to acquaint the student with the importance of 
well-developed research questions; to address those questions using the 
appropriate basic research design; and, to select an adequate sample with 
which to answer those questions. The course provides an overview of 
research techniques available for collecting information to answer specific 
research questions. MRKTG 4333 INTERNSHIP IN MARKETING 
Directed experience working in an organization at a level requiring 
professional duties and responsibilities. Open only to students 
majoring/minoring in a business degree who have completed a minimum 
of 60 credit hours. Student must complete at least 200 hours of directed 
experience. A detailed journal and term report are required. Prerequisite: 
Approval of the supervising faculty, advisor, and Chair. D 
MRKTG 4443 CHANNELS OF DISTRIBUTION 
The focus of this course is on supply chain management from the 
perspectives of suppliers, intermediaries, and ultimate organizational users 
of goods, ideas, and services. The importance and impact of relationship 
marketing is examined and analyzed. Case studies and oral presentations 
are utilized. Prerequisite: MRKTG 3143. D 
MRKTG 4543 BUSINESS TO BUSINESS MARKETING 
The course examines the terminology, principles, practices, and processes 
involved in marketing goods and services to businesses, governmental 
agencies, and institutions. Extensive case studies, group work, and oral 
presentations may be involved. Prerequisite: MRKTG 3143. D 
MRKTG 4643 INTERNATIONAL MARKETING 
The course expands the scope of marketing principles from a domestic 
market to the considerably broader and increasingly important and 
competitive international arena. The course emphasizes such major topics 
as cultural differences, legal and monetary considerations, and adaptations 
to the domestic marketing mix. Prerequisite: MRKTG 3143. S 
MRKTG 4733 BUSINESS PLAN DEVELOPMENT I 
This course develops the analytical and conceptual skills necessary to 
create a plan for the implementation of a new venture. Students will design 
a new venture and create a complete and complementary business plan. In 
this course students will examine specific business plan components, 
including environmental analysis, marketing plans, financial summaries, 
and organizational structures. F 
MRKTG 4743 BUSINESS PLAN DEVELOPMENT II 
This course is a seminar designed to prepare students to compete in a 
business plan competition. The contest simulates the real-world process of 
researching a market, writing a business plan, and presenting it to potential 
investors. Prerequisite: MRKTG 4733. S 
 
DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTER SCIENCE 
Computer Science 
COMSC 1023 COMPUTERS & INFORMATION ACCESS 
Introduction to computers, computer software, and the use of computers to 
access information for general education students. Includes an introduction 
to computer concepts and security, operating systems, and computer 
applications, including Word, Excel, PowerPoint, and Access. F, S, SU 
NOTE: The course curriculum is based on the Windows operating 
system. Students who do not have access to a Windows computer 
should plan to use computers in the SWOSU computer labs whether 
taking this course online or face-to-face. 
COMSC 1033 COMPUTER SCIENCE I 
This is an introductory programming course. This course focuses on 
algorithm design, problem-solving strategies and program design. Topics 
covered include variables, types, expressions and control structures. 
Additional topics are standard input/output; file input/output; file streams; 
single and multi-dimensional arrays; searching; sorting; and recursion and 
its relation to iteration. This course also introduces object-oriented 
programming concepts such as classes and objects; syntax of class 
definitions; methods and parameter passing. Source code management is 
introduced. F, S 
COMSC 1053 COMPUTER SCIENCE II 
This course is a continuation of Computer Science I. Object-oriented 
programming concepts such as class inheritance, encapsulation and 
polymorphism are covered. Topics covered include abstract classes; 
interfaces; GUI programming; event-driven programming; data abstraction 
through use of classic data structures list, stack and queue; and object-
oriented thinking and design. Emphasis will be on program design, 
modularity, debugging, and documentation. Source code management is 
practiced in paired programming projects. Prerequisite: COMSC 1033. 
F, S 
COMSC 1103 INTRODUCTION TO INFORMATION 
SECURITY & ETHICS 
This course is an overview of the fundamentals of a practical information 
security program with special emphasis on information security awareness, 
security systems development, implementation, maintenance, and ethics. 
This course provides an integrated, comprehensive, up-to-date coverage of 
the information security policies, process, computer science techniques, 
security tools, and awareness vital to information security. The classroom 
instruction provides a practical approach (case scenarios) of both the 
principles and practice of information, computer, and network security for 
the enterprise and home. F, S 
COMSC 1433 VISUAL BASIC PROGRAMMING 
This course provides students with the knowledge and skills needed to 
develop applications in Microsoft Visual Basic .NET for the Microsoft 
.NET platform. The course focuses on user interfaces, object-oriented 
programming, language syntax, and implementation details. It also 
introduces ADO.Net for database access and files input/output and 
dynamic arrays. F, S 
COMSC 2011-4 SEMINAR IN COMPUTER SCIENCE 
Group study of specified beginning and intermediate level topics in 
computer science. Credit: 1-4 semester hours. D 
COMSC 2043 DISCRETE STRUCTURES 
Introduction to discrete mathematics for computer science. Sets, functions, 
propositional and predicate logic, Boolean algebra, graph theory, matrices, 
proof techniques, combinatorics, and finite state machines. 
COMSC 2413 DATA STRUCTURES 
This course introduces the techniques needed to manipulate commonly 
occurring data structures. It begins reviewing the Python approach to data 
abstraction and continues treatment of how to create and maintain various 
data structures as arrays, stacks, queues, linked lists, binary search trees, 
hash and binary heaps. Algorithms (e.g., divide and conquer, time 
complexity, sorting, Big O) and efficiency are also discussed. 
Prerequisite: COMSC 1053. F 
COMSC 2463 PROGRAMMING IN C# WITH UNITY 
Introduction to programming in C# for students with programming 
experience. Programming topics include advanced applications using C# 
such as unity game design. Prerequisite: COMSC 1033. S 
COMSC 2473 PROGRAMMING IN C++ 
Emphasis in this course will be object-oriented C++. Topics include 
definition of class, data abstraction, pointers, member functions, friend 
functions, static class member, operator overloading, inheritance, virtual 
function, polymorphism, template, exception handling, reusability, generic 

 
algorithms in C++, introduction to Standard Template Library, files and 
standard input/output, single and multi-dimensional arrays, and advanced 
algorithms for searching and sorting. Extensive programming exercises in 
C++ are required. Prerequisite: COMSC 1033 or familiarity with a 
modern programming language. F 
COMSC 2603 NETWORK SECURITY 
This course will take an in-depth look at network defense concepts and 
techniques. It will examine theoretical concepts that make the world of 
networking unique. This course will also adopt a practical hands-on 
approach when examining network defense techniques. Along with 
examining different network defense strategies, this course will explore the 
advancement of network implementation, as well as timeless problem-
solving strategies. Prerequisite: COMSC 1103. F, S 
COMSC 3013 COMPUTER ARCHITECTURE 
Study of a modern computer system as a layered structure. Digital logic, 
micro programming, Von Neumann machines, operating systems, 
assembly and high-level virtual machines, emphasizing fundamental 
concepts of each layer in the hierarchy and relationships between the 
layers. F 
COMSC 3043 SYSTEMS PROGRAMMING 
The aim of this course is to introduce students to the concepts essential for 
understanding how to make use of the resources provided by a multi-
processing operating system. Particular attention is paid to utilities that 
may be available for systems management tasks and to questions of inter-
process communication. The course falls fairly naturally into five parts: 
utilities, system calls, networking, inter-process communication, the OSI 
network model, Sockets and Remote Procedure Calls. The system of 
reference is Linux/Unix. Prerequisite: COMSC 2413. S 
COMSC 3053 OPERATING SYSTEMS 
Introduction to different types of operating systems, overview of operating 
system architecture, processes, shared resources, security, memory 
management, resource allocation, scheduling deadlocks, and file 
management. Emphasis will be on the algorithms associated with the above 
concepts and implementing them as programming assignments 
individually. Prerequisite: COMSC 1053. F 
COMSC 3123 INTRODUCTION TO ESPORTS 
MANAGEMENT 
The course introduces the development of gaming, its impact on history 
and its rise to twenty-first century eSports. The course will delve into 
eSports and gaming history, business concepts required for managing 
eSports, and career opportunities within the field of eSports. 
COMSC 3133 SOFTWARE ENGINEERING 
Techniques and procedures for developing software products and 
supporting documentation. Emphasis on software life cycle models and 
teamwork in the development of software products. Prerequisite: 
COMSC 2413. S 
COMSC 3153 DATA COMMUNICATIONS AND 
NETWORKS 
This course is an introduction to data communication technology and 
protocols/standards, local area networks, wide area networks, and the 
Internet is provided. The trends in regulation and telecommunications 
technology applicable to the transmission of voice, data, and images are 
examined. Prerequisite: COMSC 2043. S 
COMSC 3253 INTRODUCTION TO COMPUTER 
FORENSICS 
The course focuses on clear and authoritative instructions about the field 
of computer forensics as it applies to the investigative process; from the 
collection of digital evidence to the presentation of Computer Forensic 
Examination findings in a court of law. Upon successful completion of the 
course, students will have a basic understanding of the computer forensic 
process, the scientific procedure involved in accounting, law enforcement, 
and computer sciences. Topics also include the science of computer 
forensics and how it relates to and is utilized within the judicial system of 
the United States. F, S 
COMSC 3353 SYSTEMS ANALYSIS AND DESIGN 
A study of the techniques for needs analysis development of requirements 
specifications for an application system is undertaken in this course. The 
implementation of operational systems and selection of hardware/software 
are examined in detail. The importance/impact of organizational behavior 
is evaluated in the context of support systems design. Topics such as 
System Development Life Cycle (SDLC) and Rapid Application 
Development (RAD) will be covered. Process analysis and design, 
development of functional specifications, physical design, and operational 
design will be discussed in test cases presented to and by students. 
Prerequisite: COMSC 1053. F 
COMSC 3403 DATABASE SYSTEMS 
Introduction to relational databases, study of relational database model, 
entity relationship modeling, normalization, SQL, transaction management 
and concurrency control. Includes implementation and maintenance of 
databases using Database Management Systems (DBMS) software 
products. COMSC 3413 INTRODUCTION TO CYBERSECURITY 
In this course, students receive instruction and lab assignments focused on 
introductory concepts in cybersecurity. This course will teach students how 
to properly secure a network using a layered security model. Students learn 
about and then build a network starting with physical security measures 
and progressing all the way down to the data defenses, just as they would 
on the job. Prerequisite: COMSC 2603. 
COMSC 3513 IS PROJECT MANAGEMENT 
This course will train the students in planning, scheduling, and controlling 
an Information System (IS) project during its life cycle. Techniques for 
planning, scheduling, and controlling projects will be discussed and 
applied. Demonstrations and exercises in using project-management 
software (such as MS project and ProjectLibre) are provided. Students will 
be given an opportunity to develop and execute an IS project and address 
issues such as staffing, scheduling, risk assessment and control, equipment 
needs and deployment, development of processes, development of 
procedures, development of policies, shareholder involvement, and project 
close-out. Prerequisite: COMSC 1103. F, S 
COMSC 3603 HARDWARE/SOFTWARE CONCEPTS 
This course provides an overview of computer and network hardware. It 
covers topics such as computer parts, tools, supporting various computer 
parts, network hardware, and supporting networks. This class will also help 
with preparation for the hardware session of the CompTIA A+ 220-901 
certification test. F 
COMSC 3613 CYBERSECURITY ETHICS & LAW 
This course looks at ethics involved in today’s cybersecurity field by using 
real-world scenarios and applying the five codes of ethics: integrity, 
objectivity, professional competence, confidentiality, and professional 
behavior. This course will also look at cybersecurity law and how it 
promotes the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of public and 
private information, systems, and networks, through the use of forward-
looking regulations and incentives, with the goal of protecting individual 
rights and privacy, economic interests, and national security. 
COMSC 3853 COMPUTER FORENSICS ANALYSIS 
This course will offer students the knowledge and skills necessary to 
install, configure, and effectively use software available to perform 
complete computer forensic examinations. Students will demonstrate 
proficiency in the skills needed to conduct an effective Windows-based 
computer forensic examination to locate and analyze evidence found 
during the examination of computer systems utilizing the uCertify 
simulation software. Students may take the uCertify Exam to receive the 
uCertify Computer Forensics Analysis Certification at the conclusion of 
the course. Prerequisite: COMSC 3253. S 
COMSC 3913 WEB DEVELOPMENT 
A study of web development using Macromedia Dreamweaver. Covers 
static and dynamic content, links, page layout, cascading styling sheets, 
and media objects. A significant student project is required. F 

 
COMSC 3933 MULTIMEDIA SYSTEMS-DESIGN AND 
EVALUATION 
An investigation of multimedia systems and their applications. Techniques 
and processes for creating professional presentations based on utilization 
of sound, clip art, video, and text will be studied. Students will also 
examine the effect of multimedia presentations on social issues associated 
with the application environment. S 
COMSC 4001-4 INDEPENDENT STUDY IN COMPUTER 
SCIENCE 
Specified projects in computer science. One to four credit hours. D 
COMSC 4011-4 COMPUTER SCIENCE SEMINAR 
Group study of specified advanced topics in computer science. One to four 
credit hours. D 
COMSC 4033 PRINCIPLES OF PROGRAMMING 
LANGUAGES 
The aim of this course is to introduce students to the general principles and 
concepts underlying programming languages, including such topics as 
syntax and its specification, exception handling and memory management. 
Students will see how these topics fit into different types of programming 
languages which can be classified as logical, procedural, and object 
oriented. Prerequisite: COMSC 2043. F 
COMSC 4043 GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEMS 
Fundamental concepts of Geographic Information Systems (GIS), 
elements of GIS, analysis of spatial information, real-world applications, 
map creation and analysis. Primary objective is to investigate interactive 
GIS application rather than develop expert users. S 
COMSC 4133 DESIGN AND ANALYSIS OF COMPUTER 
ALGORITHMS 
Topics include asymptotic notations and analysis, big-O, recurrence 
relations, sorting (quick sort, merge sort…) and searching algorithms, 
divide and conquer, dynamic programming, basic graph algorithms, the 
greedy method, backtracking, NP-completeness. 
COMSC 4143 SERVER MANAGEMENT 
This course provides students with experience in using the Windows 
Server and Linux Servers. Students will gain knowledge and skills needed 
to manage server accounts and resources, maintain server resources, 
monitor server performance, as well as safeguard data. S 
COMSC 4173 MOBILE APPLICATIONS 
This course will focus on building platform independent applications for 
mobile devices. Topics will include focused app development, mobile 
device emulators, app prototyping and testing, app experience design, and 
app updates, iteration, and life cycle management. Prerequisite: COMSC 
1033. S 
COMSC 4453 ADVANCED DATABASE SYSTEMS 
The course covers advanced topics in databases. Possible topics include 
multimedia databases, data on the Web, data mining and data warehousing 
as well as emerging issues and concepts in database design, 
implementation, and management. Prerequisite: COMSC 3403. S 
COMSC 4513 BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE 
Provide a managerial perspective to business analytics continuum 
beginning with descriptive analytics (e.g., the nature of data, statistical 
modeling, data visualization, and business intelligence), moving on to 
predictive analytics (e.g., data mining, text/web mining, social media 
mining), and then to prescriptive analytics (e.g., optimization and 
simulation), and finally finishing with Big Data, and future trends, privacy, 
and managerial considerations. Prerequisite: ENTRP 3113. F, S 
COMSC 4603 ADVANCED HARDWARE/SOFTWARE 
CONCEPTS 
Course content includes the study of current hardware and software. 
Possible topics include virtualization, virtual machines, security strategies, 
connection and installation of a network, custom-built computers, and 
network hardware support. Prerequisite: COMSC 3603. S 
COMSC 4753 COMPUTER GRAPHICS 
Design of graphics systems. Development of algorithms needed to 
implement both two- and three-dimensional graphics. Experience with a 
variety of graphics devices and software packages. 
COMSC 4913 E-COMMERCE WEB DEVELOPMENT 
Topics include introduction to scripting; JavaScript and VB Script, 
dynamic HTML; Object Model, Collection Model and Event Model, 
Server Side Web Application Development with Scripting; accessing 
database and server data, Active Server Pages (ASP.NET), design and 
implementation of e-commerce transaction applications. Students will 
create sites for online order and other information processing using 
Microsoft's ASP.NET technology. Prerequisite: COMSC 3913. S 
COMSC 4921-3 COMPUTER SCIENCE INTERNSHIP 
Designed to prepare the students to cope with the professional challenges 
in the computer field. Students must complete two hundred forty hours of 
employment with an approved employer in the area of computer 
information support or development. Reports, meeting with other interns, 
and a presentation to the faculty are required. 
COMSC 4943 DESIGN PRACTICUM 
Preparation for (or continuation of) CS/IS Capstone where students will 
work in small groups under the supervision of a faculty advisor on real-
world problem/requirement defined by a client in consultation with the 
faculty advisor. The project team will work like a contractor and handle all 
facets of the project including cost estimation, scheduling, project 
management and control, technical work, documentation, and client 
interface. The final product of the program will be a project report and team 
presentation. Prerequisite: Senior Standing. F 
COMSC 4953 CS/IS CAPSTONE 
Students will work in small groups under the supervision of a faculty 
advisor on real-world problem/requirement defined by a client in 
consultation with the advisor. The project team will work like a contractor 
and handle all facets of the project including cost estimation, scheduling, 
project management and control, technical work, documentation, and client 
interface. The final product of the program will be a project report. 
Prerequisite: Senior Standing. S 
DEPARTMENT OF 
ENGINEERING TECHNOLOGY 
Engineering Technology 
MFET 3183 STATICS AND STRENGTHS 
The study of force systems in two dimensions, equilibrium, moments, 
analysis of structures, friction, centroids, moments of inertia, stress, 
modulus of elasticity, and shear. Corequisite: MFET 3183L. 
MFET 3433 AUTOMATION AND CONTROL SYSTEMS 
Basic automation system principles, including sensor technology, motion 
principles, and microcontroller technology are applied. Degrees of 
freedom, multi-axis motion, gripper technology and other robotic features 
are covered. Lab includes programming automation systems, interfacing 
sensors, and troubleshooting basic hardware and software programs. 
Corequisite: MFET 3433L. F, S 
MFET 4020 PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATION  
REQUIREMENTS 
Non-credit course required of all students who seek professional 
certification in Engineering Technology and Industrial Technology. 
Prerequisite:  Senior classification. F, S 
MFET 4443 MATERIALS HANDLING AND FACILITY  
PLANNING 
A study of the factors influencing location, layout, and planning of 
industrial facilities. Prerequisite: TECH 2213. F, S 

 
MFET 4753 SENIOR CAPSTONE  
The development and completion of an independent senior project. The 
student will be required to generate and analyze data, design a solution and 
present all work. This work will encompass oral presentations, a poster, 
and a detailed project paper with drawings submitted to SWOSU. 
Prerequisite: Senior Standing. F 
TECH 1101 INTRODUCTION TO TECHNOLOGY 
An orientation course for technology and undeclared students to help 
prepare the student to successfully accomplish their college career goals. 
F, S 
TECH 1223 TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETY 
A survey course introducing the student to new and emerging technologies 
in relation to their economic, social, and global impact on society. F, S 
TECH 1713 BASIC ELECTRICAL SCIENCE 
Theory and practices of basic concepts of electricity. These concepts 
include an understanding of circuit properties, Ohm’s law, Power Law, and 
basic components of circuits. Prerequisite: MATH 1513. F, S 
TECH 2000-4 INDEPENDENT STUDY IN TECHNOLOGY  
(TOPIC) 
Specified topic in technology. Credit one to four semester hours. D 
TECH 2011-4 SEMINAR IN TECHNOLOGY (TOPIC) 
Specified topic in technology for undergraduate students. Credit one to four 
semester hours. D 
TECH 2213 2D CAD 
A study of computer techniques for drafting including drawing, editing and 
plotting commands. AutoCAD software is used to produce orthographic, 
schematic, pictorial and architectural drawings. 3D drawing concepts are 
introduced. Corequisite: TECH 2213L. F, S 
TECH 2413 NON-METALLIC MATERIALS & 
PROCESSES 
An introductory course in the study of non-metallic materials, their 
properties, and the processes used to manufacture various products with 
them. Materials include, but are not limited to: polymers, plastics, 
composites, woods, and ceramics. F, S 
TECH 2513 FABRICATION PROCESSES I 
A study of common industrial metals, layout tools and procedures, welding 
and brazing processes, precision measuring instruments, fasteners, and 
assembly processes. F 
TECH 2713 FUNDAMENTAL ELECTRONICS 
A continuation of basic concepts focusing upon more complex circuit 
properties including impedance, linear circuit analysis, multiphase circuits, 
and magnetic devices. Prerequisite: TECH 1713. F, S 
TECH 2813 DIGITAL DEVICES 
A study of electronic digital techniques used in modern systems. Common 
Boolean gates and expressions are combined with VHDL and FPGA 
techniques. Prerequisite: TECH 1713. F 
TECH 3113 INDUSTRIAL SAFETY 
The course will emphasize the recognition and prevention of unsafe 
working condition practices and OSHA regulations. All students will 
present their findings for specific industry hazards. F, S 
TECH 3123 EXCEL FOR ENGINEERS AND 
TECHNOLOGISTS 
This online course will take an in-depth look at Excel and how it integrates 
with engineering and technical professions. The course will cover 
functions, matrix operations, linear regression, samples and deviations, 
pivot tables, macros and programming with Excel. F, S 
TECH 3143 TECHNICAL PRESENTATIONS 
Extensive practical exercises in research, reading and writing of technical 
descriptions, explanations of processes, instructions, service manuals, 
progress reports and industrial proposals. 
A study of the significant acts of environmental legislation, the role of 
various federal agencies, the history of environmental regulation and other 
environmental concerns. SE 
TECH 3413 PRODUCTION PROCESSES 
The study of industrial materials and processes from an engineering 
viewpoint.  Prerequisite: TECH 2513. F, S 
TECH 3463 MANUFACTURING OPERATIONS I 
The study of management, productivity, quality, design, and work 
measurement in industry. F, S 
TECH 3513 MATERIALS TESTING AND ANALYSIS 
This course describes the behavior and properties of materials, their 
manufacturing characteristics, and their applications, as well as their 
advantages and limitations that influence their selection in the design and 
manufacturing of products. Topics include the structure of metals; the 
mechanical behavior, testing, and manufacturing properties of materials; 
physical properties of materials; metal alloys; ferrous metals and alloys; 
nonferrous metals and alloys; polymers; ceramics, glass, graphite, 
diamond, and nanomaterials; and composite materials. Materials are tested 
for tensile strength, elasticity, resilience, elongation, hardness, density, and 
impact-tough test. Corequisite: TECH 3513L. 
TECH 3523 FABRICATION PROCESSES II 
Application of precision measuring instruments, foundry practices, ferrous 
metal heat treating, traditional industrial machine tools and a study of 
powder metallurgy. Prerequisite:  TECH 2513. S 
TECH 3613 POWER SYSTEMS 
A study of energy sources, the devices that convert energy into useful work, 
and the control and transmission of power through mechanical units and 
fluids. F, S 
TECH 3823 INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS 
A study of machine controls and processes. Topics include solenoids, 
relays, sensors, contactors, switches, timers, counters, analog control, and 
introductory programmable controllers.  Prerequisite: TECH 2713. FO 
TECH 3883 PRINCIPLES OF ELECTRONICS 
COMMUNICATIONS 
A study of wired and wireless techniques for communicating voice, data, 
and visual information. The course covers AM, FM, digital modulations, 
microwave techniques, telephony, and networking circuits and protocols. 
Prerequisite: TECH 2713. S 
TECH 4000-4 INDEPENDENT STUDY IN TECHNOLOGY 
(TOPIC) 
Specified topic in technology. Credit one to four semester hours. D 
TECH 4011-4 SEMINAR IN TECHNOLOGY (TOPIC) 
Group study of specified topics in technology for undergraduate students.  
Credit one to four semester hours. D 
TECH 4123 INDUSTRIAL SUPERVISION 
Principles and practice of industrial supervision and leadership are 
presented. Topics include the duties and responsibilities of the supervisor 
in an industrial setting. Specifically, communication, group dynamics, 
employee behavior, ethics, current training techniques, health and safety, 
labor relations, and the supervisor’s responsibility for productivity and 
quality are addressed. SO 
TECH 4223 ELECTRONICS CAPSTONE 
A culminating experience for senior electronics students to research and 
design a practical electronic circuit. Students are required to design, 

 
prototype, and manufacture an electronic device. Prerequisite: Senior 
status in Electronics Engineering Technology. S 
TECH 4264 3D CAD 
An advanced course in 3D computer applications. Parametric model 
drawings, assembly, presentation and detail drawings are produced using a 
variety of software packages. Prerequisite: TECH 2213. Corequisite: 
TECH 4264L. F, S 
TECH 4373 ECONOMIC DECISION ANALYSIS 
The course is designed to provide the student with an understanding of 
methods and practices for evaluating the economic impact of decisions 
concerning products and processes and an ability to analyze financial 
documents used to assess organizational performance. Prerequisite: 
MATH 1513.  F, S 
TECH 4433 QUALITY CONTROL 
The study of statistical process control and quality management 
techniques, including the DMAIC process, graphical descriptions, discrete 
distributions, continuous distributions, statistical inferences, liner 
regression, multiple regression, control charts, and capability analysis. 
Corequisite: TECH-4433L. Prerequisite: ECONO 2463 or MATH 
3413. F, S 
TECH 4454 COMPUTER AIDED MANUFACTURING 
(CAM) 
This course uses computer aided manufacturing (CAM) software to draw 
and create a tool path for computer numerical control (CNC) machining 
applications such as milling and turning. Lab requires students to use CAM 
software to create machined features from a piece of stock material. 
Corequisite: TECH-4454L. Prerequisite: TECH-2213. S 
TECH 4493 MANUFACTURING OPERATIONS II 
Economic aspects of industry and manufactured processes. Prerequisite: 
TECH 3463. F, S 
TECH 4514 MACHINE TOOL PROCESSES 
A technical study of the theory, equipment and application of machine tools 
and metal removal processes. Processes covered are turning, milling, 
drilling, broaching, abrasive machining, finishing, numerical control as 
well as electrical and chemical machining. Lab includes applying theory 
through 
actual 
machine 
operation. 
Corequisite: 
TECH-4514L. 

CONTROLS 
An exploration of the hardware and software of embedded control systems 
and microprocessors. Focus is placed upon microprocessor programming, 
auxiliary requirements, interfaces, and control. Corequisite: TECH 
4833L. Prerequisite: TECH 2813. FE 
TECH 4853 PROGRAMMABLE LOGIC CONTROLS 
A study of programmable logic controllers including the design of ladder 
programs, HMI application programs, and hardware installation. Students 
will practice their projects on Rockwell’s SLC 500, RSLogix 5000 and 
PanelView.  Corequisite: TECH 4853L. Prerequisite: TECH 1713. S 
TECH 4900 ORIENTATION TO INDUSTRIAL 
INTERNSHIP 
Non-credit course to be completed before internship.  Students will 
develop:  personal resume, letter of application, cover letter, and formulate 
positive interviewing techniques to be used in obtaining an internship. 
Prerequisite:  Junior Standing. S 
TECH 4903 MANUFACTURING ENTERPRISES 
A study of the manufacturing industry that emphasizes planning and 
production aspects. Students will establish a manufacturing corporation 
then develop, produce and market a product. F, S 
TECH 4913 INDUSTRIAL INTERNSHIP 
Student must complete a minimum of 160 clock hours of employment with 
an approved industry, submit a formal report of experience and a 
supervisor's evaluation.  Students with documented industrial experience 
may select approved elective courses in lieu of internship.  Prerequisite: 
TECH 4900. SU 
TECH 4916 INDUSTRIAL INTERNSHIP 
Student must complete a minimum of 320 clock hours of employment with 
an approved industry, submit a formal report of experience and a 
supervisor's evaluation. Students with documented industrial experience 
may select approved elective courses in lieu of internship.  Prerequisite:  
TECH 4900. SU 
Aviation Education 
TECH 3013 THEORY OF FLIGHT 
This course is offered as private pilots' ground school and consists of 
instruction in basic theory of flight computer, federal aviation regulations 
and radio navigation service of aircraft. F, S 
TECH 3023 IN-FLIGHT INSTRUCTION 
Meets the flying requirements for a Private Pilot Certificate. Includes all 
maneuvers and cross-country flying required by the Federal Aviation 
Administration for issuance of a Private Pilot Certificate. Requires a 
minimum of 20 flight hours with an instructor and 20 hours of solo flight. 
D 
TECH 3033 ADVANCED THEORY OF FLIGHT 
Ground school instruction covering advanced aviation technology, 
aerodynamics, advanced navigation computers and plotters. Fulfills ground 
school needed for passing new private pilots' written exam. D 
TECH 3093 COMMERCIAL PILOTS' GROUND SCHOOL 
AND FLIGHT LAB 
Covers a review of private pilot requirements and fulfills 80 hours ground 
school instruction needed for passing commercial pilots' written exam. D 
REACH HIGHER DEGREE 
COMPLETION PROGRAM 
Organizational Leadership 
ORGL 3113 FOUNDATIONS OF ORGANIZATIONAL 
LEADERSHIP AND PERSONAL DEVELOPMENT 
This course is an introduction to the Organizational Leadership Bachelor 
of Science Program. Essential components will include: overview of 
program expectations; principles of adult learning and leadership; 
resources for success in an online learning environment, resources 
conducting online library research; and leadership topics including 
leadership traits and style. Students will complete a variety of assignments 
including a research paper in APA format. Prerequisite: Admission to the 
Reach Higher/ORGL program. 
ORGL 3223 PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION 
A study of communication in the workplace within a framework of 
organizational ethics. Essential components and course content include: 
listening, verbal and nonverbal communication, written expression, 
professional presentation methods, and leading teams. 
ORGL 3333 DATA ANALYSIS AND INTERPRETATION 
This course will enable the student to develop an understanding of the 
application and interpretation of basic data analysis. Essential components 
and course content will include basic data analysis from a user perspective. 
Hands-on exercises will enable students to utilize Excel to solve problems 
and interpret results. Prerequisite: Junior standing. Open to admitted 
ORGL program students (as required course) and to non-business 
majors (as free elective). 
ORGL 3443 SURVEY OF FISCAL MANAGEMENT 
A managerial overview of fiscal management within organizations. 
Essential components and coursework content will include: understanding 
the components and articulation of financial statements; knowledge and 
application of financial ratios leading to an understanding of organizational 
performance across time and in comparison to industry standards; 
utilization of financial information in the acquisition of capital and 

 
budgeting decisions; and rudimentary understanding of cash flows. 
Prerequisite: Junior standing. 
ORGL 4113 ETHICS AND ORGANIZATIONS 
This course is designed to examine the dynamics of workplace and 
personal ethics through the study of basic philosophical theories. Essential 
components and course content will include: leadership in the context of 
self-governance; responsibility; adherence to principles; integrity; and 
constancy of purpose. Current case studies will be used to apply ethical 
theories. Prerequisite: Junior standing. 
ORGL 4213 ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE AND 
LEADERSHIP 
The broad purpose of this course is to examine how organizational cultures 
operate so that the decisions and actions taken by leaders can have greater 
positive, intentional impact. This course is designed to help leaders become 
aware of the multiple dimensions of culture and develop the skills of 
interpretation necessary to understand organizations. Prerequisite: 45 
hours completed. 
ORGL 4223 THE INDIVIDUAL, THE ORGANIZATION, 
AND SOCIETY 
An examination of contemporary issues that affect organizations. Essential 
topics include environmental stewardship; social responsibility of the 
organization; effects and implications of globalization; the status of 
individual freedom within the organization; diversity; and the ramifications 
of technological change. This seminar course will be organized around 
student discussion and topical papers. Prerequisite: Junior standing.  
ORGL 4313 GLOBAL LEADERSHIP AND DIVERSITY 
This course provides an in-depth introduction to global leadership and its 
development and to fostering innovation and global change. The class will 
prepare students to engage across differences effectively in a cross-cultural 
workplace and improve their ability to work within and lead diverse teams 
and organizations. Prerequisite: 45 hours completed.  
ORGL 4333 LEADERSHIP THEORY AND PRACTICE 
This course is a study of theories that influence leadership and management 
with application to a variety of work situations. Essential components and 
coursework content will include: basic leadership and behavior styles; 
negotiation; critical thinking; change; conflict resolution; ethics and social 
responsibility; and diversity in the workplace. Assessment of personal 
leadership abilities and personality traits will be included. 
ORGL 4443 MARKETS AND STAKEHOLDERS 
This course introduces the student to the concept of markets and 
stakeholders. Essential components and course content will include: an 
overview of competitive markets; buyer behavior; development of new 
markets and products; marketing communication; distribution channels; 
pricing; and marketing mix strategies. It will include a discussion of 
external environmental factors and stakeholder analysis. Students will be 
able to evaluate market needs, select target markets and develop an 
appropriate market mix. Prerequisite: Junior standing.  
ORGL 4553 CAPSTONE 
This capstone course is designed specifically for Organizational 
Leadership majors in their final semester. Student will demonstrate 
learning from Organizational Leadership and focus area courses, 
addressing organizational problems and applying leadership and focus-area 
theory and concepts to professional situations. Additionally, students will 
reflect on learning and prepare for workplace entry and advancement by 
creating a professional portfolio and career documents. Prerequisite: 
Completion of other ORGL required courses in major or minor 
program. 
ORGL 4993 PROFESSIONAL INTERNSHIP 
Supervised professional-level assignment with an organization, firm, 
government agency, or not-for-profit entity within the selected area of 
focus. Prerequisite: Completion of other ORGL required courses in 
major or minor program.  
 

 
SCHOOL OF NURSING AND ALLIED HEALTH SCIENCES 
ALLIED HEALTH SCIENCES 
The Allied Health curricula are structured to provide competence in 
certain allied health sciences with majors in Health Information 
Management, Health Care Administration, and Health Science. 
Bachelor of Science degrees may be obtained in each of the majors 
listed above. 
Allied Health 
ALHLT 1021 RADIATION SAFETY AND PROTECTION 
A comprehensive course designed to provide the student with principles of 
radiation 
protection. 
Radiation-protection 
responsibility 
by 
the 
radiographer to patients, personnel, and the public is presented, as well as 
self-protection methods for personnel working around ionizing radiation. 
Dose limit and regulatory involvement are discussed, as well as radiation 
monitoring and measurement. F 
ALHLT 1034 HEMATOLOGY/HEMOSTASIS 
The study of blood cells, disease, theory of coagulation, and diagnostic 
procedures relating to whole blood are considered. Instruction in blood 
collecting techniques, handling of clinical specimens, and basic patient 
care will be included. Corequisite: ALHLT-1034L.  
ALHLT 1053 RADIOGRAPHIC POSITIONING I 
A comprehensive course which provides the student with the knowledge to 
perform radiographic procedures of a routine nature. Provides a correlated 
introduction to skeletal anatomy as well as the digestive and urinary 
systems. Considerations related to the production of quality radiographics 
will be incorporated. F 
ALHLT 1062 INTRODUCTION TO RADIOLOGIC 
TECHNOLOGY 
An introductory course designed to acquaint the student with the field of 
medical radiography and its associated modalities. Student responsibilities 
will be outlined. Students will be oriented to academic and administrative 
structure, key departments and personnel, and to the profession as a whole. 
Medical application of ethics and confidentiality are examined. F 
ALHLT 1071 PATIENT CARE 
A study of the physical and psychological aspects of dealing with sick 
and/or dying patients, family, physicians, and other health-care 
professionals. This includes proper body mechanics, transport/transfer 
techniques, 
asepsis 
and 
infection 
control, 
precautions, 
proper 
communication skills, basic terminology, and application of all the 
aforementioned. F 
ALHLT 1082 RADIOGRAPHIC EXPOSURE I 
An introductory course designed to provide the student with the knowledge 
of factors that govern and influence the production of the radiographic 
image on radiographic film. F 
ALHLT 1103 INTRODUCTION TO MEDICAL 
LABORATORY 
Orientation to the duties of the Medical Laboratory Technician; medical 
terminology; ethics; use of the microscope; laboratory safety and universal 
precautions; laboratory glassware; quality control; basic laboratory math; 
preparation of chemical solutions; specimen collection by phlebotomy and 
capillary puncture. 
ALHLT 1116 CLINICAL PRACTICE I 
A clinical education sequence which provides the student with practical 
application of previously mastered theory within a radiology department 
and the hospital environment. The student will actively perform specific 
radiographic studies under the supervision of a registered technologist. 
Clinical Practice I and II are performed successively in the spring semester, 
first year. In addition, students are responsible for attaining 
certification in C.P.R. before enrolling in Clinical Practice I. S 
ALHLT 1126 CLINICAL PRACTICE II 
A clinical education sequence which provides the student with practical 
application of previously mastered theory within a radiology department 
and the hospital environment. The student will actively perform specific 
radiographic studies under the supervision of a registered technologist. 
Clinical Practice I and II are performed successively in the spring semester, 
first year. S 
ALHLT 1142 IMAGING AND PROCESSING 
An investigative study into the aspects of radiographic image formation, 
including film type and construction, screen type and construction, 
processing procedures and chemicals and their effects, and imaging 
equipment. Also examined are some various imaging modalities. SU 
ALHLT 1163 RADIOLOGIC PATHOLOGY 
An introduction to the concepts of disease and their resulting effects on 
human physiology, with specific emphasis on pathology and disease as it 
relates to various radiographic procedures.  
ALHLT 1172 RADIOGRAPHIC EXPOSURE II 
A continued development of the study of the formation of exposure 
techniques and their resulting effects. Includes application of exposure 
variables utilized in examinations not considered routine and the control of 
variable radiation types caused by the interaction of radiation with matter.  
Prerequisite: ALHLT 1082 Radiographic Exposure I. SU 
ALHLT 1183 RADIOGRAPHIC POSITIONING II 
A comprehensive study which provides the student with the knowledge and 
experience to perform radiographic procedures not previously addressed, 
to include skull radiography and examinations not considered routine. 
Prerequisite: ALHLT 1053 Radiographic Positioning I. SU 
ALHLT 1202 URINALYSIS AND BODY FLUIDS 
This course is designed for the study of body fluids other than blood. 
Studies will focus on the analysis of cerebrospinal fluid; seminal fluid; 
amniotic, synovial, serous fluid, and urine.  
ALHLT 1323 INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC HEALTH 
This course provides an overview of the history and philosophy of public 
health. Students will be introduced to concepts of population health as well 
as an overview of methods and tools of data collection, use, and analysis. 
The overview will include factors that impact health outcomes as well as 
the processes, approaches and interventions that address them. F, S, SU 
ALHLT 1401 ALLIED HEALTH CAREERS 
An investigative review of career opportunities in the allied health 
sciences. The role of allied health professionals with present and projected 
needs is discussed and evaluated. Includes two hours of lecture per week 
for the first eight weeks. F, S 
ALHLT 1424 INTRODUCTION TO CLINICAL 
CHEMISTRY 
This course offers an introduction to the study of clinical chemistry, 
emphasizing the basic procedures performed in most clinical laboratories 
and the use of these procedures in the diagnosis and follow-up of chemical 
disorders. This course is specifically designed for Medical Laboratory 
students, Allied Health Sciences students, and other clinical majors. This 
course includes normal physiology, laboratory principles, analysis 
techniques, quality control, quality assurance, and interpretation of test 
results. Topics include inorganic, organic, and biochemistry with an 
emphasis on health sciences. Corequisite: ALHLT-1424L. 
ALHLT 1513 LABORATORY CLINICAL I  
This course is designed to give the student the opportunity to develop 
practical work-related skills and integrate classroom knowledge and 
theories. This course will provide students with an intensive field 
experience in a medical lab real or simulated environment. Students must 
complete a total of 120 contact hours in field to receive 3 hours’ credit for 
this course. 
ALHLT 1613 LABORATORY CLINICAL II 
This course is designed to give the student the opportunity to develop 
practical work-related skills and integrate classroom knowledge and 
theories. This course will provide students with an intensive field 

 
experience in a medical lab real or simulated environment. Students must 
complete a total of 120 contact hours in field to receive 3 hours’ credit for 
this course. 
ALHLT 2001-4 INDIVIDUAL STUDY IN ALLIED 
HEALTH (Topic) 
Individual study of a specified topic in Allied Health. Credit: 1 to 4 
semester hours. 
ALHLT 2011-4 SEMINAR IN ALLIED HEALTH (Topic) 
Group study of a specified topic in Allied Health. Credit: 1 to 4 semester 
hours. 
ALHLT 2045 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES I 
Emergency Medical Responder (EMR) training providing knowledge/skill 
for lifesaving interventions while waiting for/assisting higher level EMS 
personnel at ER sites & during transport. Includes EMS systems, 
operations, research, workforce safety and wellness, documentation, 
system/therapeutic 
communication, 
medical/legal 
ethics, 
anatomy/physiology, medical terminology, pathophysiology, lifespan 
development, public health, pharmacology, airway management, 
respiration, artificial ventilation, patient assessment, principles of 
medicine, shock, resuscitation, trauma & special patient populations. 
Corequisite: 2045L. F, S (1st 8 Weeks) 
ALHLT 2055 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES II 
Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) training providing advanced 
knowledge/skill for care/transportation of critical and emergency patients. 
Course includes advanced training in EMS systems, operations, research, 
workforce 
safety/wellness, 
documentation, 
system/therapeutic 
communication, medical/legal ethics, anatomy/physiology, medical 
terminology, pathophysiology, lifespan development, public health, 
pharmacology, airway management, respiration, artificial ventilation, 
patient assessment, principles of medicine, shock and resuscitation, trauma 
and special patient populations. Corequisite: 2055L. 
ALHLT 2066 ADVANCED EMERGENCY MEDICAL 
TECHNICIAN (AEMT) 
The primary focus of the Advanced Emergency Medical Technician 
(AEMT) is to provide basic and limited advanced emergency medical care 
and transportation for critical and emergent patients who access the 
emergency medical system. This individual possesses the basic knowledge 
and skills necessary to provide patient care and transportation. The AEMT 
functions as part of a comprehensive EMS response under medical 
oversight. The AEMT performs interventions with basic and advanced 
equipment typically found on an ambulance. The AEMT is a link from the 
scene to the emergency health care system. Corequisite: 2066L. SU 
ALHLT 2116 CLINICAL PRACTICE III 
A clinical education sequence designed to bring advanced positioning and 
exposure theory, as well as pathology, to a cohesive entity with information 
previously applied. Students will continue to work in the radiology 
department in the hospital environment, under the supervision of registered 
technologists. F 
ALHLT 2122 RADIATION BIOLOGY 
An introductory course designed to provide the student with the principles 
of cell radiation interaction. Radiation effects on cells and factors affecting 
cell response are presented, as well as acute and chronic effects of radiation 
exposure at varying levels. S 
ALHLT 2132 SPECIAL PROCEDURES AND 
MODALITIES 
An introductory course to the advanced modalities associated with 
radiology (C.T., ultrasound, nuclear medicine, etc.) and to special 
radiographic procedures not previously addressed (angiography, etc.) to 
include 
the 
definition 
and 
performance 
of 
each 
type, 
the 
indications/contraindications, and pathology demonstrated. S 
ALHLT 2142 IMAGE RECOGNITION AND CRITIQUE 
A comprehensive course designed to provide the student with the 
knowledge and experience to evaluate radiographic examinations, to 
identify and recognize diagnostic quality. Includes application of 
knowledge and skills acquired from 1053 Radiographic Positioning I and 
1082 Radiographic Exposure I concurrently. S 
ALHLT 2154 ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY I FOR 
HEALTH PROFESSIONS 
Anatomy and Physiology I for Health Professions is the first of a two-
course sequence examining the terminology, structure, function, and 
interdependence of the human body systems as it relates to the needs of 
health care providers. This 8-week course covers microscopic to gross 
anatomical structures and the primary physiological processes of all major 
human organ systems. The relationships between anatomical structure and 
physiological function are examined within the context of homeostatic 
regulation within the human organism. Anatomical perspective is given 
greater weight than the physiological aspect. In conjunction with online 
lecture instruction, the online lab component for this course includes online 
videos, animations, and 3D virtual cadaver dissections to support learning. 
Corequisite: 2154L. F, S, SU, Online 
ALHLT 2164 ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY II FOR 
HEALTH PROFESSIONS 
Anatomy and Physiology II for Health Professions is the second in a two-
course sequence examining the terminology, structure, function, and 
interdependence of systems within the human body. This 8-week course 
covers microscopic to gross anatomical structures and the primary 
physiological processes of all major human organ systems. The 
relationships between anatomical structure and physiological function are 
examined within the context of homeostatic regulation within the human 
organism. Physiological perspective is given greater weight than the 
anatomical aspect. In conjunction with the online lecture, the online lab 
component for this course includes videos, animations, and 3D virtual 
cadaver dissections to support learning. Corequisite: 2154L. F, S, SU, 
Online 
ALHLT 2203 LABORATORY CLINICAL III 
This course is designed to give the student the opportunity to develop 
practical work-related skills and integrate classroom knowledge and 
theories. This course will provide students with an intensive field 
experience in a medical lab real or simulated environment. Students must 
complete a total of 120 contact hours in field to receive 3 hours’ credit for 
this course. 
ALHLT 2216 CLINICAL PRACTICE IV 
A clinical education sequence designed to bring advanced positioning and 
exposure theory, as well as applications of pathology, to a cohesive entity 
with information previously applied. Students will continue to work in the 
hospital environment, under the supervision of registered technologists. F 
ALHLT 2231 QUALITY ASSURANCE AND CONTROL 
A comprehensive course designed to provide the student with an 
introduction to the evaluation of radiographic systems to assure 
consistency in the production of quality images. The components involved 
in the radiography system will be identified. Tests and procedures to 
evaluate these components will be examined. State and federal impacts will 
be described. S 
ALHLT 2242 REGISTRY PREPARATION II 
Final course to assist students in preparation for their national certification 
examination. Course includes successful completion of a minimum amount 
of simulated registry exams, review of information, and test-taking tips. S 
ALHLT 2252 REGISTRY PREPARATION I 
A comprehensive, two-part review of program aspects designed to help 
prepare the graduating students for A.R.R.T. Registry Board Exams, to 
include review of previous classes, simulated board exams, and submission 
of exam applications. F 
ALHLT 2303 LABORATORY CLINICAL IV 
This course is designed to give the student the opportunity to develop 
practical work-related skills and integrate classroom knowledge and 
theories. This course will provide students with an intensive field 
experience in a medical lab real or simulated environment. Students must 
complete a total of 120 contact hours in field to receive 3 hours’ credit for 
this course. 

 
ALHLT 2315 CLINICAL PRACTICE V 
A clinical education sequence designed to bring all didactic and laboratory 
knowledge, as well as previous clinical experience, to a cohesive entity. 
Students will continue to work in the radiology department in the hospital 
environment, under the direction of registered technologists. SU 
ALHLT 2323 HEALTH PROMOTION AND PROTECTION 
This course will provide an overview of communication techniques and 
methods specific to public health. Technical and professional writing will 
be covered as well as the use of mass media and electronic technology 
(including social media) in the protection and promotion of human health. 
F, S, Online only 
ALHLT 2333 INTRODUCTION TO ENVIRONMENTAL 
HEALTH 
This course will provide an overview of the current issues and challenges 
in our global and local environment and how those impact our health. It 
will include sources, exposure routes, regulation and health outcomes 
associated with chemical and physical agents in the environment, both 
naturally occurring and man-made and how they may result in adverse 
health outcomes. 
ALHLT 2344 CLINICAL MICROBIOLOGY FOR MLT 
A detailed study of the pathology of disease-causing microorganisms and 
laboratory training in the area of medical microbiology, immunology, and 
clinical diagnostic procedures. Acceptance into the Medical Lab Tech 
program required. Corequisite: ALHLT-2344L. 
ALHLT 2404 INTRO TO CLINICAL MICROBIOLOGY 
This course offers an introduction to the study of clinical microbiology, 
emphasizing the basic procedures performed in most clinical laboratories 
and the use of these procedures in the diagnosis and follow-up of 
microbiology pathologies. This course is specifically designed for Medical 
Laboratory students, Allied Health Sciences students, and other clinical 
majors. Topics include a study of bacteria, viruses, fungi, and parasitology. 
This course includes normal and pathogenic bacteria, viruses and parasites, 
laboratory principles, analysis techniques, quality control, quality 
assurance, and interpretation of test results. Special emphasis is given to 
the clinical laboratory setting and the pathology related to human disease 
as it pertains to patient care. Corequisite: ALHLT-2404L. 
ALHLT 2412 IMMUNOLOGY AND SEROLOGY 
A study of the immune system, antigen-antibody reactions and the 
application of these reactions in serology detection procedures in disease 
and infection. Designed for MLT students.  
ALHLT 2434 IMMUNOHEMATOLOGY 
A study of the basic principles of blood banking and the techniques 
involved in various phases of blood banking in clinical situations. The 
course covers pre-transfusion testing, compatibility testing, blood and 
blood components and their use in transfusion therapy, hemolytic disease 
of the newborn, and transfusion acquired infectious diseases. Designed for 
MLT students.  
ALHLT 2453 MEDICAL TERMINOLOGY 
Provides the building blocks for effective communication in the health care 
environment and teaches the foundation of prefixes, suffixes and root-
words of Greek and Latin origin commonly used in medical vocabulary. 
Word part combination practices, pronunciation, and spelling is 
emphasized. 
The 
course 
presents 
a 
basic 
foundation 
of 
anatomy/physiology, and diagnostic/therapeutic modalities which are 
parallel to medical vocabulary. A basic introduction of pharmacological 
principles and common drugs used in medical treatment is also introduced. 
Three hours of lecture per week. F, S, Online SU 
ALHLT 2504 CLINICAL CHEMISTRY FOR MLT 
The study of various chemical analyses of body fluids. Emphasis is on 
reactions, reagents and reference ranges of analytes measured in the 
clinical chemistry lab. Acceptance into the Medical Lab Tech program 
required. Corequisite: ALHLT-2504L.  
ALHLT 2633 CARDIAC/EMERGENCY CARE 
Designed specifically for pre-professional health related fields, students 
will utilize and integrate appropriate cardiac and emergency techniques 
into a variety of first response situations. Course includes the provision of 
American Red Cross Certification in: professional rescuer CPR (2person, 
bag-valve-mask); adult, infant, and child CPR, automated external 
defibrillator use and obstructed airway training, oxygen and first aid 
administration. 
ALHLT 2504 CLINICAL CHEMISTRY 
The study of various chemical analyses of body fluids. Emphasis is on 
reactions, reagents and reference ranges of analytes measured in the 
clinical chemistry lab. Corequisite: ALHLT-2504L.  
ALHLT 3033 HISTORY OF MEDICINE 
This course surveys the history of medicine from the ice age through 20th 
century medicine. The course requires no previous knowledge or 
background in history of science or medicine. The goal of the course is to 
familiarize the student with a basic background in the history and evolution 
of medicine as a building block for allied health professional programs. F, 
S, SU  
ALHLT 3043 HEALTH STATISTICS 
This is a course in health-related statistics and statistical applications in the 
medical sciences. Statistical principles will be taught along with data 
collection and display techniques as well as utilization of formulas used by 
health care facilities. Two hours of lecture per week with 2 hours of lab for 
application techniques. Prerequisite: MATH 1513 or MATH 1143. 
Corequisite: ALHLT 3043L. F, S, Online & Traditional 
ALHLT 3053 ADVANCED MEDICAL TERMINOLOGY 
A continuation of ALHLT 2453 Medical Terminology focusing on a more 
in-depth study of medical vocabulary. Students will use basic medical 
terminology knowledge to interpret medical charts and investigate 
different types of medical writing and review. Prerequisite: ALHLT 
2453. F, S, SU, Online only 
ALHLT 3073 DIAGNOSTICS, DRUGS, AND 
THERAPEUTICS 
An introduction to pharmacology that includes investigation into the 
history of drugs, drug design, routes of administration, and develops a basic 
understanding of drug categories used to treat different body systems. 
Laboratory measures and diagnostic tests will also be explored. 
Prerequisite: ALHLT 2453. F, S, SU, Online only 
ALHLT 3183 CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN 
HEALTHCARE 
An introduction of cultural awareness and sensitivity as it relates to 
healthcare and the professional environment with emphasis on strategies 
needed to provide culturally competent care. The course will explore 
cultural beliefs about health and illness and will discuss the impact of 
cultural and ethnic issues in the healthcare environment and the 
professional workplace. Three hours of lecture in an online format per 
week. F, S, SU, Online only 
ALHLT 3193 THE U.S. HEALTHCARE SYSTEM 
An overview of the methods by which health care services are provided 
and financed in the United States including access and delivery along the 
health care continuum. Three hours of lecture per week. F, S, Online SU 
ALHLT 3933 HEALTHCARE MANAGEMENT 
Strategic Management and Finance in Healthcare. Principles of 
management and leadership as related to health care organizations 
including organizational behavior, strategic management of human 
resources, considerations relative to cultural competency and diversity, 
collective bargaining, management of costs and revenue and 
implementation of policies related to quality of care and services. Three 
hours of lecture per week. F, S, SU, Online all semesters 
ALHLT 3963 HEALTHCARE PROJECT MANAGEMENT 
An upper-level course for students in various healthcare programs. All 
students will acquire life skills necessary to succeed as an employee in 
healthcare. These skills include strategic planning, team building, project 
management, organizational leadership & governance and regulatory 
compliance. Prerequisite: ALHLT 3933. F, S, SU 

 
ALHLT 3978 HEALTH CARE INTERNSHIP 
A designated period of practical experience devoted to serving an 
apprenticeship in health care administration. Students will serve under 
selected administrators in the areas of hospital, long term care, mental 
health care, home health, governmental health, voluntary health, and health 
research project administration. Credit two to eight semester hours. F, S, 
SU 
ALHLT 4043 HEALTHCARE LAW & ETHICS 
Healthcare law, ethics, and privacy. An introduction to the U.S. Legal 
System with subsequent emphasis on legal implications relative to the 
delivery of health services including privacy and security of health 
information. Three hours of lecture per week. F, S, SU, Online all 
semesters 
ALHLT 4074 PATHOPHYSIOLOGY 
This course analyzes structure and function of the human body related to 
disease and injury with a focus on processes within the body that result in 
the signs and symptoms of disease. Four hours of lecture per week. F, S 
ALHLT 4093 EPIDEMIOLOGY 
Factors that influence the occurrence, distribution, control, and prevention 
of disease will be examined. Emphasis is on infectious disease problems, 
but noninfectious diseases are considered. Three hours of lecture per week. 
F, S, Online SU  
ALHLT 4123 HEALTHCARE REVENUE CYCLE 
This Revenue Cycle course provides a firm foundation in healthcare 
financial management. The course will teach students the skills necessary 
to evaluate the performance of revenue cycle systems and processes. This 
course enables students to develop an understanding of the components of 
the revenue cycle, the best methods of bench-marking performance, and 
proven methods of improving cash flow. In addition, students will learn 
about the latest technology, business office staffing, resource management, 
and recent government regulations related to revenue cycles. F, Online 
ALHTL 4143 PUBLIC HEALTH CAPSTONE 
This course will prepare students to enter the workforce by applying their 
professional oral and written skills as well shadowing/internship with an 
approved public health professional. S 
 
Health Information Management Program 
Professional Health Information 
Management Courses 
HIM 3033 INTRO TO HEALTH INFORMATION 
An introduction to the field of health information. Centers around basic 
functions of a Medical Record/Health Information Department. Two hours 
of lecture and three hours of lab per week. Corequisite: HIM 3033L. F, 
Online 
HIM 3123 ADVANCED ELECTRONIC HEALTH 
RECORDS 
This course will continue to build upon concepts presented in HIM-3223. 
Most healthcare executives are recognizing the EHRs are essential for 
doing business today. The changes that accompany the computerization of 
health information are huge. The advanced EHR course will provide the 
latest trends and applications related to EHRs and an in-depth 
understanding of specific key areas associated with EHRs within the US 
healthcare system. Students will gain insight into elements of the EHR 
process, implementation, and ongoing management of EHR systems. 
Corequisite: HIM 3123L. Prerequisite: HIM 3122. F, S, Online 
HIM 3213 HEALTHCARE LAW & INFORMATION 
This course provides students a practical understanding of the U.S. Legal 
System regarding healthcare laws, regulations, ethics, and privacy and 
security of PHI and ePHI that are specific to healthcare professionals. F, S, 
SU, Online 
HIM 3223 INTRO TO ELECTRONIC HEALTH RECORDS 
This course is intended for individuals who are interested or involved in 
electronic health records (EHRs). Provides value to students as they are 
drawn into the challenges & improvements enabled by EHRs. The EHR is 
the “bridge to everywhere.” It bridges the diverse roles of many medical 
specialties and allied healthcare occupations. The EHR must bridge the gap 
between medical data and decision-making and the limitations of unaided 
human cognition. The EHR must be a key enabler between growing 
medical knowledge and daily practice in institutions, clinics, and offices 
around the USA. Two hours of lecture per week. F, S, Online 
HIM 3333 CODING I 
This course provides information on CPT coding principles and the 
outpatient prospective payment system as well as effective management of 
coding services for both inpatient and outpatient systems. The course 
includes four hours of lecture and six hours of lab per week for the first 
eight weeks. Corequisite: HIM 3333L. Prerequisite: ALHLT 4074 and 
HIM 3453. S, Online 
HIM 3343 CODING II 
This course provides information on health-related coding systems which 
are utilized for data retrieval and reimbursement by type of service. ICD-
9-CM coding principles are covered. Data retrieval relating to manual or 
automated systems are discussed. The course includes two hours of lecture 
and three hours of lab per week. Corequisite: HIM 3343L. Prerequisite: 
HIM 3333. F, Online 
HIM 3363 HEALTHCARE COMPLIANCE AND RISK 
MNGMT 
This course will give students a practical understanding of the laws and 
regulations encountered daily by healthcare compliance professionals. It 
will provide students with an ability to identify specific regulatory issues 
present in the healthcare environment and understand penalties associated 
with violations of such regulations. Students will learn to conduct basic 
legal research and where to find resources to interpret healthcare 
regulations. F, S, SU, Online 
HIM 3453 HEALTHCARE FINANCE 
Healthcare firms are very unique in the manner in which they receive 
compensation for the service that they provide.  In this course students will 
learn why the revenue function is so different for healthcare firms as 
compared to other industries. The course will also provide an overview of 
various types of reimbursement and classifications systems utilized in 
collecting, retrieving, and maintaining clinical data utilized in the U.S. for 
many types of healthcare facilities. The prospective payment system 
utilized by CMS is of primary focus as well as CMS contract oversight 
activities. S, Online 
HIM 4023 HEALTH INFORMATION APPLICATION 
Presents information on various regulatory, ancillary, and specialty areas 
within the field of Health Information and Informatics Management. 
Includes a study of health data informatics, registries, MPI requirements, 
and database development. Corequisite: HIM 4023L. S, Online 
HIM 4033 HEALTH INFORMATION MANAGEMENT 
This course provides information on managerial aspects of Health 
Information Management. The course will focus on leadership theories, 
management techniques, training and professional development, 
performance improvement, human resources, and financial management. 
HIM Senior Standing Only. Corequisite: HIM 4033L. S 
HIM 4052 PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE 
This course will help students gain professional skills as they near entering 
the professional field. Virtual applications are used to simulate actual 
healthcare operations. F, S, SU, Online 
HIM 4073 HEALTH DATA ANALYSIS 
This course consists of acquiring, managing, analyzing, interpreting, and 
transforming data into accurate, consistent, and timely information. Tasks 
include: analysis of health data using appropriate testing methods to 
generate findings for interpretation; interpretation of analytical findings by 
formulating recommendations for clinical, financial, and operational 
processes; and the ability to validate results through qualitative and 
quantitative analysis in order to confirm findings. Students will learn basic 
research design, methods and be able to explain the role of biomedical 
research. 
 
HIM 4082 HIM PROFESSIONAL REVIEW 
A capstone course designed to review learned HIM professional 
applications, practice, and principles to assist in preparing the student to 
successfully complete the national registration exam and to be able to 
successfully meet the entry level competencies of the HIM profession. 
HIM Senior Standing Only. S, SU, Online 
HIM 4093 HEALTH DATA INFORMATICS 
This course will introduce Health Informatics including definitions, theory, 
technologies, workflow and expectations in the informatics field, tools, and 
professional organizations. There will be a focus on healthcare informatics 
as it brings together healthcare-generated information with technology for 
the purpose of improving quality of care in a cost-effective manner. F, 
Online 
HIM 4113 HEALTHCARE QUALITY MEASURES 
This course examines strategies by which healthcare facilities identify 
healthcare quality issues within their organization, utilize best practice 
guidelines to implement improvement strategies and establish metrics from 
which success is measured. Healthcare quality reporting strategies are 
explored such as Joint Commission Core Measures and Sentinel Events 
and the CMS Q10 Clinical Warehouse. Role delineation related to 
healthcare quality/performance improvement is delineated for the 
healthcare administrator as well as the professional and medical staff. F, S, 
SU, Online 
HIM 4153 MANAGEMENT PRACTICUM 
A three-week (120 hours) professional practice experience in the Health 
Information 
Department 
of 
a 
selected 
facility. 
Includes 
observation/practice in the functional and managerial activities, followed 
by a one-week review session. Scheduled during the second eight weeks of 
the spring semester, senior year. HIM Senior Standing Only. F, S, SU, 
Online 
HIM 4213 HEALTH DATA INTEGRITY 
Data integrity as it relates to healthcare is a vital piece to quality health 
information. This course will discuss the core disciplines in a data 
governance program including: information life cycle management, data 
quality management, information security and privacy, master and 
reference data management, metadata management, data architecture 
management, data development, and business intelligence management. F, 
Online 
HIM 4223 CODING III 
This course provides advanced application of various classification 
systems and coding management theory. Utilizing the current mandated 
code sets, students will apply coding guidelines and principles to advanced 
coding problems and patient record documentation. The course also 
includes a process to facilitate the accurate representation of a patient’s 
clinical status in the patient health record. This enables the student to 
establish the necessary skills for achieving coding totality, coding 
accuracy, and the management of coding functions. 
Occupational Therapy Assistant 
OTA 1013 INTRO TO OCCUPATIONAL THERAPY 
This course is designed to establish a knowledge base for the prospective 
OTA in that it emphasizes the human element of health care and the role 
the Occupational Therapy Assistant performs in providing this component. 
It focuses on the history and philosophy and gives an overview of 
assessment, evaluation and performance areas as well as the tools of 
practice. Theoretical frameworks and approaches and basic concepts of 
human development are also covered. 
Assistant Program.  F 
OTA 1023 KINESIOLOGY FOR OTA 
This course builds on basic anatomic and physiologic concepts of human 
movement, emphasizing the kinesiological, anatomic and functional 
aspects of the skeletal musculature of the human body and their application 
to human motion. 
OTA 1102 THERAPEUTIC MEDIA 
The purpose of this course is to acquaint the student with basic craft 
techniques which may be utilized in a variety of treatment settings.  
Properties of crafts will be discussed and their application to different 
populations. 
OTA 2002 HEALTH CARE SYSTEMS AND 
OCCUPATIONAL THERAPY MANAGEMENT 
This course will teach the OTA student the trends of health care in the past, 
present, and future. It will also explore various occupational therapy 
management styles, techniques, and applications. Proper documentation, 
methods, and reasoning for quality assurance will be covered. This course 
will also deal with fiscal management of occupational therapy service, the 
marketing of occupational therapy staff, and the importance and variety of 
research in occupational therapy services. 
OTA 2022 FIELDWORK I-A  
This fieldwork experience will consist of exposure in various settings 
where occupational therapy services may be present. These experiences 
will allow the student to observe occupational therapy or other health 
related services. Students will do this to gain a better understanding of what 
OT is, where it may be found, and how it fits in with other related services. 
Students will also use this experience to develop professionalism, 
observation, and documentation skills. 
OTA 2102 THERAPEUTIC ACTIVITIES 
This course provides the student with experience conducting individual and 
group activities, promoting the idea of therapeutic use of self. This course 
will acquaint the student with life skills activities, games, and everyday 
coping skills. This course will emphasize adaptation techniques for a 
variety of life activities and their purpose in treatment and will introduce a 
variety 
of 
additional 
therapeutic 
techniques 
and 
applications. 

OTA 2113 PHYSICAL DYSFUNCTION AND 
TREATMENT TECHNIQUES   
This course includes the study of occupational therapy principles, 
techniques of evaluation, and methods of treatment for individuals with 
problems in physical function. This course will present assessment and 
evaluation of occupational performance, therapeutic mechanism, and 
intervention strategies in treating individuals with neurological and 
orthopedic dysfunction as well as discharge planning and written 
documentation of client behavior and performance. 
Assistant specific course work.  S 
OTA 2122 FIELDWORK I-B 
In this course students will be able to initiate and apply concepts and 
techniques learned during academic preparation for practical situations.  
Students will work with clinical instructors, patients/clients, and team 
members in a therapeutic milieu. Written documentation and actual 
treatment will be the focus. 
OTA 2133 PEDIATRIC CARE IN OT 
This course offers a comprehensive study in the approach of OT treatment 
in pediatrics. The course content will include normal development, 
diagnostic problems, frames of reference, documentation, and theory as it 
relates to pediatric intervention. It will also cover family/caregiver issues 
as related to pediatric OT and an introduction to pediatric evaluations, and 
basic concepts to human development. 
course work.  S 
OTA 2143 ELDERCARE IN OCCUPATIONAL THERAPY 
This course offers a wide variety of treatment programs, media and 
modalities useful in working with late-life adults. It includes a 
comprehensive review of the aging process, with all of its psychosocial and 
physical ramifications. It is also a study of concepts of aging and 
intervention techniques to be employed in different practice settings, and 

 
specific concerns of working with both the well elderly and those with 
dysfunction; individually or in groups. 
course work.  S 
OTA 2153 PSYCHOSOCIAL DYSFUNCTION AND 
TREATMENT TECHNIQUES 
This course includes the principles and techniques of evaluation and 
treatment for individuals who present emotional, cognitive, and 
psychosocial problems. Intervention strategies with selected individuals 
with psychosocial disturbances are covered. Emphasis is placed on oral and 
written documentation of client behavior and treatment techniques. 

OTA 2203 FIELDWORK II-A 
This fieldwork experience enables the student to apply knowledge and 
skills learned in the classroom to practical situations.  Students will be 
assigned to various clinical settings. The students will collaborate with 
fieldwork educators, client/patients, and team members. They will practice 
using occupation to restore wellness in clinical settings. 
Therapy Assistant specific course work.  SU 
OTA 2212 DISEASE PATHOLOGY 
This course is designed to help OTA students become familiar with the 
various mental and physical health problems commonly dealt with in 
Occupational Therapy practice. This course will introduce the etiology, 
prognosis, signs and symptoms of these health problems. 
OTA 2213 FIELDWORK II-B   
This fieldwork experience is a continuation of OTA 2203, Fieldwork II-A. 

Fieldwork II-A.  SU 
Physical Therapist Assistant 
PTA 1012 INTRODUCTION TO PHYSICAL THERAPY 
This course will present the purpose, philosophy, and history of physical 
therapy and its relationship to other health care delivery systems. The 
student will be able to delineate the roles of physical therapy personnel, 
identify requirements for medical communication and documentation, and 
be made aware of the medical-legal aspects including professional ethics. 
F 
PTA 1023 BASIC HUMAN NEEDS  
The student will be able to define “normal” in respect to vital signs, 
posture, range of motion and muscle function. He/she will be able to 
perform accurate testing of muscle strength and joint motion. The student 
will also be instructed in activities of daily living, proper body mechanics, 
and transfer techniques. Practical application of these techniques will be 
practiced in the laboratory. F 
PTA 1113 THREATS TO BASIC HUMAN NEEDS 
The student will identify underlying circumstances and phases of disease 
and dysfunction, perform techniques to prevent secondary disabilities 
using special equipment as needed. Practical application of these 
techniques will be practiced in the laboratory.  S 
PTA 1213 PAIN MANAGEMENT I   
Students will be instructed in the various theories of pain, correctly 
positioning and draping patients for pain relief and for protection of 
modesty; heat/cold application, effectively administering massage and 
lymphapress intermittent pressure, relaxation and postural exercises; 
applying cervical and lumbar traction; paraffin, hydrotherapy; medical 
asepsis; and bandaging and dressing. Practical application of these 
techniques will be practiced in the laboratory.  F 
PTA 1224 THERAPEUTIC EXERCISES I  
Instruction 
will 
be 
given 
on 
rehabilitation 
techniques 
and 
neurophysiological approaches to treatment.  Joint mobilization, range of 
motion, aquatics, amputees, prosthetics, and orthotics are introduced.  
Students will identify architectural barriers and make modifications to 
overcome the limitations they impose. Gait-training techniques with 
assistive devices will be performed. Practical application of these 
techniques will be practiced in the laboratory.  F 
PTA 2013 PAIN MANAGEMENT II  
Students will learn the principles and applications of various therapeutic 
modalities; electrotherapy, iontophoresis diathermy, biofeedback, laser, 
fluidotherapy, infrared, taping, ultrasound, and light therapy. Practical 
application of these techniques will be practiced in the laboratory.  S 
PTA 2024 THERAPEUTIC EXERCISE II  
Therapeutic exercises related to children are presented. Developmental 
sequences and primitive reflexes are introduced. Students will be instructed 
in cardiopulmonary treatments including cardiac rehabilitation and chest 
physical-therapy techniques. Practical application of these techniques will 
be practiced in the laboratory.  S. 
PTA 2032 CLINICAL PRACTICUM I 
Clinical experience in local health care facilities to observe and practice 
PTA skills learned in class and lab sessions. Students will be under the 
supervision of a registered physical therapist and/or registered physical 
therapist assistant.  F 
PTA 2112 PTA SYSTEMS/PROBLEMS 
The student will assist the physical therapist in selected evaluation 
treatment and administrative activities, summarize the progression of 
comprehensive rehabilitation programs for major disabilities, describe and 
utilize selected administrative records and charge systems in physical 
therapy, discuss measures for quality assurance and cost containment, 
review proper ways to write a resume, and review for national board 
examinations.  S 
PTA 2133 CLINICAL PRACTICUM II 
Students are given the opportunity to practice PTA skills which have been 
acquired through the PTA Program in Physical Therapy Departments.  
Students will be under the supervision of a registered physical therapist 
and/or registered physical therapy assistant.  S 
NURSING 
Professional Nursing Courses 
NURS 2212 INTRODUCTION TO PROFESSIONAL 
NURSING 
The profession of nursing is explored through the philosophy and 
conceptual framework of the School of Nursing. The historical 
development of nursing and nursing education are linked to current nursing 
practice. Ethical and legal aspects of nursing, as they affect the student 
entering nursing, are incorporated into the course. Student accountability 
and professionalism are introduced and developed. Two hours theory. 
NURS 3126 COMMUNITY NURSING 
The emphasis is on a broad scope of experiences, from maintenance of 
health and prevention of illness to promotion of wellness of communities, 
families, and individuals. Corequisite: NURS 3126L. 
NURS 3156 FUNDAMENTALS OF NURSING 
Emphasis is on the acquisition and use of assessment and technical tools 
for the delivery of health care. 
NURS 3236 ACUTE AND CHRONIC CARE I 
The student will explore the holistic health needs of adult clients. Emphasis 
is on application and analysis of competency necessary to restore health of 
the acutely ill client. Corequisite: NURS 3236L. 
NURS 3256 CHILD HEALTH NURSING 
Emphasis on nursing care of the child from infant through adolescence. 
Corequisite: NURS 3256L. 
NURS 3273 NURSING RESEARCH 
Emphasis is on skill competency in the use of the research process in 
nursing practice and application of evidence-based practice. 

 
NURS 3283 PHARMACOLOGY 
Focuses on therapeutics of pharmacological principles and theory as 
applied to nursing in the dosage calculation and administration of drugs. 

NURS 4001-02 INDIVIDUAL STUDY IN NURSING 
Individual study of specified topic in nursing. Credit one to two semester 
hours. Prerequisite: Admission to upper division nursing major and 
signature of Associate Dean of Nursing. 
NURS 4143 CHALLENGES FOR NURSES IN TODAY’S 
HEALTHCARE SYSTEM 
Current issues in healthcare that impact nursing practice with an emphasis 
on patient safety. 
NURS 4286 NURSING LEADERSHIP 
An exploration of leadership and management concepts and their impact 
on nursing practice and the delivery of health care. Leadership and 
management competencies will be implemented in a variety of practice 
settings. Corequisite: NURS 4286L. 
NURS 4346 ACUTE AND CHRONIC CARE II 
Emphasis on care of the adult and pediatric patient in the critical care 
setting. Corequisite: NURS 4346L. 
NURS 4356 FAMILY HEALTH 
Emphasis is on understanding and caring for the expanding family’s health 
care needs including health promotion and health restoration throughout 
the life span. Corequisite: NURS 4356L. 
NURS 4376 PSYCHOSOCIAL NURSING 
Emphasizes the psychodynamics of health and use of the therapeutic 
process in the prevention, promotion, restoration, and/or maintenance of 
mental health among individuals, families, and groups. Corequisite: 
NURS 4376L. 
NURS 4383 NURSING ELECTIVE 
The exploration of selected professional, political, social, legal and/or 
ethical theory as related to nursing practice in a specified practice setting. 
Corequisite: NURS 4383L. 
LPN to BSN Courses 
These courses are specifically designed for the LPN returning to school for 
a baccalaureate degree. 
NURS 4703 LPN-BSN ROLE TRANSITION 
The profession of nursing is explored through the philosophy and 
conceptual framework of the Department of Nursing. The historical 
development of nursing and nursing education is linked to current nursing 
practice.  Concepts unique to career ladder nurses are explored in depth. 
Taken in the first semester of nursing course work. Prerequisite:  
Admission to the LPN to BSN Program. 
NURS 4713 LPN-EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE 
Emphasis is on competency in the use of the research process in nursing 
practice. Considers the use of statistics and current evidence-based 
practice, including ethics, research design, research critique, descriptive 
and inferential statistics, parametric and non-parametric tests, types of 
tests, reliability, and validity, and effect sizes. Prerequisite: NURS 4703. 
NURS 4723 LPN-NURSING INFORMATICS 
This course provides a framework for the application of information 
technology to support patient care and provide leadership within health 
care systems. Emphasis is on the use of information technology to facilitate 
patient care, to inform quality improvement, selection and evaluation of 
information systems and technology, and related ethical, regulatory, and 
legal issues. Prerequisite: NURS 4703. 
NURS 4733 LPN-ADVANCED PHYSICAL ASSESSMENT 
This course will build upon assessment skills developed in the professional 
nurse’s basic educational program and professional background with a 
focus on the theoretical and clinical basis of assessment. The student will 
use findings from physical, psychosocial, and cultural assessment 
parameters across the lifespan to gather specific data relevant to frequent 
health concerns. Prerequisite: NURS 4703. 
NURS 4743 LPN-ISSUES AND CONCEPTS FOR 
PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE 
An exploration of the impact of advanced education on practice and the 
nurse’s response to current trends and issues influencing health care 
delivery. Emphasis is placed on the interface between individual and 
professional development. Prerequisite: NURS 4703. 
NURS 4756 LPN-COMMUNITY HEALTH PROMOTION 
Exploration of the theoretical concepts and clinical practice of nursing in 
and with communities. Community nursing practice with the goal of health 
promotion and maintenance will be emphasized. Clinical and Practicum 
Project experiences will focus on the development and implementation of 
practice strategies to facilitate the health of entire communities.  
Prerequisite: NURS 4703. 
NURS 4766 LPN-ACUTE AND CHRONIC CARE ACROSS 
THE LIFESPAN 
This 6-hour course contains both a theory and a clinical component. 
Emphasis is on the care of the adult patient in the critical care setting.  
Prerequisite: NURS 4703. 
NURS 4776 LPN-PROFESSIONAL NURSING 
LEADERSHIP 
An exploration of leadership and management concepts and their impact 
on nursing practice and the delivery of health care. Leadership and 
management competencies will be implemented in a variety of practice 
settings. Prerequisite: NURS 4703. 
RN to BSN Courses 
These courses are specifically designed for the licensed RN returning to 
school for a baccalaureate degree. 
NURS 4603 BRIDGING NURSING PARADIGMS 
The profession of nursing is explored through the philosophy and 
conceptual framework of the Department of Nursing. The historical 
development of nursing and nursing education are linked to current nursing 
practice.  Concepts unique to career ladder nurses are explored in depth. 
Taken in the first semester of nursing course work. Three hours theory. 
Prerequisite:  Admission to the RN to BSN Program. 
NURS 4613 NURSING STATISTICS AND EVIDENCE-
BASED PRACTICE 
This course emphasizes competency in use of the research process and 
statistics in nursing practice. Topics include the basics of research and 
statistics, 
descriptive 
and 
inferential 
statistics, 
parametric 
and 
nonparametric tests, types of tests, reliability and validity, evidence-based 
practice, the research process, and research critiques. Three hours theory. 
Prerequisite: NURS 4603. 
NURS 4623 WELLNESS THROUGH HEALTH 
PROMOTION 
Emphasis on health promotion and illness prevention throughout the 
lifespan, and acquisition/review and use of assessment skills. Holistic 
health and wellness-focused interventions are introduced. Three hours 
theory. Prerequisite: NURS 4603. 
NURS 4633 ETHICS AND CARING 
Exploration of the legal and ethical aspects of professional nursing practice 
when caring for clients at various places along the health continuum. 
Emphasis will be given to the ethics of care as a paradigm for ethical 
decisions. Prerequisite: NURS 4603. 
NURS 4643 THEORY AND PRACTICE ELECTIVE 
The exploration and application of selected professional, political, social, 
legal, and/or ethical theory as related to nursing practice in a specified 
practice setting. Prerequisite: NURS 4603. 

 
NURS 4653 NURSING INFORMATICS 
Students explore and analyze the use of electronic technology to manage 
information and enhance evidence-based nursing practice, including the 
arenas of nursing administration, education, research, and direct patient 
care. Other areas of focus include ethical and legal issues associated with 
informatics. Three hours theory. Prerequisite: NURS 4603 
NURS 4663 COMMUNITY BASED NURSING ACROSS 
THE HEALTH CONTINUUM  
Exploration of the theoretical concepts and clinical practice of nursing in 
and with communities. Community nursing practice with the goal of health 
promotion and maintenance will be emphasized. Clinical experiences will 
focus on the development and implementation of practice strategies to 
facilitate the health of entire communities. Three hours theory and 
practicum project. Prerequisite: NURS 4603 
NURS 4673 CONTEMPORARY NURSING LEADERSHIP 
An exploration of leadership and management concepts and their impact 
on nursing practice and the delivery of health care. Leadership and 
management competencies will be implemented in a variety of practice 
settings. Three hours theory and practicum project. Prerequisite: NURS 
4603. 
NURS 4683 ADVANCED PHYSICAL ASSESSMENT 
Students acquire advanced physical assessment and clinical reasoning 
skills and apply comprehensive assessment skills to case studies depicting 
a variety of lifespan stages and settings. The emphasis is on health 
promotion, disease prevention, risk assessment, and nursing intervention. 
Three hours theory. Prerequisite: NURS 4603 
NURS 4693 ISSUES AND CONCEPTS FOR 
PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE 
An exploration of the impact of advanced education on practice and the 
nurse’s response to current trends and issues influencing health care 
delivery. Emphasis is placed on the interface between individual and 
professional development. Taken in the last semester of nursing course 
work. Three hours theory. Prerequisite: NURS 4603 
