AN 204/AN 204C. INTRODUCTION TO CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY (3). Introduces the methods and theory of cultural anthropology through a theoretical and comparative examination of the role of human life. Includes the study of cultural practices such as language, myth, gender, marriage, and
sexuality, and economic and political practices in different cultures of the world. Cross listing: SO 204. NOTE: AN 204C is a course that carries a communication focus in the course assignments, and enrollment is limited to student who took the paired/linked RCC
200 course in the fall.

AN 300. WRITING CULTURE (3). Develops an understanding of the formal schooling influences on individuals and ways society affects educational institutions. Explores information and tools used to understand and succeed in the educational system. NOTE: Majors and Minors only. Cross-Listing: SO 300.

AN 402. ETHNOGRAPHIC RESEARCH METHODS (3). The methods anthropologists and sociologists use to gain access, develop rapport, collect and analyze data, and interpret findings when studying culture and society. Prerequisite(s): One 200- level Sociology or Anthropology course. Cross listing: CJ 402, CIL 402, and SO 402.

AN 403. ANTHROPOLIGICAL THEORY (3). Examines significant theories and debates that have informed anthropological analysis and practice. Explores a range of theoretical ideas such as agency versus structure, culture, power, history and social change, the politics of representation, objectivity and subjectivity. In discussing these major ideas, we will relate them to several key questions: what is the nature of the individual's relation to culture or
society? How have anthropologists sought to understand these relationships and to what extent do anthropological conceptualizations reflect the ways in which people understand their positions in society? Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course and junior class standing.

AN 404. SURVEYS FOR SOCIAL CHANGE (3). Learn to design and analyze your own surveys and explore how quantitative research can be used to facilitate social change. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course. Cross listing: CJ
404, CIL 401, and SO 404.

AN 407. PUBLIC ANTHROPOLOGY (3). Discusses anthropology’s insights on culture and research techniques as means to analyze social, political, and economic problems and develop solutions. Focuses on the ways in which applied anthropology can analyze, inform, and influence policy in the United States and abroad, demonstrating anthropology’s mainstream relevance. Prerequisite(s): SO 200 and SO 204 or AN
204, or permission of instructor. Cross listing: SO 407.

AN 408. GENDER AND CULTURE (3). Examines the cultural construction of sexuality and gender. Looks at a variation in ideas about sexuality, procreation and gender; how the individual learns gender roles; and how ideas about gender difference relate to kinship, economics, politics and religion. Prerequisite(s): One 200- level Sociology or Anthropology course. Cross-listing: SO 408.

AN 411. FOOD, GENDER, AND CULTURE (3). Explores ways in which preparing, eating, and thinking about food reflects culturally determined gender and power relations in societies around the world. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course, or any Women's and Gender Studies course. Cross
listing: SO 411 and WGS 411.

AN 412. FOOD JUSTICE (3). Explores our relationship with food through analysis of power, privilege, and culture. Learn ways to change the alienation, structural violence, and injustice experienced within dominant systems of food production and consumption. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course. Cross listing: SO 412 and PJ 426.

AN 414. EXPLORING CULTURE THROUGH FILM (3). Examines major anthropological concepts through an analysis of visual and written representations of societies throughout the world. Discussions will probe issues of identity, language, culture change, and power and resistance through a critical synthesis of ethnographic, theoretical, and popular films/videos and texts. Cross listing(s): COM 464K and SO 414.

AN 421. COMMUNITY FOOD SYSTEMS (3). Seeks to elaborate and deepen the understanding of the Community Food System concept. Begins with an investigation of the current moment in the global food system, its strengths and its inefficiencies. Explores issues as diverse as hunger, health and obesity, the limits of localism, food sovereignty to agroecological alternatives. Examines the use of Community Food Systems to better understand our alternatives to determine a different approach to growing food
and feeding people. This is the introduction course for the Community Food Systems minor. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course. Cross-listing: SO 421.

AN 423. MEXICAN AMERICANS IN THE U.S. (3). Provides a general overview of Mexican Americans in the United States in contemporary society. Examines the history, culture, and past and present policies that have affected the community. Emphasizes racism, discrimination, prejudice, internal colonialism, split labor market theory, immigration, participation in social movements,
and experiences with various social institutions such as the economy, politics, media, education, and the family. Prerequisite(s): SO 200 or SO 203 or permission of instructor. Cross listing: SO 423.

AN 427. REGIONAL FOODWAYS IN THE UNITED STATES (3). We seldom recognize the deeply rooted nature and meaning of foodways. We will use a wide array of media to illuminate those phenomena in our personal lives as well as in those of others. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level course in Anthropology or Sociology. Cross listing(s): SO 427.

AN 434. SPIRIT POSSESSION (3). Provides a cross-cultural lens for the analysis and understanding of beliefs and practices such as mediumship and trance. We will examine what questions these practices raise about gender, race, sexuality and
more.  Prerequisite(s): One 200-level course in Anthropology or
Sociology. Cross listing(s): SO 434.

AN 445. GENDER AND GLOBALIZATION (3). This class asks: what questions are raised by global flows of people, culture and capital, and how do these flows relate to the problems faced by men and women in different parts of the world? Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Anthropology or Sociology course. Cross listing(s): PJ 445, SO 445, and WGS 445.

AN 446. WOMEN AND GENDER IN THE MIDDLE EAST (3). Focuses on women's rights and LGBTQ rights in the Middle East. Often women and differing sexualities in the Middle East tend to be represented stereotypically without attention to context and historical background. Focuses on the everyday lives of Muslim women and men in the Middle East and their daily struggles. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Anthropology or Sociology course. Cross listing(s): PJ 446, SO 446, WGS 446.

AN 453. VIOLENCE AND POWER (3). Interdisciplinary course that explores the relationship between inequality, power, and violence. The course examines how power and violence are co- constructed in various contexts-including the family, culture, law and governmental institutions, medical institutions, and the mass media-and considers how people respond to and resist violence. Co-listing(s): PJ 453 and SO 453. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Anthropology or Sociology course.

AN 455. DRUGS, HEALTH, AND CULTURE (3). Rooted in medical anthropology and ethnography, analyzes the cultural meanings associated with health and illness: biomedicine and health care, medical knowledge production, and medical decision-making. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Anthropology or Sociology course. Cross listing(s): CJ 455, PJ 455, and SO 445.

AN 459E-W. SPECIAL TOPICS IN ANTHROPOLOGY (3). Special topics in Anthropology are explored.

AN 465. ANARCHY AND ANARCHISM (3). Relying on case studies and ethnographies, examines anarchism as a social, cultural, and political practice, one rooted largely in the left-wing critique of the liberal state and capitalism. Prerequisite(s): One
200-level Anthropology or Sociology course. Cross listing(s): CJ
465, PJ 465, and SO 465.

AN 468E-W. TOPICS IN CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY (3). Analysis of cultural, social and political changes and challenges in contemporary and ancient cultures. Prerequisite(s): One 200- level Sociology or Anthropology course or permission of instructor

AN 469E-W. TOPICS IN CULTURE (3). Analysis of origins, development, and changes/challenges of ancient and/or modern cultures. Prerequisite(s): SO 200 or AN 204 or permission of instructor. Cross listing: SO 469E-W.

AN 471. ANIMALS, SOCIETY, AND CULTURE (3). Introduces students to the debate about the proper relationship between humans and our animal cousins. Utilizes ethnographic reading, philosophy and an examination of political economy to highlight the cultural, economic and social impacts of our treatment of animals on our ecosystems and ourselves. Prerequisite(s): One
200-level Anthropology or Sociology course. Cross Listing(s): PJ
471, and SO 471.

AN 485. ANTHROPOLOGY OF RELIGION (3). Cross-cultural debates and definitions of religion, ritual, symbolism, beliefs and practices. Critically examines how religion in shaped by social categories such as kinship, exchange, the human life cycle, and the environment. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course and RT201 or permission of instructor. Cross listing: SO 485 and RT469E.

AN 487. TRANSNATIONAL FEMINISMS (3). Develops a gendered, historical, and contextual understanding of transnationalism, solidarity, social justice, feminist activism and globalization as specific processes. It will encourage acting on global issues in more ethically and politically conscious ways. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level course in Anthropology or Sociology. Cross listing(s): PJ 487, SO 487, WGS 487.

AN 490E-W.  INDEPENDENT STUDY IN ANTHROPOLOGY (1-3). Offers opportunity for independent study in special topics of interest not covered in regularly offered courses under the
direction of a faculty member. Prerequisite(s): Junior standing and approval of division director.

AN 495. PRACTICUM IN COMMUNITY FOOD SYSTEMS (1-3). Practicum course begins and ends in the garden. Students will
walk away with a more intimate understanding of the planning and implementation of a small one acre organic urban garden.
Explores biointensive and permaculture approaches to food production. Utilizing these skills, students will be able to produce food and will understand how the production of food is an important aspect of the community food system concept. Examines the relationships between food production, distribution, processing, and consumption. Cross-listing: SO 495.
AN 496. FOOD SYSTEMS SUMMER INTENSIVE (1-3). Practicum course in community food systems that begins and ends in the garden. Students will walk away from this course with a more intimate understanding of the planning and implementation of a small one acre organic urban garden. Cross listing: SO 496.

AN 498E-W. INTERNSHIP IN ANTHROPOLOGY (3). Integrates practical experience and intellectual guidance based on employment or volunteer work. Prerequisite(s): One 200 level course and one methods course. Junior standing and minimum GPA of 2.80. Note: Requires approval of Sociology department chair and director of Academic Internship Program.

AN 499. MAJOR’S SEMINAR (3). Capstone course provides Anthropology majors with information on graduate school, employment opportunities and particular ways their knowledge can be used to contribute to the community. Students are encouraged to participate in the community during this course. Cross-listing: SO 499.



BREW 400. BIOLOGICAL BREWING FUNDAMENTALS (3). Introduces the scientific basis of brewing in biological context. Particularly focuses on the basic biology of malt, hops, and yeast, including introduction to yeast metabolism and fermentation. Also discusses history and styles of craft beer. Prerequisite(s): Collegiate course in natural science. NOTE: Admission to the Applied Craft Brewing Certificate Program required.

BREW 430. BUSINESS OF CRAFT BREWING (3). Explores the merchandising and operations of microbrewing, with specific focus on finances, marketing, brewing policies and regulations, and developing a business plan. NOTE: Admission to the Applied
Craft Brewing Certificate Program required.

BREW 496A. APPLIED CRAFT BREWING l: HOT SIDE (3). Explores recipe preparation, malt, mashing, lautering, boiling, hopping, and whirl pooling in consideration of water, starch, enzymes, and sugars. Also includes discussion of reading malt reports. Prerequisite(s): BREW 400. NOTE: Admission to the Applied Craft Brewing Certificate Program required.

BREW 496B. APPLIED CRAFT BREWING II: COLD SIDE (3). Explores cleaning and sanitation methods, fermentation methods, quality control and assurance practices, beer testing, and packaging. Also discusses draft systems and beer judging criteria.
Includes sensory assessment. Prerequisite(s): BREW 496A. NOTE: Admission to the Applied Craft Brewing Certificate Program required.

BREW 498. BREWING INTERNSHIP (4). A supervised internship at a brewery or brewing-related internship site where students apply program coursework. Includes completion of an Applied Craft Brewing Certificate Program project. Prerequisite(s): Permission of instructor.



AS 250. PRINCIPLES OF ASTRONOMY (3). Provides an introductory survey of the universe for non-science majors. Topics can include study of the night sky, light and telescopes, the Sun, planets, stars, or cosmology. Co-requisite: AS 251. Prerequisite(s): MT 250, or placement in MT 260 or higher.. NOTE: Designed for non-science majors to meet the Natural Science Core requirement when taken with AS 251.

AS 251. PRINCIPLES OF ASTRONOMY LABORATORY (1). Involves laboratory exercises accompanying and reinforcing lecture topics, including observations, computer simulations, and experimentation. May require field trips during or outside of class time. Co-requisite: AS 250. Prerequisite(s): MT 260 or equivalent or permission of instructor. NOTE: One three-hour evening laboratory each week required.

AS 470. INTRODUCTION TO ASTROPHYSICS (3). Reviews the observational bases of astrophysics, radiative properties of stars, stellar spectra, binary and variable stars, stellar interiors and evolution, and galaxies and cosmology. Includes observational work. Prerequisite(s): PH 304B. NOTE: Recommended as a physics elective or following completion of general physics and calculus. Cross-listing(s): PH 470.



BL 204E-W. TOPICS IN BIOLOGY (3). Introduces students to scientific inquiry in the context of a focused biological topic. Develops student knowledge of biological content and includes discussion of relevant societal and ethical issues. Topics have included Human Genetics, DNA and Biotechnology, and Animals and the Environment. NOTE: This course has been approved to satisfy the core natural science with laboratory requirement when taken with BL 205E-W. Co-requisite: BL 205E-W.

BL 205E-W. TOPICS IN BIOLOGY LABORATORY (1). Introduces students to scientific inquiry through participation. Involves exercises accompanying and reinforcing lecture content. NOTE: One three-hour laboratory per week. Co-requisite: BL
204E-W.

BL 208. BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY (3). Introduces students to scientific inquiry in the context of human biological variation and evolution. Develops student knowledge of human genetics, human evolution, the fallacy of human biological races, and the fossil evidence of human evolution. NOTE: This course has been approved to satisfy the core natural science with laboratory requirement when taken with BL 209. Co-requisite: BL
209.

BL 209. BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY LABORATORY (1). Introduces students to scientific inquiry through participation. Involves exercises accompanying and reinforcing lecture content. Emphasizes the skeletal system, with examples used to illustrate hypothesis testing and use of evidence in making inferences about human relationships. NOTE: One three-hour laboratory per week. Co-requisite: BL 208.

BL 216. HUMAN BIOLOGY (3). Introduces students to natural science in the context of the human organism. Develops student knowledge of the biology and bioethical issues associated with scientific understanding of human disease, genetics, and biotechnology.  NOTE: This course has been approved to satisfy the core natural science with laboratory requirement when taken with BL 217. Does not fulfill requirements for pre-nursing or other pre-health programs. Co-requisite: BL 217.
BL 217. HUMAN BIOLOGY LABORATORY (1). Introduces students to scientific inquiry through participation. Involves exercises accompanying and reinforcing lecture content. NOTE: One three-hour laboratory per week. Co-requisite: BL 216.

BL 224. INTRODUCTION TO BOTANY (3). Provides a comprehensive overview of botany. Introduces plant form and function, cells and tissues, diversity of plants, and concepts of pollination and reproduction. Discusses how plants adapt to environments and how plants are economically vital. Co- requisite(s): BL 225. NOTE: This course has been approved to satisfy the core natural science with laboratory requirement when taken with BL 225.

BL 225. INTRODUCTION TO BOTANY LABORATORY (1). Involves laboratory experiments accompanying and reinforcing lecture topics. Co-requisite(s): BL 224.

BL 254. INTRODUCTION TO MEDICAL MICROBIOLOGY (3). Surveys major groups of medically important pathogenic microorganisms, including viruses, bacteria, fungi, and protozoans. Emphasizes microbiological principles, and introduces
immunologic and epidemiologic concepts. Co-requisite: BL 255. NOTE: Designed specifically for pre-Nursing students. Does not fulfill the Natural Science Core requirement or requirements for other pre-Health programs, such as pre-Medicine, or Biology.

BL 255. INTRODUCTION TO MEDICAL MICROBIOLOGY LABORATORY (1). Involves laboratory experiments
accompanying and reinforcing lecture topics. Co-requisite: BL 254. NOTE: One three-hour laboratory per week. Offered every
spring semester.

BL 258. GENERAL BIOLOGY I; ORGANISMIC (3). Introduces students to natural science, hypothesis testing, and general concepts of biomolecules, cells, and cellular energy processes. Develops knowledge of the terms and concepts of ecology, evolution, disease biology, and physiology. Highlights socially relevant issues. NOTE: Designed for Biology, Biochemistry, Environmental Studies, and Neuroscience majors, as well as for pre-medical and other pre-health students. This course has been approved to satisfy the core natural science with laboratory requirement when taken with BL 259, BL 259H, or BL 259S. Co- requisite(s): BL 259, BL 259H, or BL 259S.

BL 259. ORGANISMIC BIOLOGY LABORATORY (1). Introduces study design, primary literature, data interpretation, and written presentation of results. Reinforces lecture content and includes fieldwork and one dissection. NOTE: One three-hour laboratory per week. Co-requisite(s): BL 258 except for students with AP
high school credit for BL 258.

BL 259H. HONORS ORGANISMIC BIOLOGY LABORATORY (1). Introduces study design, primary literature, data interpretation, and written presentation of results. Reinforces lecture content and explores broader themes of history and philosophy of biology. Includes fieldwork and one dissection. NOTE: One three-hour laboratory per week. Honors students only, or permission of instructor. Co-requisite(s): BL 258 except for students with AP high school credit for BL 258.

BL 259S. ORGANISMIC BIOLOGY LABORATORY: SPANISH BILINGUAL (1). Introduces study design, primary literature, data interpretation, and written presentation of results. Reinforces lecture content and includes fieldwork and one dissection. Taught bilingually in Spanish and English, emphasizing Spanish. NOTE: One three-hour laboratory per week taught in Spanish and English. Co-requisite(s): BL 258 except for student with AP high school credit for BL 258.

BL 260. GENERAL BIOLOGY II: MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR (3). Develops knowledge of hypothesis testing in molecular and cellular biology as well as the terms and concepts of cell biology, genetics, molecular biology, disease biology, and physiology. Highlights socially relevant issues. NOTE: Designed for Biology, Biochemistry, Environmental Studies, and Neuroscience majors, as well as for pre-medical and other pre-health students. This course has been approved to satisfy the core natural science with laboratory requirement when taken with BL 261, 261H, or 261S. Co-requisite(s): BL 261, BL 261H, or BL 261S. Prerequisite(s): BL
258.

BL 261. MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOLOGY LABORATORY (1). Introduces study design, primary literature, data interpretation, and oral presentation of results. Reinforces lecture content.  Includes work with recombinant DNA. NOTE: One three-hour laboratory per week. Co-requisite: BL 260 except for students with AP high school credit for BL 260.

BL 261H. HONORS MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOLOGY LABORATORY (1). Introduces study design, primary literature, data interpretation, and oral presentation of results. Reinforces lecture content and explores broader themes of history and philosophy of biology. Includes work with recombinant DNA. NOTE:  One three-hour laboratory per week. Honors students only or permission of instructor. Co-requisite: BL 260 except for students with AP high school credit for BL 260.

BL 261S. MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOLOGY LABORATORY; SPANISH BILIGUAL (1). Introduces study design, primary literature, data interpretation, and oral presentation of results. Reinforces lecture content. Includes work with recombinant DNA. Taught bilingually in Spanish and English, emphasizing Spanish. NOTE: One three-hour laboratory per
week. Co-requisite(s): BL 260 except for students with AP high school credit for BL 260. Prerequisite(s): BL 259, BL 259H, or BL
259S.

BL 274. PRINCIPLES OF HUMAN ANATOMY (3). Provides a comprehensive introduction to human anatomy including the integumentary, skeletal, muscular, sensory, nervous, endocrine, digestive, respiratory, circulatory, urinary, and reproductive organ systems.  Co-requisite(s): BL 275. Prerequisite(s): Sophomore standing. One natural science course recommended. NOTE: Required for students intending Nursing or Pharmacy.

BL 275. HUMAN ANATOMY LABORATORY (1). Involves laboratory exercises accompanying and reinforcing lecture topics. Requires contact with human cadavers and skeletal materials. Co- requisite(s): BL 274. NOTE: Two one-and-a-half hour laboratories per week.

BL 276. PRINCIPLES OF HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY (3). Provides a comprehensive introduction to human physiology, including neurophysiology, endocrinology, muscular, cardiovascular, respiratory, renal, and gastrointestinal physiology. Co-requisite(s): BL 277. Prerequisite(s): High school chemistry or one semester of college chemistry or permission of instructor. NOTE: Required for students intending Nursing or Pharmacy.
BL 277. HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY LABORATORY (1). Involves laboratory exercises accompanying and reinforcing lecture topics. Requires work with human and non-human vertebrate tissues and fluids. Co-requisite(s): BL 276. NOTE: One three-hour
laboratory per week.

BL 296. INTRODUCTION TO BIOMEDICAL TERMINOLOGY (1). Develops student ability to recognize and use biomedical terminology in biological and biomedical contexts. Focuses on common roots, prefixes, and suffixes and discusses basic human anatomy.  Prerequisites(s): A collegiate course in natural science. NOTE: Fulfills a prerequisite for most programs requiring a course in biomedical terminology.

BL 402. PRINCIPLES OF ECOLOGY (3). Develops student knowledge of ecological principles in the context of the primary scientific literature. Develops student facility in working with biological primary literature and understanding ecological investigations.  Prerequisite(s): BL 258, BL 260. and MT 272. Cross listing: ENVS 402. NOTE: Required for all Biology and Environmental Science majors.

BL 403. QUANTITATIVE ECOLOGY LABORATORY (1). Involves ecological research design and the collection, evaluation, and statistical analysis of ecological data in the laboratory and in the field.  Prerequisite(s): BL 259, BL 261 and MT 272. Cross listing: ENVS 403. NOTE: Required for all Biology and Environmental Science majors.

BL 406. HUMAN AND COMPARATIVE ANATOMY (3). A rigorous organ-system-based course in human anatomy that also places human anatomical structure into its evolutionary and developmental context. Includes an overview of anatomical variation among vertebrates. Teaches anatomy as an active biological discipline. Co-requisite: BL 407. Prerequisite(s): BL 258 and BL 260. NOTE: Pre-Nursing and Pre-Physical Therapy students should take BL 274 to meet the requirements for these programs.

BL 407. HUMAN AND COMPARATIVE ANATOMY LABORATORY (1). Intensive laboratory course closely accompanying and reinforcing lecture content in human and comparative anatomy. Teaches anatomy as an active biological discipline. Includes work with skeletal and preserved specimens of humans and other vertebrates. Co-requisite: BL 406. Prerequisite(s): BL 259 and BL 261. NOTE: Pre-Nursing and Pre- Physical Therapy students should take BL 275. Class may require attendance at a few field trips outside of class time.

BL 410. AQUATIC ECOLOGY (3). Develops student knowledge of freshwater ecology in its physical and chemical context. Emphasizes aquatic communities and includes exploration of the impacts of human activities on aquatic systems.   Prerequisite(s): BL 258 and BL 260. Cross listing: ENVS 410.

BL 412. DEVELOPMENTAL BIOLOGY (3). Focuses on early development in a variety of model organisms and humans. Emphasizes modern approaches to explain molecular and genetic aspects of regulative and mosaic development, differential gene expression, and morphogenesis. Prerequisite(s): BL 258 and BL
260.

BL 414. PRINCIPLES OF GENETICS (3). Explores concepts of heredity, including the structure, replication, transmission, and expression of genes from the DNA of chromosomes. Interprets genetic phenomena at different levels of organization, including prokaryotic and eukaryotic systems. Prerequisites(s): BL 258 and BL 260. Co-Requisite: BL 415. NOTE: Required for all Biology majors.

BL 415. GENETICS AND GENOMICS LABORATORY (1). Involves research design and the collection, evaluation, and analysis of genetic and genomic data in the laboratory and from online databases. Prerequisite(s): BL 259 and BL 261. Co- Requisite: BL 414. NOTE: Required for all Biology majors.

BL 416.  MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOCHEMISTRY (3). Develops student understanding of biomolecules in the context of cells and metabolic processes. Focuses on biological and biomedical relevance. Prerequisite(s): BL 258, BL 260, and CH
250.

BL 418. MICROBIOLOGY (3). Studies viruses, bacteria, archae, and eukaryotic microorganisms within a broad biological perspective. Includes the growth, metabolism, genetics, and ecology of microbes. Introduces concepts of immunology, epidemiology and discusses major infectious diseases caused by microorganisms. Co-requisite: BL 419. Prerequisite(s): BL 258, BL
260, and CH 210.

BL 419. MICROBIOLOGY LABORATORY (1). Involves laboratory experiments accompanying and reinforcing lecture topics. Co-requisite: BL 418. Prerequisite(s): BL 259 and BL 261.

BL 420. HUMAN GENOMICS (3). Develops student knowledge of genomic variability, regulation, and structure with a focus on the human genome. Introduces students to fundamentals of bioinformatic genomic analysis. Prerequisite(s): BL 258, BL 260, and MT 272.

BL 423. TROPICAL HEALTH BIOLOGY LABORATORY (1) Explores the biology of human health in the context of tropical countries. Discusses health threats in tropical countries and asks students to consider possible solutions. Pre-requisite(s): BL 259 and BL 261 or permission of instructor. NOTE: Requires student participation in a Spring Break travel-learning experience in a tropical country.

BL 424. CELL AND CANCER BIOLOGY (3). Develops an understanding of eukaryotic cell structure and function at the molecular level.  Focuses on normal and abnormal signaling, signal transduction, cell-cycle control, metabolism, and genetic regulation in understanding cancer. Includes cancer detection, prevention, and treatment. Prerequisite(s): BL 258, BL 260, and CH 230.

BL 426. MOLECULAR BIOLOGY (3). Develops student knowledge of genome structure, replication, expression and regulation in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Generally introduces students to bioinformatics and biotechnology applications of molecular biology. Co-requisite: BL 427. Prerequisite(s): BL 258, BL 260, and CH 250.

BL 427. MOLECULAR BIOLOGY LABORATORY (1). Laboratory course emphasizing techniques of molecular biology using model organisms. Co-requisite: BL 426. Prerequisite(s): BL 259, BL 261, and CH 251.

BL 428. CONSERVATION BIOLOGY (3). Introduces the fundamental principles of conservation biology including patterns of global biological diversity, biogeography, population genetics,
extinction, restoration ecology, management, and conservation policy. Prerequisite(s): BL 258 and BL 260. Cross listing: ENVS
428. NOTE: Junior standing or completion of Distributive Core required.

BL 435. ADVANCED FIELD ECOLOGY LABORATORY (2). Introduces students to methods of sampling and studying a variety of organisms in the field. Develops student ability to design, conduct, and appropriately interpret field ecological studies. Prerequisite(s): BL 403 or ENVS 403. Cross listing: ENVS 435.

BL 436. HUMAN AND COMPARATIVE PHYSIOLOGY (3). A rigorous systems-based course in human physiology that also considers exemplar model physiological systems used in biomedical research. Topics include metabolism, neural and endocrine function, circulation, respiration, osmoregulation, and muscle function. Prerequisite(s): BL 258, BL 260, , and CH 230. Co-requisite(s): BL 437.

BL 437. HUMAN AND COMPARATIVE PHYSIOLOGY LABORATORY (1). Intensive laboratory course closely accompanying and reinforcing lecture content in human and comparative physiology. Teaches physiology as an active biological discipline. Prerequisite(s): BL 259 and BL 261. Co-requisite(s): BL
436.

BL 438. VIROLOGY (3). Introduces students to viruses, including diversity, entry, genome replication, latency, persistence, assembly, and pathogenesis. Explores bateriophages, eukaryotic viruses, the molecular basis of virus-host interactions and disease transmission, viruses in medicine, emerging infections and viral diseases. Prerequisite(s): BL 258, BL 260, and CH 210.

BL 446. MARINE BIOLOGY (3). Develops student knowledge of the biology of the world ocean, emphasizing marine diversity and ecology in oceanographic context. Introduces students to issues of commercial fisheries, mariculture, and oceanic pollution and helps students develop integrative positions. Prerequisite(s): BL
258 and BL 260.  Cross-listing: ENVS 446.

BL 447. MARINE BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION LABORATORY (1) Explores the biodiversity and ecology of tropical coral reefs and associated habitats in the Caribbean. Discusses conservation threats and asks students to consider possible solutions. Pre-requisite(s): BL 259 and BL 261 or permission of instructor. Cross-listing: ENVS 481S. NOTE: Requires student participation in a Spring Break travel-learning experience in Belize.

BL 448. PLANT DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY (3). Surveys plant systematics and distributional aspects of plant community ecology. Emphasizes identification, classification, biogeography, and environmental effects on plant distribution and community structure. Focuses on the Colorado flora. Prerequisite(s): BL 258 and BL 260. Cross listing: ENVS 448. NOTE: One or two
weekend field trips required.

BL 458.  BEHAVIORAL ECOLOGY (3). Explores the mechanisms and functions of animal behavior with emphasis on the ecological and evolutionary bases of animal behavior. Some areas discussed include communication, reproductive behavior, and social behavior. Prerequisite(s): BL 258 and BL 260. Cross listing: ENVS
458.

BL 459. ANIMAL BEHAVIOR LABORATORY (1). Laboratory and field exercises accompany and reinforce lecture topics. Involves non-invasive work with live animals. Prerequisite(s): BL 259 and
BL 261. Cross listing: ENVS 459.

BL 460. FOREST AND LANDSCAPE ECOLOGY (3). Investigates the unique ecological characteristics of forest ecosystems, surveys the diversity of world forests, and explores methods of analysis and management of forests at landscape scales. Prerequisite(s): BL
258, BL 260, and MT 272. Cross listing: ENVS 460. NOTE: May require participation in field trips outside of class time.

BL 462. PRIMATE ECOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR (3). Explores the ecology and evolution of primates in the context of their biotic and abiotic environments. Emphasizes primate life history, behavior, social organization and conservation ecology. Prerequisite(s): BL 258 and BL 260. Cross listing: ENVS 462. NOTE: May require participation in field trips outside of class time.

BL 464. EVOLUTION (3). Explores concepts of evolution as a process of discovery. Topics include biological diversity, classification and phylogeny, genetic and phenotypic variation, evolutionary forces, character evolution, species concepts, specialization, and human variation and evolution. Prerequisite(s): BL 258 and BL 260.

BL 466. IMMUNOLOGY (3). Explores the human immune system and immunopathology by presenting concepts of the activation
and regulation of the immune response. Prerequisite(s): BL 258, BL 260, and CH 230. NOTE: May include field trips to research facilities.

BL 469A. ECOLOGY, EVOLUTION, AND BEHAVIOR RESEARCH LABORATORY (1) Explores biological research through whole-class work on a faculty-member directed research project in the area of ecology and/or evolution. Develops student research abilities via reading the primary literature, consideration or research questions, data collection, and data analysis. Pre- requisite(s): BL 259 and BL 261 and MT 272 or permission of instructor. NOTE: May require field work and/or student work outside of laboratory time.

BL 469B. MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOLOGY RESEARCH LABORATORY (1) Explores biological research through whole- class work on a faculty-member directed research project in an area of molecular and cellular biology. Develops student research abilities via reading the primary literature, consideration or research questions, data collection, and data analysis. Pre- requisite(s): BL 259 and BL 261 and CH 211 or permission of instructor. NOTE: May require student work outside of laboratory time.

BL 481E-W. SPECIAL TOPICS IN BIOLOGY (1-4). Explores selected topics in the field of biology not normally covered in regular course offerings. Course format varies according to topics selected. Prerequisite(s): BL 258 and BL 260. NOTE: Certain topics may include a laboratory, which will require prerequisites
of BL 259 and BL 261.

BL 485. NEUROANATOMY AND NEUROPHYSIOLOGY (3). Explores the functional significance of neural physiology and connectivity, including effects related to neural development, how nerve cells communicate with one another, how patterns of
neural interconnections give rise to different perceptual, cognitive,
and motor responses, and how neural communication is modified by experience. Co-requisite: BL 486. Prerequisite(s): NS 260, BL
258, and BL 260, or permission of instructor. Cross listing: NS
485.

BL 486. NEUROANATOMY AND NEUROPHYSIOLOGY LABORATORY (1). Involves laboratory experiments and computer simulation of neural functions as well as gross dissection, and histological study of Neuroanatomy. Co-requisite:
BL 485. Cross listing: NS 486. NOTE: One three-hour laboratory per week.

BL 489A/B. Arrupe Science Mentorship (0-1). Students will support Arrupe Jesuit High School seniors complete their Science Capstone projects. Regis students needn’t be science majors to participate. Most of the mentorship will occur at Arrupe Jesuit High School.

BL 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN BIOLOGY (1-3). Offers an opportunity for advanced study of independent topics in biology. Prerequisite(s): BL 258 and BL 260, permission of instructor and approval of department chair. NOTE: A maximum of 3 SH may be used to satisfy requirements for major or minor.

BL 491E-W. UNDERGRADUATE RESEARCH IN BIOLOGY (1). Offers an opportunity for laboratory or field research under faculty direction. Requires oral or poster presentation. Prerequisite(s): BL 258, BL 259, BL 260, BL 261. Permission of instructor is required. NOTE: Requires a time commitment of approximately 4-8 hours per week. Does not satisfy the upper division laboratory requirements for any major or minor.

BL 494. SEMINAR IN BIOLOGY, SOCIETY, AND ETHICS (1). Surveys bioethical controversies in the context of justice and the common good, and assists students in developing their own coherent and informed bioethical positions. Introduces Biology- Major learning outcomes. Prerequisite(s): BL 258 and BL 260. Sophomore standing. NOTE: Required for all Biology majors.

BL 495. SEMINAR IN EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY (1). Develops student facility with reading, interpretation, and discussion of articles from the primary literature in evolution. Includes resume development, cover letter construction, and development of an initial Biology outcomes portfolio.  Prerequisite(s): BL 494, Junior standing. NOTE: Required for all Biology majors.

BL 496. SEMINAR IN BIOLOGY RESEARCH (1). Explores biology as a dynamic discipline via research seminar attendance and
reading associated scientific literature. Covers a broad range of biological topics. Includes development of a Biology-Major outcomes portfolio. Prerequisite(s): BL 495, Junior standing. NOTE: Required for all Biology majors, and requires attendance
at the Department of Biology seminar series outside of class time.

BL 498E-W. INTERNSHIP IN BIOLOGY (3). Provides faculty- directed practical experience in a biology-related working environment outside of Regis University. Requires oral presentation to department at conclusion of semester. Prerequisite(s): BL 258 and BL 260, Junior standing, permission of instructor and approval of department chair and director of Academic Internship Program. NOTE: Credit may not be counted to fulfill the minimum upper division semester hour requirement for a Bachelor of Science in Biology or a biology minor.


BL 499A. SENIOR THESIS I (1). Involves the first steps in writing an Honors-in-Biology thesis based on independent research. Prerequisite(s): BL 491E-W. Senior standing and approval of department chair. Pass/No Pass grading only.

BL 499B. SENIOR THESIS II (1). Involves completion of the Honors-in-Biology thesis and an oral defense of the thesis. Prerequisite(s): BL 499A. Senior standing and approval of department chair. Pass/No Pass grading only.

CATHOLIC STUDIES (CAS)

CAS 300E-W. FOUNDATIONS OF CATHOLIC TRADITION
(3). An interdisciplinary overview of the sources and contributions of the Catholic religious tradition. Investigates historical roots and cultural adaptations from its beginning to today’s global setting. Topics might include developments in philosophy, theology, literature, the arts as well as the influence of political and social thought and institutions.

CAS 308. CATHOLIC CHRISTIANITY (3). An interdisciplinary investigation of the foundational sources of Catholic Christianity emphasizing historical development of the tradition and academic approaches to expressions of that development such as biblical literature, sacramental and liturgical practice, official church teachings (especially Vatican Council II), and Christian mission in the modern world. Prerequisite(s): RT 201/201C. Cross Listing: RT 308.

CAS 323. CATHOLIC IMAGINATION IN LITERATURE AND FILM (3). Explores characteristically Catholic ways of imagining
the world and wrestling with important human questions through literature and film. Prerequisite(s): RT 201. Cross-listing: RT 323.

CAS 400E-W. THE CATHOLIC INTELLECTUAL TRADITION (3). Explores significant contributors to Catholic intellectual tradition as well as of the basic issues that have determined that tradition: the role of faith and reason, the place of culture in Christian evangelization, spirituality, and autobiography. Emphasizes the study of primary texts. Prerequisite(s): RT 201.

CAS 410E-W. THE ARTS IN CATHOLIC TRADITION (3). Explores the relationship between Catholic tradition and the fine arts and the role of the arts in expressing and enriching the life of faith. Focuses on the relationship between the sacred and the beautiful, the history of Christian iconography, or specific media
of expression (e.g., performing, visual arts, liturgical arts). Examines the spiritual power of the aesthetic experience. Prerequisite(s): RT 201.

CAS 411. ECOTHEOLOGY (3). Explores contemporary environmental issues from the perspectives of different religious traditions. Compares spiritual and religious views of the environment, its meaning, and its relation to human beings. Explores scientific understandings of contemporary environmental issues, asking how religions engage these issues. NOTE: Junior standing or completion of Distributive Core required.

CAS 412. CATHOLIC LIFE AND THOUGHT (3). An exploration of post-Vatican Council II Catholic Christian belief and practice with emphasis on the foundations, historical forms and resources of the tradition and its development. Special attention will be
given to topics of interest to adults. Prerequisite(s): RT 201. Cross listing: RS 412.
CAS 420E-W. CATHOLIC TRADITION IN SOCIETY AND CULTURE (3). Explores the relationship between Catholic thought and practice and social or cultural phenomena in various cultures or time periods. The approach can be from different disciplines such as sociology, anthropology, media studies, and history. Prerequisite(s): RT 201.

CAS 430E-W. CATHOLIC TRADITION AND NATURAL SCIENCE (3). Explores Catholic thought on the natural sciences. Addresses such topics as the theory of evolution, the role of Greek philosophy and science in the development of Catholic thought, the impact of Catholic thinkers on the history of science, controversies between the Church and the sciences, moral issues arising from technological development. Prerequisite(s): RT 201.

CAS 440E-W. CATHOLIC RELIGIOUS AND SPIRITUAL TRADITIONS (3). Explores Catholic Christian spiritual experiences and practices focusing on particular contributors (e.g., Benedict, Ignatius Loyola, Teresa of Avila), or particular forms of spiritual practice (e.g., mystical, monastic, Ignatian) or particular spiritual disciplines (e.g., contemplation, activism, liturgical). Prerequisite(s): RT 201.

CAS 443. ECONOMIC POLICY, JUSTICE AND THE COMMON GOOD (3). Uses readings in economics, philosophy and Catholic social teaching to evaluate economic theory and economic
policies that address social ills (e.g., poverty, unequal income distribution, unequal access to health care.) Prerequisite(s): EC
200 or EC 3200 or EC 3300. Cross listing: EC 4243 and PJ 478. NOTE: Junior standing or completion of Distributive Core required.

CAS 450E-W. HISTORICAL THEMES IN CATHOLIC TRADITION (3). Studies historical themes, figures, movements or periods that shaped or were shaped by Catholic thought or practice. Prerequisite(s): RT 201.

CAS 460E-W. PEACE AND JUSTICE IN CATHOLIC TRADITION (3). Studies the sources and influence of Catholic social teaching. Focus may include themes (e.g., liberation, peace activism, church-state relations, political freedom), figures who have enacted Catholic teaching (e.g., Francis of Assisi, Dorothy Day), or issues (e.g., economic justice, military services, international aid). Examines biblical, papal, conciliar, and theological documents. Prerequisite(s): RT 201.

CAS 480. CHRISTIAN LEADERSHIP (3). Explores the context, theology, and skills for leadership in faith communities. May include special attention to pastoral theology, ecclesiology, and sacramental life. Prerequisite(s): RT 201 and any 300-level RT course. Cross listing: RG 480G.

CAS 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN CATHOLIC STUDIES (3). Provides focused research on a topic in Catholic Studies not covered in regular course offerings. NOTE: Specific assignments and meeting times are arranged with the instructor. Approval of program director required.

CAS 498E-W. CATHOLIC STUDIES INTERNSHIP (3). Offers an opportunity to explore Catholic Studies in its practical application to various working areas of contemporary Catholicism. Requires students to reflect critically and constructively on the experience. Prerequisite(s): CAS 300. Approval of program director required.

CH 202/202C. INTRODUCTION TO ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMISTRY (3). Provides a qualitative introduction to the chemical aspects of environmental and social issues for the non- science student. Includes the role of science and technology, water and air pollution, conventional and alternate energy sources, nuclear power and selected topics relating to local and global issues in energy and the environment. Co-requisite: CH
203, or permission of instructor. NOTE: Designed specifically for non-science majors to satisfy the Natural Science Core Requirement when taken with CH 203.

CH 203. INTRODUCTION TO ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMISTRY LABORATORY (1). Involves laboratory exercises accompanying and reinforcing lecture topics. Co-requisite: CH
202, or permission of instructor. NOTE: One three-hour laboratory period.

CH 204. DRUGS OF USE AND ABUSE (3). Provides an introductory survey of general, organic, and biological chemistry principles as they relate to prescribed, over the counter, and recreational drugs. Specific topics may vary each semester. Co- requisite: CH 205, or permission of instructor. NOTE: Designed specifically for non-science majors to satisfy the Natural Science Core requirement when taken with CH 205.

CH 205. DRUGS OF USE AND ABUSE LABORATORY (1). Involves laboratory exercises accompanying and reinforcing CH
204 lecture topics, including observations, demonstrations, and student experimentation. Co-requisite: CH 204, or permission of instructor. NOTE: One three-hour laboratory period.

CH 206A. CHEMISTRY FOR HEALTH RELATED SCIENCES (3). Introduction to the fundamentals of chemistry including unit conversions, the metric system, properties of matter, nuclear chemistry, introductory organic chemistry, the structure of drug molecules, important organic functional groups, concentration and dosing, acids and bases, and the fundamentals of biochemistry. Throughout the course, there is an emphasis on problem solving skills in a health care setting. This course is designed for pre- Nursing students and will NOT fulfill the natural science, distributive core requirement. Co-requisite: CH 207A. NOTE: Designed for health care programs. ACT math score of 20 or greater, or SAT math score of 515 or greater required, or a grade of C- or higher in CH 209, or permission of instructor.

CH 207A. CHEMISTRY FOR HEALTH RELATED SCIENCES LABORATORY (1). Students perform laboratory experiments
that enhance and support their understanding of material taught in CH206A. Co-requisite: CH 206A. NOTE: One three-hour laboratory per week. An ACT math score of 20 or greater or
SAT math score of 515 or greater or a grade of C- or higher in
CH 209 required, or permission of instructor.

CH 209. INTRODUCTORY COLLEGE CHEMISTRY (3).A survey of selected topics in general chemistry with a strong emphasis on quantitative problem-solving skills, graphing, and dimensional analysis.  This course is designed for students with a limited math background who wish to take General Chemistry I (CH 210) or Chemistry for Health Related Sciences (CH 206A). Completion of CH 209 (grade of C- or higher) allows students to gain the skills necessary for success in CH 210 or CH 206A. This course will NOT fulfill the natural science, distributive core requirement and
is intended for students who wish to continue in their STEM
related studies. Offered in the fall only.

CH 210.  GENERAL CHEMISTRY I (4). Introduces chemical and physical properties of matter, atomic structure, dimensional analysis and stoichiometry, aqueous and gas-phase chemistry, periodicity, chemical bonding, and molecular geometry. Co- requisite: CH 211. Prerequisite: An ACT Math Score of 23 or greater, an SAT Math score of 540 or greater, or a C- or higher in CH 209, or permission of instructor.

CH 211. GENERAL CHEMISTRY LABORATORY I (1). ). Introduces fundamental laboratory techniques with an emphasis on commonly used bench and commonly used instrumental techniques. This inquiry based lab requires use of student driven experimental protocols and active problem-solving. Students are introduced to common data analysis techniques including mastery
of data linearization and experimental error. This course develops strong laboratory notebook skills and experimental design. Co- requisite: CH 210. NOTE: One three-hour laboratory per week.

CH 220. HONORS PRINCIPLES OF CHEMISTRY I (4). An honors-level course for students with strong skills in math and/or chemistry. Topics are similar to CH 210, but with more in-depth coverage. Intended for students considering a major in chemistry, biochemistry or pre-medicine. Co-requisite: CH 221. Prerequisite(s): Minimum score of 28 on the math ACT or permission of the instructor.

CH 221. HONORS PRINCIPLES OF CHEMISTRY I LAB (1). Inquiry based examination of fundamental chemical concepts in context of their impact on research, humanity and the environment using modern laboratory techniques and instrumentation.  Co-requisite: CH 220. NOTE: Minimum score of 28 on the math ACT or permission of the instructor.

CH 230.  GENERAL CHEMISTRY II (4). Continuation of CH210.Examines molecular structure, chemical kinetics, chemical equilibrium and thermodynamics. Additional special topics may include transition metal chemistry, the chemistry of new materials, nuclear chemistry. . Co-requisite: CH 231. Prerequisite(s): C- or better in CH 210 and CH 211 or CH 220 and CH 221, or permission of instructor. NOTE: Offered every spring.

CH 231. GENERAL CHEMISTRY LABORATORY II (1). Introduces fundamental laboratory techniques with an emphasis on commonly used bench and instrumental techniques. This inquiry-based laboratory requires the use of student-driven experimental protocols and active problem solving. Students are introduced to common data analysis techniques including mastery of data linearization & experimental error. This course continues
the development of strong laboratory notebook and experimental design from CH 211. Co-requisite: CH 231. Prerequisite(s): C- or better in CH 210 and CH 211 or CH 220 and CH 221, or permission of instructor. NOTE: Offered every spring.

CH 250. ORGANIC CHEMISTRY I (4). Studies the molecular structure of organic compounds, their functional groups, physical properties, and the relationship between structure and reactivity. Introduces the principles of reaction mechanisms, reactions of pi bonds and alkyl halides, and simple multi-step organic synthesis, as well as reaction thermodynamics and kinetics. Co-requisite: CH
251. Prerequisite(s): C- or better in CH 230 and CH 231 or permission of instructor. NOTE: Offered every fall.

CH 251. ORGANIC CHEMISTRY LABORATORY I (1). Investigates techniques used to separate, purify, and identify organic compounds. Also covers spectroscopic techniques including NMR, IR, and MS. Co-requisite: CH 250. Prerequisite(s): C- or better in CH 230 and CH 231 or permission of instructor. NOTE: Offered every fall.

CH 410. QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS (2). A rigorous quantitative laboratory course designed to refine wet chemistry techniques and reinforce the various aqueous equilibria topics covered in general chemistry through titration, gravimetric analysis, and UV- Vis spectroscopy. Introduces advanced data analysis tools and commonly used instrumental techniques to solve quantitative chemical analysis. Prerequisite(s): C- or better in CH 230 and CH
231 or permission of instructor. NOTE: Offered every fall.

CH 420. ORGANIC CHEMISTRY II (4). Comprehensive survey of more complex organic chemical reactions and their mechanisms, including the chemistry of conjugated and aromatic ring systems, alcohols and phenols, ethers and epoxides, carbonyl chemistry, reactions of carboxylic acids and their derivatives, carbonyl alpha- substitution and condensation reactions, and chemistry of amines. Includes more complex multi-step organic synthesis. Co-requisite: CH 421. Prerequisite(s): C- or better in CH 250 and CH 251 or permission of instructor. NOTE: Offered every spring.

CH 421. ORGANIC CHEMISTRY LABORATORY II (1). Investigates the synthesis, isolation and purification of selected organic compounds and their identification by spectroscopic methods. Includes multi-step organic synthesis. Co-requisite: CH
420. Prerequisite(s): C- or better in CH 250 and CH 251, or permission of instructor. NOTE: Offered every spring.

CH 428. SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION LABORATORY (2). Laboratory-based course devoted to
synthetic methods used in inorganic and organic chemistry, as well as together with standard and advanced chemical characterization methods techniques, such as magnetic susceptibility, gas chromatography, infrared spectroscopy, ultraviolet and fluorescence spectroscopy, and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Prerequisite(s): C- or better in CH 420 and CH
421, or permission of instructor. NOTE: Offered every fall.

CH 430A. THERMODYNAMICS AND KINETICS (3). Formal development of classical thermodynamics with applications to chemical equilibria, phase equilibria, active and passive ion transport across cell membranes, and protein folding; applications of kinetic molecular theory to gas-phase and solution-phase chemical reactions. Prerequisite(s): PH 304B and C- or better in CH 230, CH 231, and MT 360B, or permission of instructor. NOTE: Offered every fall.

CH 430B. QUANTUM THEORY AND SPECTROSCOPY (3). Experimental basis for quantum mechanics; the quantum postulates; applications to translational, vibrational, and rotational motion; interaction of radiation and matter; symmetry and spectroscopy; spin ½ systems; atomic structure; approximation methods. Prerequisite(s): PH 304B, C- or better in CH 230, CH
231, and MT 360B or permission of instructor. Cross-listing: PH
460. NOTE: Offered every spring.

CH 431. PHYSICAL AND COMPUTATIONAL CHEMISTRY LABORATORY (2). Laboratory-based course focusing on the use of modern spectroscopic and computational techniques for studying chemical equilibria, reaction kinetics, and molecular
structure. Prerequisite(s): C- or better in CH 430A or permission of instructor. NOTE: Offered every spring.

CH 440. INSTRUMENTAL ANALYSIS (2). In-Depth study of instrumental techniques used in analytical chemistry. Techniques include optical spectroscopy, chromatography, mass spectrometry, and electrochemistry. The functions, design, data analysis, and experimental design of each technique will be investigated. Co-requisite: CH 441. Prerequisite(s): C- or better in CH 410, CH 420 and CH 421, or permission of instructor. NOTE: Offered every spring.

CH 441. INSTRUMENTAL ANALYSIS LABORATORY (2). Laboratory course supporting CH 440 in studying instrumental techniques used in analytical chemistry. Focuses on experimental design, data analysis, and data interpretation. Co-requisite: CH
440. Prerequisite(s): C- or better in CH 410, CH 420 and CH
421, or permission of instructor. NOTE: Offered every spring.

CH 448. ADVANCED ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (3). Explores advanced topics in physical and synthetic organic chemistry including kinetic isotope effects, reaction mechanisms, biomolecules and their structure, and multi-step syntheses. Prerequisite(s): C- or better in CH 420 and CH 421, or permission of instructor.

CH 452A. BIOCHEMISTRY I (3). Introduces the structure and function of proteins with an in-depth study of enzyme kinetics and the thermodynamics of biological systems. Hones complex problem-solving skills in the context of organic and general chemistry fundamentals to solve current problems in biochemical and biomedical research. Prerequisite(s): C- or better in CH 420 and CH 421, or permission of instructor. NOTE: Offered every fall.

CH 452B. BIOCHEMISTRY II (3). Builds on the toolbox of skills developed in Biochemistry I to master the main vein of metabolism, including, but not limited to, glycolysis, gluconeogenesis, the citric acid cycle, and oxidative phosphorylation. Emphasizes the role of metabolism in regulation, disease, and physiology. Investigates current literature in cancer metabolism and treatment, circadian and cellular regulation, exercise physiology and diabetes. Course emphasizes student-led learning and continues to hone problem-solving skills in a biochemical and biomedical research context. Prerequisite(s): C- or better in CH 452A, or permission of instructor. NOTE: Offered every spring.

CH 453. BIOCHEMISTRY LABORATORY (2). Introduces fundamental biochemical techniques and instrumentation, including the isolation and purification of biomolecules, three- dimensional modeling, and biophysical experiments. Prerequisite(s): C- or better in CH 452A, or permission of instructor. NOTE: Offered every spring.

CH 466. MODERN INORGANIC CHEMISTRY (3). Surveys the chemistry of metals and nonmetals and their compounds. Topics include an in-depth coverage of periodic behavior, advanced acid/base chemistry, the study of bonding models used for transition metal complexes, a kinetic/mechanistic treatment of transition metal reactions, advanced topics in inorganic electrochemistry, metals in biological systems, and modern materials chemistry, including nanochemistry. Additional topics may include symmetry and spectroscopy of transition metal complexes, the organometallic chemistry of catalysts and topics related to geochemistry and environmental chemistry. Offered every spring. Prerequisite(s): C- or better in CH 230 and CH 231, or permission of instructor. NOTE: Offered fall of odd years.

CH 485. JUNIOR CHEMISTRY SEMINAR (1). Critically examines professional growth as chemists and/or biochemists in the context of the Jesuit mission with an emphasis on vocational discernment and the development of professional materials. Assignments include analyses of professional trajectories; written documents including CV, resume, cover letters, professional portfolios and social media correspondence; development of presentation skills; and a focus on ethical issues within science. NOTE: Junior class standing required. Majors and minors only. Offered every fall.

CH 490E. Research in Physical Chemistry (1-3). Advanced study in independent research projects in chemistry and biochemistry. Prerequisite(s): Majors and minors only. Permission of instructor.

CH 490T-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN CHEMISTRY: RESEARCH IN ORGANIC SYNTHESIS (1-3). Advanced study in independent research projects in chemistry and biochemistry. Prerequisite(s): Majors and minors only. Permission of instructor.

CH 495. SENIOR CHEMISTRY SEMINAR (1). Cultivates the skill and art of communicating science to diverse audiences, from the educated general public to the trained chemical community, using a variety of modern formats. Emphasis is placed on incorporating the Jesuit mission and ethical standards into scientific communication and professional trajectory. Develops critical reading, writing and oration skills essential for any career. Prerequisite(s): Senior class standing or permission of instructor. Majors and minors only. NOTE: Offered every spring.

CH 498E-W. INTERNSHIP IN CHEMISTRY (3). Provides a working environment in which practical experience in the application of chemistry is obtained under appropriate supervision. Prerequisite(s): Approval of department chair and
director of Academic Internship Program. NOTE: Credit may not be counted to fulfill the minimum upper division semester hour requirement for a major in Chemistry or Biochemistry.

CH 499A-D. RESEARCH IN CHEMISTRY OR BIOCHEMISTRY (1-2). Independent research in Chemistry or Biochemistry under the guidance of a faculty member.

CENTER FOR INTEGRATIVE LEARNING (CIL)

CIL 400. INTEGRATIVE THEORIES AND TOPICS (3). An introduction to the theories and intellectual tools of integrative learning and working.

CIL 401. SURVEYS FOR SOCIAL CHANGE (3). Learn to design and analyze your own surveys and explore how quantitative research can be used to facilitate social change. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course. Cross listing: CJ
404, CIL 401, and SO 404.

CIL 420. OPPRESSION AND RESISTANCE (3). Covers an introduction to Structural/Historical Racism, Interpersonal Racism/Bias, Identity and Social Construction, Resistance Movements, Antiracism, and Race/Religion/Jesuit Values.

CIL 421. SEGREGATION IN UNITED STATES HISTORY (3). Explores segregation in the U.S. comparing histories of settler colonialism (including land dispossession and boarding schools),
slavery and Jim crow (including housing/schooling and mass incarceration), histories of immigration and xenophobia. We explore these and other histories by centering intersectional analysis of race, class, gender, sexuality, citizenship status, and native subjectivity. Cross listing(s): HS 484E and PJ 420.

CIL 422. DIVERSITY IN U.S. SOCIETY (3). Provides a critical and comparative analysis of race, ethnicity, and other diversity in the United States. Includes racism, creation, and maintenance of ethnic group status, political processes, and movements for self- determination. Prerequisite(s): RCC 400D and CIL 420. Cross listing(s): CJ 422, PJ 422 and SO 422.

CIL 440. PSYCHOLOGY OF RACISM (3). Focuses on how individual-level psychological processes are structured and patterned to perpetuate and maintain systems of racist oppression. We will discuss the relationships between participation in racially oppressive societal structures and numerous psychological and behavioral processes for both members of racially dominant/oppressive groups and for individuals from groups subjected to racial oppression.
Interventions that reduce prejudice in racially powerful groups will be explored alongside interventions that that target the well-
being, self-defense, and success of targets of racial oppression. Additionally, cultural, global, and historical perspectives are necessary to understand the modern racist system of oppression, and this course will ensure that these topics are examined. All students will leave this class with tools necessary to effect change to our systems of racist oppression; students will also gain experience actively reducing racism in our world. Cross listing(s): PSY 440.

CIL 450. EMERGING LEADERS (3). Examines 21st-century
models of leadership and includes multiple opportunities for active participation in leadership and change making at Regis and in the surrounding community. Through readings, class presentations, experiential exercises, journal reflections, and small group discussion, students explore social justice and map their path of leadership development and campus or community engagement.

CIL 451. LEADERSHIP AND SOCIAL CHANGE (0-1). Explores social change from diverse perspectives to develop and lead effective change - through interactive exercises, lectures, group presentations, and guest speakers.  Explore political, social, economic, historical influences that affect social change, identify examples of social entrepreneurial based solutions to problems, and develop a set of best practices that organizations and individuals use to pursue social change; collaboration, common purpose, commitment, ingenuity, understanding.

CIL 452. HEROIC LEADERSHIP (0-1). Explores diverse leadership concepts, practices, and issues while discovering one’s personal leadership style - through interactive exercises, lectures, group presentations, and guest speakers. Using the Jesuit leadership model discussed in Lowney’s Heroic Leadership, the class will examine the importance and role of self-awareness, ingenuity,
love, and heroism in leadership.

CIL 453. ORGANIZATIONAL LEADERSHIP (0-1). Explores effective leadership and supervision in organizations - through interactive exercises, lectures, group presentations, and guest speakers. Using a case study of a multi-national nonprofit organization, the class examines the importance of organizational mission, vision, capacity building and learning.


CIL 454. LEADERSHIP IMMERSION (0-1). Includes proof of participation and reflection on: 40 hours of service, 4 workshops (there are 8 offered per year), field placement/internship, 3 Day Fall Regis Student Leadership Retreat, Weekly Leadership Meetings, Attendance at 2 leadership conferences through the Colorado Leadership Alliance, presentations.

CIL 455. LEADING FROM WITHIN (3). Explores the role of mindfulness in leadership. Investigates various practices that connect your beliefs and behaviors as it relates to your leadership.

CIL 484. INTEGRATIVE PRACTICUM (3). Supervised practical application of previously studied theories. Involve readings, reflection, student-developed projects, service learning, etc.

CIL 487E-W. TOPICS IN INTEGRATIVE STUDIES (3). A variety of courses with interdisciplinary, Integrative, experiential content.

CIL 490E-W. INTEGRATIVE INDEPENDENT STUDY (3). Research under the direction of a faculty member in a discipline or topic of study not covered in a scheduled course.

CIL 496. INTEGRATIVE CAPSTONE (3). The culminating course for many integrative majors and minors, as well as for students wanting to focus on integration and application of theories through research and synthesis/demonstration; review of integrative inquiry theories and skills, and facilitated work on design and implementation of a project or internship.

CIL 498. INTEGRATIVE INTERNSHIP (3). Practical experience/applied learning in a field of study applicable to the student’s career choice or a skill set. Progress is guided and monitored by both on-site and faculty supervisors. Prerequisites: Sophomore standing, approval of instructor and director of the Academic Internship Program. Note: Ten - fifteen hours per week at placement site required (120 hours over a semester).

COMMUNICATION (COM)

COM 250/250C. SPEAKING TO MAKE A DIFFERENCE (3). Develops engaged, competent, confident communicators, preparing speakers to connect with small and large, live and remote audiences. Encourages critical listening, writing, rehearsing, revising and speaking skills relevant to everyday, civic,
professional and family/social life.  NOTE: COM 250C is limited to students who took the linked RCC 200 course in the fall.

COM 251. MEDIA LITERACY (3). Investigates the creation, production, and uses of messages, media, and platforms (television, film, advertising, social media). Students will become more conscientious, critical, and responsible audiences, consumers, and meaning-makers.

COM 252/252C. COMMUNICATION IN RELATIONSHIPS (3). Emphasizes the communicative processes by which we co-create, experience, and manage relationships. Students will become more aware, competent, and confident communicators, whether live, face-to-face or in the digital realm.

COM 300. CAREER AND PROFESSIONAL PORTFOLIO (3). Designed to help Communication majors think about careers before settling into an emphasis area. Fosters introspection while highlighting the expectations and challenges of communication in professional contexts. Students begin developing a career portfolio. NOTE: Majors only.
COM 380. COMMUNICATION: QUESTIONS, CONTEXTS, AND THEORY (3). Examines ways that communication constitutes social life and introduces several important theories of meaning making for dialogic consideration. Explores interpersonal relationships; the intersections of language, gender, culture, and power, and the dynamics of mass media and society. Foregrounds the notion of context, and engages the question of how we ought to live. Prerequisite(s): COM 250, COM 251, or COM 252. NOTE: Required for all Communication majors or minors.

COM 381. RESEARCH METHODS IN COMMUNICATION (3). Surveys a variety of communication research methods and guides students through their own research proposals and/or projects. Students learn to write literature reviews, research questions and reports, observe, document and analyze communication, and conduct interviews and surveys. NOTE: Sophomore class
standing.  Required for all Communications majors.

COM 400. INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION (3). Using readings, film, field experience and projects, the course investigates cultural identity, meaning, patterns, relationships, and conflicts that arise as contact increases between people from different cultures in our global society. Prerequisite(s): COM 250 for Regis College students.

COM 402. MEDIA AESTHETICS (3). A survey of aesthetic considerations of television, film, and radio. Students will examine the fundamental image elements-light, space, time-motion, and sound. Prerequisite(s): COM 380.

COM 403E-W. FORENSIC PARTICIPATION (1). Students prepare at least two events in public speaking and/or oral interpretation of literature. Requires attendance at a minimum of two tournaments to qualify for credit. Prerequisite(s): COM 380 or permission of instructor. NOTE: Students who wish to participate in competitive forensic tournaments can earn up to three (3) semester hours credit (one credit per semester over three semesters).

COM 404. COMMUNITY STORYTELLING (3). Build upon time- tested traditions, practices and processes to help communities tell their stories. Develop and produce a powerful, engaging community/public story event that can illuminate issues, transform conflict and shape meanings. NOTE: Junior class standing
required. Prerequisite(s): COM 250, or permission of instructor.

COM 405. INTERPERSONAL CONFLICT STUDIES (3). Examines conflict in a variety of human relationships. Explores conceptual and practical skills to analyze and manage conflicts including face- to-face and third-party negotiations. Prerequisite(s): COM 380. Cross listing: PJ 405.

COM 409A. DIGITAL STORYTELLING (3). Explores practices of media production with an emphasis on storytelling. Covers audio, video, and interactive media forms. Prerequisite(s): COM 380, or permission of instructor. NOTE: Required for Media and Society specialization.

COM 409B. CRITICAL MEDIA STUDIES (3). Studies a variety of methods currently utilized for conducting a critical analysis of communication acts. Includes dramatism, semiotics, narrative theory, reader-oriented criticism, feminist criticism, and others. Students apply one or more of these methods in developing and presenting critical analyses of discourses. Prerequisite(s): COM
380 and COM 409A, or permission of instructor.

COM 411. PERFORMANCES OF SELF AND SOCIETY (3). Explores performance through sociological, anthropological and literary/artistic and experiential lenses. Engaging through readings, film, role-plays, immediate, live and online performances (and the analysis thereof), dialogue, writing and other production of texts, and critique, students come to understand this most pragmatic of human communicative behaviors. Prerequisite(s): COM 250, and sophomore class standing. Cross listing(s): WGS 441.

COM 413. DIVISIVE DISCOURSES AND DIFFICULT CONVERSATIONS (3). Examines the dynamics of histories, discourses, and narratives through theoretical lenses and looks at how public discourse impacts conflict, group and interpersonal communication. Explores some difficulties in negotiating high- stakes or emotional terrain, and practical approaches for imagining, conducting and participating in productive dialogues. Prerequisite(s): COM 380. Cross listing: PJ 413.

COM 415. WRITING FOR THE MEDIA (3). Writing for different mass media including online, print and broadcast news, public relations, and advertising. Develops practical skills and understanding of writing for varying media audiences and for different purposes.

COM 416A. PRINCIPLES OF PUBLIC RELATIONS (3). Studies the history, purpose, and processes of public relations. Examines public relations tools and practices, ranging from preparing and conducting a public relations program, setting up a news conference, establishing and running a speaker bureau, designing and producing a brochure and editing an employee newsletter. Prerequisite(s): COM 380, or permission of instructor. BA 3400 for business students only. NOTE: Required for Public Relations and Civic Engagement specialization.

COM 416B. STRATEGIC PUBLIC RELATIONS (3). Explores the history, purpose, and processes of public relations. Examines public relations tools and practices, ranging from preparing and conducting a public relations program, setting up a news conference, establishing and running a speaker bureau, designing and producing a brochure and editing an employee newsletter. Prerequisite(s): COM 380 and COM 416A, or permission of instructor. NOTE: Required for Public Relations and Civic Engagement specialization.

COM 419. THEATRE AND JUCTICE WORKSHOP (3). An interdisciplinary theatre, dialogue, workshop and community project-based course in which performance itself is viewed as a mode of inquiry and a way of making the invisible visible, fostering storytelling, listening, collaboration and transformation. Prerequisite(s): COM 210. COM 380 required for Communications majors and PJ 200 required for Peace and Justice majors. Cross listing: FAM 405 and PJ 495W.

COM 421. PERSUASION AND ARGUMENTATION (3). Studies persuasion and argumentation from the early Aristotelian perspective to contemporary research. Includes models of the persuasive process, emotional stimulation, proofs and reasoning, cultural premises, and ethics of persuasion. Prerequisite(s): COM
380.

COM 423A. INTERPERSONAL COMMUNICATION (3). Focuses on interpersonal aspects of communication. Introduces concepts and related skills that define communication in a variety of face-
to-face contexts. Includes models of communication, language and meaning, nonverbal and verbal communication, perception,
conflict and establishing positive human relationships via communication. Prerequisite(s): COM 380, or permission of instructor. NOTE: Required for Human Communication and Conflict emphasis area.

COM 423B. ORGANIZATIONAL COMMUNICATION (3). Surveys contemporary organizational communication theories and practices. Investigates issues such as diversity, participation, power structures, organizational systems and leadership. Focuses on analyzing and critiquing current organizational practices and assumptions, with an aim toward increasing social justice and ethics. Prerequisite(s): COM 380. Junior standing required for Business students only. Cross listing: PJ 423. NOTE: Required for Human Communication and Conflict emphasis area.

COM 424. NEW COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES (3). Examines how new media works, what effects may result from their use in public and private settings, and how they might, when necessary, be regulated. Prerequisite(s) : COM 380.

COM 425. VIDEO PRODUCTION (3). A survey of video production methods and aesthetic theory. Students become proficient in pre-production planning, basic video production techniques, and equipment, using both studio and remote equipment. Students produce a basic video project. Prerequisite(s): COM 380.

COM 427. COMMUNICATION ETHICS (3). Explores theoretical and practical issues in the explanations of ethical options and decisions in relational, organizational, and mass communication contexts. Case studies, practical analysis, and current ethical dilemmas in communication are investigated from multiple theoretical perspectives. Prerequisite(s): COM 380.

COM 428. MEDIA AND POLITICS (3). Introduces students to
the complex relationship between citizens, the media, and political actors. Explores political communication aspects including news, social media, debates, polls, advertising, and effects on voters. Students produce a political campaign ad at the conclusion of the semester. Prerequisite(s): COM 380 and junior class standing.

COM 429. AUDIO TECHNOLOGY (3). Engage creatively and critically with the society around us in artistic and socially aware ways through creation of original audio projects that may range from podcasts, soundscapes and sound scores to oral histories, audio postcards and more. NOTE: Junior class standing required.

COM 432. ADVERTISING THEORY AND PRACTICE (3).
Studies advertising and promotional aspects of marketing in depth. Integrates theory with practical planning, management and
strategy issues. Prerequisite(s): COM 380. BA 3400 for business students only.

COM 440. GENDER, SEXUALITY, AND COMMUNICATION (3). Explores connections between communication, gender, and sexuality in close relationships, organizations and the media. Course involves readings, dialogues, films, field trips, and group projects. Prerequisite(s): COM 380 or WGS 400 or permission of instructor. Cross listing: WGS 440.

COM 443. FREEDOM OF SPEECH (3). Through an analysis of theory, legal documents, and case studies this course addresses the arguments for and against an unconditional right to freedom
of speech.  Prerequisite(s): COM 380 for Communication majors. Cross-listing: PJ 432M.


COM 445. TELEVISION PROGRAMMING AND CRITICISM (3). Studies television programming, theory, techniques, and strategies. Explores the themes and assumptions inherent in television messages and the role of audience research in the development of television content. Prerequisite(s): COM 380.

COM 456. THE CULTURE AND POLITICS OF PUBLIC MEMORY (3). Examines the constructed nature of our national memories by posing questions regarding the authenticity of memorial representations, the ownership of public histories, and the rhetorical functions memory texts serve for society. Prerequisite(s): COM 380. Cross-listing: HS 441 and PJ 416E.

COM 457E-W. SPECIAL TOPICS IN COMMUNICATION AND DIVERSITY (3). Examines issues of diversity from the context of the communication discipline. Prerequisite(s): Junior class standing required, or completion of the distributive core.

COM 458E-W. SPECIAL TOPICS IN COMMUNICATION AND THE ENVIRONMENT (3). Examines environmental issues from the context of the communication discipline. Prerequisite(s): Junior class standing required, or completion of the distributive core.

COM 459E-W. SPECIAL TOPICS IN COMMUNICATION AND JUSTICE (3). Examines issues in justice and the common good from the context of the communication discipline. Prerequisite(s): Junior class standing required, or completion of the distributive core.

COM 460E-W. SPECIAL TOPICS IN COMMUNICATION AND MEANING (3). Examines issues of meaning from the context of the communication discipline. Prerequisite(s): Junior class standing required, or completion of the distributive core.

COM 464E-W. FILM CRITICISM: (3). Introduces the technical evolution and history of film and the principles of aesthetic criticism, film analysis and the evolution of themes and genres. Considers basic elements of cinema including screen writing, direction, casting, production, cinematography, and editing. Prerequisite(s): COM 380.

COM 471. INTERNATIONAL COMMUNICATION AND COMPARATIVE MEDIA SYSTEMS (3). Global media are no longer restricted to individual countries, so we will analyze how media move from one country to another to another and discuss what boundaries infringe that movement in various regions. Prerequisite(s): COM 380. Cross-listing: PJ451V.

COM 484A. MEDIA TECHNOLOGY I (1). Part I of the Communication Technology Series, partners students and media professionals with the Arvada Community Table. Teaches students to use Google Analytics. Students will learn to retrieve, read, and interpret existing data from the organization's website as well as apply for a Google AdWords grant.

COM 484B. MEDIA TECHNOLOGY II (1). Part II of the Communication Technology Series, partners students and media professionals with the Arvada Community Table. Focuses on understanding social media analytics. Students will learn to retrieve, read, and interpret data from Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, and YouTube. Students will use existing materials from the organization to explore how information travels through
these channels.
COM 484C. MEDIA TECHNOLOGY III (1). Part III of the Communication Technology Series, partners students and media professionals with the Arvada Community Table. Professionals will teach students the basics of search engine optimization and analytics. With these skills, students will collect data, interpret it, and make suggestions to the Community Table about how to increase online presence, strengthen connections between the organization and constituents, and build new relationships. The professionals will guide and oversee the students' work.

COM 485E-W. SPECIAL TOPICS IN COMMUNICATION (3). Examines special topics in the field of communication in depth. Includes assignment options of original research and creative projects. Prerequisite(s): COM 380 or permission of instructor.

COM 486. MASS COMMUNICATION AND SOCIETY (3). Investigates and analyzes economic, political, and ideological dimensions of mass communication and social control, and the development of mass media forms. Prerequisite(s): COM 380 or SO 200. Cross listing: SO 486.

COM 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN COMMUNICATION (0-6). Supervision by a faculty member on advanced research or practice in one of the medias that meets the individual needs of the student. Prerequisite(s): Approval of department chair.
NOTE: May be taken only once for credit towards the
Communication major, and a second time for elective credit.

COM 492. WRITING FOR THE MEDIA PRACTICUM (3). Explores and teaches writing for a variety of media including but not limited to scripts, journalistic articles, blog posts and more, to be determined by instructor. Students will be encouraged to contribute to Regis student media such as the Highlander.

COM 495. SENIOR CAPSTONE EXPERIENCE (3). Brings senior Communication majors together to explore the synthesis of the discipline. Students engage in research projects, job-search strategies, interviewing and professional development. Prerequisite(s): COM 380 and Majors only. Minimum of 18 semester hours in Communication and completion of 86 semester hours or more.

COM 498E/F/G. INTERNSHIP IN COMMUNICATION (3). Offers an opportunity for placement in industry, media organizations, government or other agency for applied learning and experience. Progress is guided and monitored by both on-site and faculty supervisors. Site selection emphasizes the best combination of prior academic learning and experience. Internships are for advanced Communication students. Prerequisite(s): COM 380. Completion of 12 additional hours in
Communication major and GPA of 2.8 or higher required. NOTE: Placement approval by faculty Internship supervisor and Director of Academic Internships required.

CRIMINAL JUSTICE (CJ)

CJ 203. SOCIAL PROBLEMS (3). Surveys selected social problems from a national and international scope. Includes analysis of possible causes and consequences of these problems and of various proposals for solutions and reforms. Cross listing: SO
203.

CJ 402. ETHNOGRAPHIC RESEARCH METHODS (3). Examines methods anthropologists and sociologists use to gain access, develop rapport, collect and analyze data, and interpret findings when studying culture and society. Cross-listing(s): SO 402.

CJ 404. SURVEYS FOR SOCIAL CHANGE (3). Learn to design and analyze your own surveys and explore how quantitative research can be used to facilitate social change. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course. Cross listing(s): AN 404, CIL 401, and SO 404.

CJ 412. CHILDREN’S EYEWITNESS TESTIMONY (3). Introduces the student to the issues surrounding children’s eyewitness testimony. Explores issues and insights into Children’s eyewitness testimony using a topic approach. Prerequisite(s): PSY 250 or SO
200.

CJ 415. FORENSIC PSYCHOLOGY (3). Provides a critical analysis of the law, focusing on the criminal justice system in our society. Emphasizes the psychological, social, and cultural factors that influence the criminal justice system, and the use of behavioral science techniques. Prerequisite(s): PSY 250 or SO 200. Cross listing: PSY 484.

CJ 416. DEVIANCE (3). Provides a historical and comparative study of social deviance, including definitions of and reactions to deviance, and deviance as collective behavior. Examines various sociological theories of deviance, and social groups and behaviors defined as deviant in the United States and other countries. Prerequisite(s):  One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course. Cross listing: SO 416.

CJ 422. DIVERSITY IN U.S. SOCIETY (3). Provides a critical and comparative analysis of race, ethnicity, and other diversity in the United States. Includes racism, creation, and maintenance of ethnic group status, political processes, and movements for self- determination. Prerequisite(s): SO 200 or SO 203 or permission of instructor required. Cross listing: CIL 422, PJ 422 and SO 422.

CJ 437. ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE: RACE AND CLASS (3). Explores how race and class intersect with natural disasters, toxic waste dumps, pollution, inadequate sanitation, pesticides, childhood lead poisoning and asthma epidemics, inequities in
public transportation, and a wide range of ongoing social movements and success stories. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course, or permission of instructor. Cross-listing: ENVS 437, PJ 437, and SO 437.

CJ 440. WOKE IN THE DEEP SOUTH (3). Travel to Georgia, Alabama, and Mississippi and take a deep dive into past and modern diversity and civil rights issues. Explore past and present systems of oppression and inspiring solutions to racial inequality. Visit museums and historic sites, and dialogue with experts, citizens, politicians, and activists. NOTE: Sophomore class standing or completion of Distributive Core required. Cross- listing: SO 440 and PJ 440E.

CJ 450. CRIMINOLOGY (3). Analyzes social, political, and economic dynamics of crime including corporate and government crime, racism and sexism in the criminal justice system, and imprisonment. Pre-requisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course. Cross listing: SO 450.

CJ 451. JUVENILE JUSTICE (3). Investigates juvenile justice in the context of social and political authority, the operations of the criminal justice system, youth culture and youth subcultures, and related social issues. Presents various sociological theories of
juvenile deviance, youth justice, and assorted historical and contemporary manifestations of juvenile crime and deviance. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course or permission of instructor. Cross listing: SO 451.

CJ 452. PUNISHMENT AND CORRECTIONS (3). Provides an historical, political, and economic analysis of the penal system in the United States. Pre-requisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course. Cross listing: SO 452 or PJ 452.

CJ 455. DRUGS, HEALTH, AND CULTURE (3). Rooted in medical anthropology and ethnography, analyzes the cultural meanings associated with health and illness: biomedicine and health care, medical knowledge production, and medical decision-
making. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Anthropology or Sociology course. Cross listing(s): AN 455, PJ 455, and SO 445.

CJ 456. PHILOSOPHY OF LAW (3). Explores various issues in the philosophy of law, such as the relation of law to morality, the relation of natural law to morality, the question of natural law, and the nature and purpose of human law. Prerequisite(s): One
200-level Philosophy course. Cross listing: PL 452.

CJ 465. ANARCHY AND ANARCHISM (3). Relying on case studies and ethnographies, examines anarchism as a social, cultural, and political practice, one rooted largely in the left-wing critique of the liberal state and capitalism. Prerequisite(s): One
200-level Anthropology or Sociology course. Cross listing(s): AN
465, PJ 465, and SO 465.

CJ 474. MODERN SLAVERY AND TRAFFICKING (3). Modern Slavery and human trafficking in global perspective. Covers sex trafficking, bonded labor, forced labor, child soldiers, chattel slavery, and domestic servant slavery. Explores the role of the state, organized crime, the media, culture, corruption, and debates about prostitution. Includes testimonies by survivors research reports, theoretical essays, policy statements, expert testimonies, and videos. Prerequisite(s): SO 200 or PJ 400 or permission of instructor. Cross listing: PJ 474 and SO 474.

CJ 484. FORENSIC PSYCHOLOGY (3). Provides a critical analysis of the law, focusing on the criminal justice system in our society. Emphasizes the psychological, social and cultural factors that influence the criminal justice system, and the use of behavioral science techniques.

CJ 459E-W. TOPICS IN CRIME AND JUSTICE (3). Selected courses focus on issues related to crime, police and the court system, punishment, social control, rehabilitation, etc. Cross listing: SO 459E-W. NOTE: CJ 450 or SO 450 recommended.

CJ 469E-W. TOPICS IN IMMIGRATION (3). Selected courses focus on issues in immigration.

CJ 489. PRACTICUM IN CRIME AND JUSTICE (3). Explores readings and work in the community related to crime and justice issues. Prerequisite(s): SO 200. Cross-listing: SO 489.

CJ 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN CRIMINOLOGY (1-3). Applies independent research in selected areas of criminal justice. Prerequisite(s): CJ 450 or SO 450 and approval of Sociology department chair.

CJ 496E-W. TOPICS IN CULTURE AND CRIMINAL JUSTICE
(3). Selected courses will focus on various topics involving culture, social justice, and crime.


CJ 498E-W. INTERNSHIP IN CRIMINAL JUSTICE (3). Integrates practical experience and intellectual guidance based on employment or volunteer work. Prerequisite(s): CJ 450 or SO
450. Junior standing, and minimum GPA of 2.80. NOTE: Requires approval of Sociology department chair and director of Academic Internship program.

ECONOMICS (EC)

EC 200/EC 200C. ECONOMICS FOR RESPONSIBLE CITIZENSHIP (3). Explores the interdisciplinary nature and historical evolution of economic theory and policy with particular emphasis on its impact on attitudes, politics, society, and the environment. Highlights the pressing problems of inequality and climate change as they relate to economics. Provides students with basic quantitative, economic, and financial literacy.

EDUCATION (ED)

ED 200. MATH FOR TEACHERS (2). Focuses on the
development of basic competency in mathematics. Studies number
systems and number sense, geometry, measurement, statistics, probability and functions, and use of variables to gain conceptual and computational skills in mathematics. Reviews mathematics to develop a basic competence. Pass/No Pass grading only. NOTE: Does not meet Core Studies requirements in Mathematics.

ED 204. FOUNDATIONS OF EDUCATION FOR DIVERSE LEARNERS (3). Surveys theory and practice in American education, based on analyses of current practices and future projections, historical contributions, philosophical approaches and sociological foundations. NOTE: Students will tutor throughout the semester in a Denver area school assigned by the Education Department.

ED 207A. FALL TUTORING LABORATORY (0). Tutoring in a prearranged school two times each week. NOTE: Pass/No Pass grading.

ED 207B. SPRING TUTORING LABORATORY (0). Tutoring in a prearranged school two times each week. NOTE: Pass/No Pass grading.

ED 300. PHYSICAL AND CULTURAL GEOGRAPHY (3). Studies the influence of geographic factors on the development of civilization; the interrelations of physical features, resources, and people; including historical, political, and economic implications.

ED 302. PSYCHOLOGY FOR EDUCATORS (3). Applies principles of development and learning theory to classroom teaching within the context of Colorado Academic Standards. Key theory-to-practice topics include models of learning, achievement gap issues and instructional strategies, motivation, classroom management, teaching diverse students, and parent involvement. Coursework includes readings, lectures, dialogue, simulations, guest speakers, Prerequisite(s): ED 204 and PSY 250 and Sophomore standing. NOTE: Assignment to a Metro Denver area school for 15 hours of fieldwork required

ED 306. ASSESSMENT OF LEARNING (3). Provides an overview of assessment and instruction on the construction of reliable and valid instruments, including selected response and constructed response formats. Examines performance assessment and the construction of a body of evidence necessitated by Standards-
Based Education. Prerequisite(s): ED 204. NOTE: Students will tutor throughout the semester in a Denver area school assigned by the Education Department.

ED 380E-W. FIELD EXPERIENCE (0). Students will complete thirty-five (35) hours as an intern in a school classroom. Work with children/adolescents is designed to connect coursework with classroom experience. School experience will be arranged by the Education Department. NOTE: Students should only register for one section of field experience in any given semester. Pass/No
Pass grading only.

ED 401-498 UPPER DIVISION COURSES IN EDUCATION. IF FIELDWORK IS REQUIRED IN ANY 400-LEVEL EDUCATION COURSE, THE STUDENT MUST ALSO REGISTER FOR ED
380E-W--FIELDWORK IN SCHOOLS.

ED 401. TEACHING EXCEPTIONAL LEARNERS (3). Examines disabilities in schools and services, systems, and concepts associated as well as state and federal trends. Applies evidence based instructional strategies and planning to meet the needs of every student.  Examines current legislation and develops Universal Design planning. Prerequisite(s): ED 204. Cross listing(s): EDSP 401 and EDSP 420.

ED 403A. READING INSTRUCTION AND ASSESSMENT FOR ELEMENTARY EDUCATORS (3). Participants deepen understanding and application of Colorado READ Act and READ Plan, the science of reading, and the five essential elements of elementary grades, evidence-based reading instruction and assessment: phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary, and comprehension. Instruction is explicit, systematic, and diagnostic. Two competencies focus the course including foundational decoding skills and language comprehension. Coursework involves readings, discussions, demonstrations, planning and teaching lessons, administering and evaluating assessments that guide instruction, case studies, and written analyses of field experience data. NOTE: Official acceptance into the Teacher Licensure Program by COTER. Field Experience required.

ED 403B. DISCIPLINARY LITERACY (3). Participants build background knowledge and apply instructional strategies and assessments designed to promote student’s success as readers, writers, speakers, and listeners in middle school and high school classrooms. Coursework includes readings, demonstrations, discussions, and written analyses of fieldwork data. Includes a research component. NOTE: Fieldwork required in an assigned Metro Denver area school.

ED 403C. EARLY READING INSTRUCTION (3). Provides the foundation for applying evidence-based principles and practices of early language and literacy development, the science of reading, and structured literacy with an emphasis on early reading. Focal topics include phonetics, phonology, orthography, morphology, syntax, and semantics. Instruction is systematic, explicit, multimodal, and diagnostic. Topics include the READ Act and READ Plan and identification of early signs of reading difficulties such as dyslexia. Coursework involves readings, discussions, demonstrations, planning and teaching lessons, administering and evaluating assessments that guide instruction, case studies, and written analyses of fieldwork data. Prerequisite(s): ED 204 and ED
306. NOTE: Admission to Teacher Licensure Program to COTER
or minors who have completed ED 204 and ED 306. Field Experience in local Kindergarten or 1st grade is required and is assigned by the Education Department.

ED 407. SOCIAL STUDIES FOR ELEMENTARY TEACHERS (3). Prepares elementary pre-service teachers to plan, teach, and assess topics in the Colorado Academic Standards. Topics in content areas include government, civics, political science, and U.S. history.  NOTE: Pass/No-Pass grading only.

ED 410. WRITING INSTRUCTION FOR ELEMENTARY EDUCATORS (3). Participants apply evidence-based theories and practices of language study guided by the science of reading. The course consolidates phonetics, phonology, morphology, orthography, semantics, and syntax. Instruction is direct, structured, explicit, and systematic and is informed by assessment. Topics include writing development, writing processes, text lessons, administering and analyzing assessments to guide instruction, case studies, and written analyses of field experience data. NOTE: Official acceptance into the Teacher Licensure Program by COTER. Field Experience required.

ED 416. ELEMENTARY STUDENT TEACHING FOR 5TH YEAR STUDENTS (3). Students approved by the Committee on Teacher Education of Regis (COTER) student teach during the educational semester in an elementary school in the Metro Denver area under the direction of a cooperating teacher. Co- requisite(s): ED 495. Prerequisite(s): Completion of all education
courses and COTER approval. Fee required. Pass/No Pass grading only. NOTE: 16 weeks in a school observing, assisting, planning, teaching, and conferring under the direction of the cooperating teacher required.

ED 417. ELEMENTARY STUDENT TEACHING (11). Students approved by the Committee on Teacher Education of Regis (COTER) student teach during the educational semester in an elementary school in the Metro Denver area under the direction of a cooperating teacher. Co-requisite(s): ED 495. Prerequisite(s): Completion of all education courses and COTER approval. Fee required. Pass/No Pass grading only. NOTE: 16 weeks in a school observing, assisting, planning, teaching, and conferring under the direction of the cooperating teacher required.

ED 418. WELLNESS: A PERSONAL COMMITMENT (3). Studies the concepts of physical, social, emotional, intellectual, and spiritual wellness, developing an information base from which to make effective decisions. Prerequisite(s): Junior standing. Cross listing: PE 418.

ED 419. INTEGRATED ELEMENTARY METHODS (6). Surveys methods, materials, and concepts related to teaching mathematics, science and social studies. Combines the knowledge of content area and integrates the skills and approaches pertinent to elementary instruction. Class Standing: Juniors and Seniors only. NOTE: Official acceptance by COTER required; registration for Field Experience required (ED 380E-W).

ED 421. SECONDARY ENGLISH CONTENT, INSTRUCTION, AND ASSESSMENT (3). Presents the materials, methods, and practices in secondary English courses. Analyzes grammar, composition, the short story, the novel, drama, poetry, and communications. NOTE: Official acceptance into Teacher Licensure Program by COTER required. Field Experience required.
ED 425. SECONDARY FOREIGN LANGUAGE CONTENT, INSTRUCTION, AND ASSESSMENT (3). Studies methods of teaching a foreign language (French, German, or Spanish) at the secondary level. NOTE: Official acceptance into Teacher Licensure Program by COTER required. Field Experience required.

ED 427. SECONDARY MATHEMATICS CONTENT, INSTRUCTION, AND ASSESSMENT (3). Examines methods and materials appropriate for teaching middle and high school mathematics. Emphasizes classroom, small group and
individualized instruction, and new curricular approaches. NOTE: Official acceptance into Teacher Licensure Program by COTER required. Field Experience required.

ED 427A. SECONDARY BUSINESS CONTENT, INSTRUCTION, AND ASSESSMENT (3). Examines methods and materials appropriate for teaching middle and high school accounting, bookkeeping, consumer law and economics. Emphasizes specific classroom applications related to non-clerical business courses. NOTE: Official acceptance into Teacher Licensure Program by COTER required. Field Experience required.

ED 429. SECONDARY SCIENCE CONTENT, INSTRUCTION, AND ASSESSMENT (3). Methods and materials appropriate for teaching middle and high school science. Attention given to classroom, laboratory, small group and individualized instruction and new curricular approaches. NOTE: Official acceptance into Teacher Licensure Program by COTER required. Field Experience required.

ED 431. SECONDARY SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT, INSTRUCTION, AND ASSESSMENT (3). Adapts history, political science, economics, sociology, cultural geography, social psychology, and cultural anthropology to meaningfulness within the secondary curriculum. Presents pedagogical procedures including lecture, discussion, field trips, resource specialists, and audio-visual aids. Explains integrating current events for curricular relevance. NOTE: Official acceptance into Teacher Licensure Program by COTER required. Field Experience required.

ED 432. SECONDARY STUDENT TEACHING FOR 5TH YEAR STUDENTS (3). Students approved by the Committee on Teacher Education of Regis (COTER) student teach during the educational semester in a secondary school in the Denver Metro
area under the direction of a cooperating teacher. Co-requisite(s): ED 495. Prerequisite(s): COTER approval. Fee required. NOTE:
16 weeks in a school observing, assisting, planning, teaching, and conferring under the direction of the cooperating teacher required. Pass/No Pass grading only.

ED 433. K-12 ART CONTENT, INSTRUCTION, AND ASSESSMENT (3). Explores and applies theoretical and practical issues in designing and implementing a K-12 art education program. Emphasizes current trends in art education; materials and methods of teaching and assessing various art media; and curriculum development. NOTE: Official acceptance to the
Teacher Licensure Program by COTER required. Field Experience required.

ED 433B. K-12 MUSIC CONTENT, INSTRUCTION, AND ASSESSMENT (3). Explores and applies theoretical and practical issues in designing and implementing a K-12 music education program. Emphasizes current trends in music education; materials and methods of teaching and assessing a variety of music formats; and curriculum development. NOTE: Official acceptance to the Teacher Licensure program by COTER required. Field Experience required.

ED 434. SECONDARY STUDENT TEACHING (11). Students approved by the Committee on Teacher Education of Regis (COTER) student teach during the educational semester in a secondary school in the Denver Metro area under the direction
of a cooperating teacher. Co-requisite(s): ED 495. Prerequisite(s): COTER approval. Fee required. NOTE: 16 weeks in a school observing, assisting, planning, teaching, and conferring under the direction of the cooperating teacher required. Pass/No Pass grading only.

ED 435. SECONDARY CURRICULUM PLANNING AND CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT (3). Provides students with knowledge and skills needed for effective classroom management and planning in a Standards-Based environment. Student demonstrates mastery of short and long-term planning, time management, and research-driven methods to improve and report student achievement, and develop instructional and behavioral expectations for the successful classroom. NOTE: Acceptance in Teacher Licensure Program by COTER required. Field Experience required.

ED 436. TECHNOLOGY IN THE CLASSROOM (1). Examines a variety of new and emerging technologies and information related to K-12 classrooms. NOTE: Required for students seeking teacher licensure. Pass/No Pass grading only.

ED 438. K-12 STUDENT TEACHING (8-11). Students approved by the Committee on Teacher Education at Regis (COTER) student teach during the educational semester in an elementary and secondary placement in the Metro Denver area under the direction of a cooperating teacher. Co-requisite: ED 495. NOTE: Completion of all education courses and COTER approval. Sixteen weeks in a school observing, assisting, planning, teaching, and conferring under the direction of the cooperating teacher required. Senior standing required. Pass/No Pass grading only.

ED 439. FIELD EXPERIENCE: CULTURALLY AND LINGUISTICALLY DIVERSE (0). 35 hours field work with CLD learners. Co-requisite: ED 485.

ED 447. READING MULTICULTURAL LITERATURE IN THE ELEMENTARY CLASSROOM (3). Explores historical and contemporary literature for elementary students that represents various genres and diverse people, places, and perspectives. Introduces the science of reading, the Colorado READ Act, close reading for comprehension, and disciplinary literacy across content areas. Coursework includes readings, demonstrations, discussions, planning and teaching lessons and a unit, field trips, and written analyses of fieldwork data. NOTE: Field Experience required.

ED 485. THEORIES, STRATEGIES, AND ASSESSMENT FOR CULTURALLY AND LINGUISTICALLY DIVERSE  K-12 (3). Provides research-based methods and strategies for teaching English as a Second Language to speakers of other languages. Explores curriculum materials appropriate to the development of English as a Second Language. Examines process learning as it applies to ESL in content areas. Discusses and demonstrates specific teaching methodology including natural learning and sheltered approaches to develop academic English. Co-Requisite: ED 439. Cross listing: EDLD 485.
ED 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN EDUCATION (1-3). Pursues independent exploration of areas of interest under the supervision of a department member. Prerequisite(s): Approval of department chair.

ED 495. STUDENT TEACHER SEMINAR (0-1). Examines current educational practices, addresses student teaching issues,
classroom management, Teacher Work Sample and Teacher Portfolio. Co-requisite: ED 417 or ED 434. Prerequisite(s): Senior standing. NOTE: Approval by COTER required.

ED 498E-W. INTERNSHIP IN EDUCATION (3). Provides internships in education taken under the supervision of a department member. Prerequisite(s): Approval of department chair and director of Academic Internship Program.

EDUCATION: ELEMENTARY (EDEL)
EDEL 441. CHILD AND ADOLESCENT LITERATURE (3). Studies genres of early childhood and adolescent literature. Emphasizes the history of this literature, analysis and evaluation of literary elements and discussion of the value issues raised in literary pieces. Includes the integration of literature in instruction.

EDEL 439, EXPRESSIVE ARTS FOR ELEMENTARY EDUCATORS (3). Analyzes the impact of the expressive arts in child development.  Focus will be on expression of creativity through activities involving music, art, theater, movement and dramatic play.  NOTE: Dual Language students only.

EDEL 445. TEACHING MATH AND SCIENCE (3). Emphasizes developing mathematically powerful teachers who understand a broad array of mathematical concepts and who are able to develop and deliver effective, challenging, and engaging mathematical curriculum across the content area.

EDEL 450. ASSESSMENT OF LEARNING (3). Provides information and means for future classroom teachers to assess student learning. Appropriate, practical and relevant assessment techniques and evaluation guidelines will be provided.

EDEL 460. TEACHING LANGUAGE ARTS AND SOCIAL STUDIES (3). Students apply teaching/learning theories related to reading/writing literacy, social studies, and expressive arts integrating technology and service learning. Students prepare, teach, and assess lessons/units for individuals, small groups, and whole classrooms at the primary level.

EDEL 461. TEACHING MATH AND SCIENCE (3). Explores theories of learning, conceptual knowledge, and instructional strategies relevant to teaching and learning mathematics and science.  Additional emphasis on planning, implementing, assessing and reflecting on emerging practice. Field experience required.

EDEL 470. CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT (3). Explores the creation of a classroom that supports individual and collaborative learning.  Considers current legislation related to management of techniques to ensure inclusive learning environments.

EDEL 490. STUDENT TEACHING: ELEMENTARY (10). Requires work in a classroom full time (600 student contact hours) under the supervision of a licensed teacher of the same endorsement in an accredited school. Provides opportunity to observe, develop lessons, assess learning, and teach large and small groups as well as individualized lessons. Student attends appropriate in-services or faculty meetings and become a part of the school community.
leadership, and collaboration. NOTE: This course must be taken in the classroom format.

EDUCATION: FOUNDATIONAL
EDFD 400. FOUNDATIONS OF EDUCATION (3). Addresses the foundations of public education within the state of Colorado and United States more broadly to answer the questions, (1) What is the purpose of public education? (2) What are the primary influences on public education?

EDFD 403. DIVERSITY, EQUITY, AND SOCIAL JUSTICE (3). Teacher candidates will explore and reflect on multicultural perspectives, issues of social justice, and societal structures that impact the success of individual students and programs. Issues of discrimination in schools, the curriculum, and within the classroom will be addressed, as well as your own beliefs and how these impact your roles as educators. Prerequisite(s): EDFD 400.

EDFD 408. NEVADA SCHOOL LAW (3). Focuses on legal rights, roles and responsibilities of educators in Nevada, emphasizing obligations to students, administrators, school boards and public. Examines issues of school management, organization, finance, child abuse and neglect and violence in schools from the perspective of Nevada School Law.

EDFD 409. WORLD GEOGRAPHY IN EDUCATION (3). Provides an introductory overview of geographic concepts, themes, and elements designed to help pre-service Education students better understand and analyze the world from a geographic perspective. Examines the Earth’s physical and human elements and systems, the unique qualities of world regions, and the spatial interaction of people, elements, and regions, as well as major regional and global problems and prospects.

EDFD 411E-W. TOPICS IN EDUCATION (1-6). Pursues specific topics in education focusing on student research, writing, and product development offered in Directed Study format.

EDFD 430. LIFESPAN DEVELOPMENT (3). Addresses human developmental stages from the perspectives of major theories of development-cognitive, learning, humanistic, and psychoanalytic. Cross listing: PY 469.

EDFD 482A-B. FIELD PRACTICUM I and II (0). Students will complete 100 hours of field experience in a school classroom. Work with children/adolescents is designed to connect coursework with classroom experience. School placement will be arranged by the Education Department. NOTE: Students should only register for one section of fieldwork in any given term. Pass/No Pass grading only.

EDFD 482C-F. FIELD PRACTICUM III-VI (0). Students will complete 50 hours of field experience in a school classroom. Work with children/adolescents is designed to connect coursework with classroom experience. School placement will be arranged by the Education Department. NOTE: Students should only register for one section of fieldwork in any given term. Pass/No Pass grading only.

EDFD 497. PROFESSIONALISM IN EDUCATION I (2). Seminar that accompanies Student Teaching. Focuses on topics that are critical for the effective teacher with a global perspective: planning for instruction, ethical practices, creating a supportive classroom,
EDUCATION: CULTURALLY AND LINGUISTICALLY DIVERSE EDUCATION (EDLD)

EDLD 403. ASSESSMENT OF THE DIVERSE LEARNER (3). Explores the principles, purposes, and processes of assessment used in the evaluation of exceptional learners and English language learners. Includes how assessment results can be used to develop appropriate educational programs for diverse students. Prerequisite(s): ED 401 or EDSP 401 and ED 485. Cross listing(s): EDSP 403.

EDLD 413. TEACHING LITERACY TO ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS (3). Designed for teachers who desire to increase their knowledge of the development of reading literacy skills for all students, with a focus on ELLs. Examines specific research- based strategies to teaching reading based on Colorado State Standards, while adhering to constructive principles. Students consider the similarities and differences of teaching reading to native and non-native speakers of English emphasizing the importance of family literacy in teaching reading to ELLs. Prerequisite(s): ED 485, EDLD 485 or permission of instructor required. Cross listing: EDLT 413.

EDLD 433A. CULTURE IN CONTEXT (1). Involves travel to Costa Rica for two weeks, full immersion into the language and culture, and reflection on the stages of cultural and language acquisition. Students will compare their real-life experiences in Costa Rica to educational theories in cultural and language acquisition.

EDLD 451. MULTICULTURAL PERSPECTIVES IN EDUCATION(3). Explores and reflects on multicultural perspectives issues of social justice, and societal structures which impact the success of individual students and programs. Investigates and discovers threads that tie the diverse cultures together through literature and discusses the implications of these discoveries for their own attitudes. NOTE: Community-based learning is required. Minimum of sophomore class standing required.

EDLD 475. LINGUISTICS FOR TEACHERS OF CULTURALLY AND LINGUISTICALLY DIVERSE STUDENTS (3). Provides the learner with information concerning first and second language acquisition theory. Explores the structure and function of the English language including linguistics, applied linguistics, psycholinguistics, and sociolinguistics. Instructional practices for teaching English to speakers of other languages will be reviewed. Process learning as it applies to the acquisition of the English language will be explored and modeled. Prerequisite(s): ED 485 or permission of instructor required.

EDLD 485. THEORIES, STRATEGIES, AND ASSESSMENT FOR CULTURALLY AND LINGUISTICALLY DIVERSE K-12 (3). Provides research-based methods and strategies for teaching English as a Second Language to speakers of other languages. Explores curriculum materials appropriate to the development of English as a Second Language. Examines process learning as it applies to ESL in content areas. Discusses and demonstrates specific teaching methodology including natural learning and sheltered approaches to develop academic English Co-Requisite: ED 439. Cross listing: ED 485.

EDLD 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY: LINGUISTICALLY DIVERSE EDUCATION (1-6). Pursues independent exploration of areas of interest under the supervision of faculty. Prerequisite(s): Permission of instructor required.

EDUCATION: LITERACY (EDLT)

EDLT 405. LITERACY INTERVENTIONS (3). Focuses on research-based approaches, strategies, assessment tools and issues related to effective literacy instruction for student performing significantly below grade level. Explores and evaluates individual reading and writing programs for students with the most challenging literacy needs. Students will also learn about
reading disabilities and relationships of those disabilities to literacy development. Utilizes appropriate assessments to evaluate student needs and determine next steps for literacy interventions and instruction within the general education/content area classroom. Prerequisite(s): ED 204 and ED 302. Cross listing: EDSP 405.

EDLT 413. TEACHING LITERACY TO ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS (3). Designed for teachers who desire to increase their knowledge of the development of reading literacy skills for all students, with a focus on ELLs. Examines specific research- based strategies to teaching reading based on Colorado State Standards, while adhering to constructive principles. Students consider the similarities and differences of teaching reading to native and non-native speakers of English emphasizing the importance of family literacy in teaching reading to ELLs. Prerequisite(s): ED 485, EDLD 485 or permission of instructor required. Cross listing: EDLD 413.

EDLT 415. READING TOWARDS SOCIAL JUSTICE (3). Examines a range of literature for young adults, with emphases on interpretation and pedagogy. Relates structural and thematic elements to the personal and academic development of adolescents, and explores ways to weave this literary genre into the fabric of secondary content area classes. Students will construct thematic units and lessons in a standards-based, assessment driven environment. Prerequisite(s): ED 204 and ED
302. NOTE: Junior standing or completion of Distributive Core required.

EDUCATION: PROFESSIONAL SEQUENCE

EDEC/EDEL/EDFA/EDSC 490 AND EDFA 491. STUDENT TEACHING (10). Requires work in a classroom full time (600 student contact hours) under the supervision of a licensed teacher of the same endorsement in an accredited school. Provides opportunity to observe, develop lessons, assess learning, and
teach large and small groups as well as individualized lessons. Student attends appropriate in-services or faculty meetings and become a part of the school community.

EDUCATION: READING (EDRG)

EDRG 444. TEACHING READING AND WRITING (3). Provides students with an understanding of methods for teaching reading and writing. Emphasizes current methodologies, research-based instructional practices, and ongoing assessment. Understanding
and application of the five essential components of comprehensive reading instruction is a primary expectation.

EDUCATION: SECONDARY (EDSC)

EDSC 461-469. SECONDARY METHODS (3). Familiarizes student with new and traditional methods of teaching. Examines methods such as lecturing, individualization, cooperative grouping, Socratic seminars and journaling. Examines the curriculum and standards for topic as well as for lesson planning. Each course contains a practicum component.

EDSC 461. SECONDARY METHODS IN BUSINESS (3). Includes the curriculum and methods of teaching secondary business.

EDSC 462. SECONDARY METHODS IN DRAMA (3). Includes methods and strategies for teaching drama.

EDSC 463. SECONDARY METHODS IN ENGLISH (3). Includes methods and strategies for teaching drama.

EDSC 465. SECONDARY METHODS IN FOREIGN LANGUAGE (3). Includes methods and strategies for teaching a foreign language.

EDSC 466. SECONDARY METHODS IN MATHEMATICS (3). Includes the curriculum and methods of teaching secondary mathematics. Reviews daily/unit lesson design and requires research and analysis of new theories in the field of mathematics.

EDSC 467. SECONDARY METHODS IN SCIENCE (3). Includes methods and strategies for teaching science.

EDSC 468. SECONDARY METHODS IN SOCIAL STUDIES (3). Includes methods and strategies for teaching social studies.

EDSC 469. SECONDARY METHODS IN SPEECH (3). Includes methods and strategies for teaching speech.

EDUCATION: SPECIAL EDUCATION (EDSP)

EDSP 380. SPECIAL EDUCATION PRACTICUM (0), Thirty-five hours as an intern in a special education classroom. Work with children/adolescents with special needs is designed to connect coursework with classroom experience. School placement will be arranged by the Education Department. NOTE: Students should only register for one section of fieldwork in any given semester. Pass/No Pass grading only.

EDSP 401. TEACHING EXCEPTIONAL LEARNERS (3). Examines disabilities in schools and services, systems, and concepts associated as well as state and federal trends. Applies evidence based instructional strategies and planning to meet the needs of every student.  Examines current legislation and develops
Universal Design planning. Prerequisite(s): ED 204 and ED 302. Cross listing(s): ED 401 and EDSP 420.

EDSP 402. TRANSITION, CONSULTATION, AND COLLABORATION (3). Provides students with the knowledge and skills needed to work with others to develop successful inclusive education programs. Includes working with parents, special educators, and related services personnel on behalf of exceptional students. Prerequisite(s): ED 401 or EDSP 401. NOTE: Admission to the Department not required for students intending to Minor in Special Education.

EDSP 403. ASSESSMENT FOR THE DIVERSE LEARNER (3). Explores the principles, purposes, and processes of assessment used in the evaluation of exceptional learners and English language learners. Includes how assessment results can be used to develop appropriate educational programs for diverse students. Prerequisite(s): ED 401 or EDSP 401 and ED 485. Cross listing: EDLD 403. NOTE: Admission to the Department not required
for students intending to minor in Special Education.

EDSP 404. METHODS AND STRATEGIES IN SPECIAL EDUCATION (3). Examines educational strategies and relevant research to address the skill deficits (language arts and mathematics) manifested in students with exceptionalities. Includes general classroom accommodations for exceptional
students. Prerequisite(s): ED 401 or EDSP 401. NOTE: Admission to the Department not required for students intending to minor
in Special Education.

EDSP 405. LITERACY INTERVENTIONS (3). Focuses on research-based approaches, strategies, assessment tools and issues related to effective literacy instruction for student performing significantly below grade level. Explores and evaluates individual reading and writing programs for students with the most challenging literacy needs. Students will also learn about
reading disabilities and relationships of those disabilities to literacy development. Utilizes appropriate assessments to evaluate student needs and determine next steps for literacy interventions and instruction within the general education/content area classroom. Prerequisite(s): ED 204 and ED 302. Cross listing: EDLT 405.

EDSP 406. BEHAVIOR MANAGEMENT AND INTERVENTION (3). Provides a basis for understanding and addressing behavior challenges of diverse learners. Explores foundations of PBIL-- principles, policies and practices, theoretical perspectives on the nature of challenging behavior, functional based behavior assessment and support planning, individual, classroom, school- wide support systems, interventions and practices to facilitate positive behavior and social competence. Prerequisite(s): ED 401.

EDSP 420. TEACHING EXCEPTIONAL LEARNERS (3). Examines disabilities in schools and services, systems, and concepts associated as well as state and federal trends. Applies evidence based instructional strategies and planning to meet the needs of every student.  Examines current legislation and develops
Universal Design planning. Cross listing(s): ED 401 and EDSP 401.

EDSP 443. MATHEMATICS FOR SPECIAL EDUCATORS (3). Explores mathematical concepts for teaching exceptional students. Includes design of mathematical lessons and selection of mathematical curricula to meet individual needs of students with moderate and severe needs. Field experience required.

EDSP 453. LITERACY FOR STUDENTS WITH SPECIAL NEEDS (3). Language and literacy development using a variety of methods/curricula for teaching reading and language arts. Studies effective assessment, instruction and materials for special needs students. Prerequisite(s): EDRG 644 and all foundational course work. NOTE: Contains a practicum component.

EDSP 460. METHODS FOR THE TYPICAL CLASSROOM (3). Provides knowledge of special education intervention and evaluation processes. Emphasizes assessment techniques, diagnosis, interpretation, and application of evaluation. Prerequisite(s): Completion of all foundational courses. NOTE: Contains a practicum component.
EDSP 461. ASSESSMENT OF THE DIVERSE LEARNER (3). Provides knowledge of special education intervention and evaluation processes. Emphasizes assessment techniques, diagnosis, interpretation, and application of evaluation. Prerequisite(s): EDSP 453 and EDSP 464 and EDSP 467 and completion of all foundational courses. NOTE: Contains a practicum component.

EDSP 462. METHODS IN SPECIAL EDUCATION (3). Examines teaching strategies, methods, curricula, and classroom management for special needs students. Emphasizes specialization,
modification and/or adaptation of materials and curriculum as well as developing and teaching individualized instruction programs. NOTE: Requires theory knowledge and practicum experience.

EDSP 464. BEHAVIOR MANAGEMENT AND INTERVENTION (3). Focuses on analyzing student behavior and intervention strategies for disruptive actions. Addresses normal behaviors as well as those that cause problems in the classroom. Focuses on students with moderate needs. Prerequisite(s): Completion of all foundational and professional sequence courses. NOTE: Practicum component required.

EDSP 465. TRANSITION, CONSULTATION, AND COLLABORATION (3). Emphasizes development of competencies in consultation and collaboration. Encourages the development of understanding and skills that enhance the teacher’s ability to work with and communicate effectively with school personnel, paraprofessionals, and parents.

EDSP 467. ADAPTIVE TECHNOLOGY (3). Overview of adaptive technology and research for special needs students and challenges they face. Field experience with devices such as: screen text enlargers and reading systems, typing enhancers, alternative keyboards, voice recognition systems, wheelchairs, etc. required. Prerequisite(s): Completion of all foundational courses.

EDSP 468. ASSESSMENT INTERVENTION AND PROGRAM PLANNING (3). Assessment and program development for students with special needs. Emphasizes instruction and intervention providing students with the best learning environments in the least restrictive settings. Prerequisite(s): EDSP 453 and EDSP 461 and EDSP 464 and EDSP 467 plus completion of all foundational courses required. NOTE: Field experience includes elementary and secondary levels.

EDSP 471. CHARACTERISTICS OF PUPILS WHO HAVE
AUTISM (3). Focuses on symptoms of autism in children, the tools used to diagnose autism, and strategies for supporting those around autistic children.

EDSP 475. SPEECH AND LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT (3). Examines the process of language acquisition as well as addressing specific information about certain language disabilities.

EDSP 478. METHODS AND STRATEGIES FOR TEACHING PUPILS WHO HAVE AUTISM (3). Centers on diagnostic techniques, which provide the basis for instruction. Provides a variety of instructional techniques, information, and ideas for teaching K-12 autistic children.

EDSP 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN SPECIAL EDUCATION (1-6). Pursues independent exploration of areas of interest under the supervision of faculty. Prerequisite(s): Permission of instructor required.

EDSP 492. STUDENT TEACHING: SPECIAL EDUCATION GENERALIST (10). Student teaching practicum (600 hours) assessing, teaching, and program planning for children with special needs. Students choose one level (elementary or secondary) and must have practicum experience with school children with a variety of needs. Prerequisite(s): Majors only. Permission of Advisor required. Pass/No Pass Grading only.

ENGLISH (EN)

EN 203. INTERMEDIATE COMPOSITION (3). Studies expository writing. Concentrates on critical and argumentative essays of 500-
1,000 words. NOTE: Reasonable competency in basic writing and word processing required.

EN 250/EN 250C. LITERATURE MATTERS (3). Introduces the literary genres of poetry, fiction, and drama. Students will write a series of analytical essays, including at least one research essay. Prerequisite(s): RCC 200. NOTE: EN 250C is a course that emphasizes communication in the course assignments, and enrollment is limited to student who took the paired/linked RCC
200 course in the fall.

EN 300. LITERARY ANALYSIS (3).  Introduces and develops advanced approaches to thinking and writing about literature. Explores the fundamentals of poetic, dramatic, and narrative forms, while seeking a more complex understanding of literary analysis and evaluation. Prerequisite(s): RCC 200. NOTE: Course restricted to English majors and minors only.
EN 310. INTRODUCTION TO FILM STUDIES (3). Teaches student how and why to analyze and appreciate films. Topics include formal analysis, narrative structure, genre, film theory, and criticism. Prerequisite(s): RCC 200.

EN 323. AMERICAN LITERATURE SURVEY TO 1900 (3). Surveys significant works of American literature from first exploration to the turn of the 20th Century. Examines representative authors, literary works, styles, and movements within a historical context. Includes authors such as Bradstreet, Ines de la Cruz, Irving, Poe, Hawthorne, Emerson, Thoreau, Davis, Jacobs, Whitman, and Dickinson. Prerequisite(s): RCC 200.
NOTE: English Majors only.

EN 324. AMERICAN LITERATURE SURVEY 1900 TO PRESENT (3). Surveys significant works of American literature from 1900 to the present. Examines representative authors, literary works, styles, and movements within a historical context. Includes poetry, prose, and plays from canonical and emergent authors. Prerequisite(s): RCC 200. NOTE: English Majors only.

EN 353. BRITISH LITERATURE SURVEY TO 1789 (3). Surveys significant works of British literature from the Old English period to the eighteenth century. Examines representative authors, literary works, styles, and movements within a historical context. Includes such authors as Chaucer, Shakespeare, Milton, Behn, and Johnson. Prerequisite(s): RCC 200. NOTE: English Majors only.

EN 354. BRITISH LITERATURE SURVEY 1789-PRESENT (3). Surveys significant works of British literature from the Romantics to the present. Examines representative authors, literary works, styles, and movements within a historical context. Includes such authors as Coleridge, Wordsworth, Keats, Tennyson, Browning,
Yeats, Eliot, and Heaney. Prerequisite(s): RCC 200. NOTE: English
Majors only.

EN 388. CREATIVE WRITING: MULTI-GENRE (3). Provides a workshop in fiction, non-fiction, and poetry emphasizing discussion of students' original work. Includes analysis of the elements of writing and techniques used by a variety of modern and contemporary writers.

EN 410E-W. WOMEN IN LITERATURE (3). Surveys women’s literary achievement, or focuses on a particular historical period or cultural milieu, ethnographic perspective or social theme. Examines literary and critical works focusing on women’s viewpoints in social, cultural, economic, and aesthetic contexts. Prerequisite(s): EN 300. Cross listing: WGS 410E-W.

EN 412. RHETORIC: THE ART OF PERSUASIVE WRITING (3). The study of classical rhetoric, the art of persuasion. Focuses on organizational and stylistic techniques used by great writers to inform and persuade audiences. Course is writing-intensive. Prerequisite(s): RCC 200 or Permission of the Instructor.

EN 415. THE AMERICAN SHORT STORY (3). Examines the origins and development of the American short fiction from early authors such as Irving, Poe and Hawthorne to more contemporary writers. Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 416. CATHER (3). Studies the life and works of Willa Cather. Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 420. CONTEMPORARY AFRICAN AMERICAN LITERATURE (3). Explores African American literature, primarily fiction, of the past 50 years, including writers such as Morrison, Whitehead, Ward, Adiche, and Butler. Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 421. AMERICAN WOMEN WRITERS OF COLOR (3). Studies American women writers of color of the 20th and 21st century. Readings will focus on fiction and other genres, including the works of Kingston, Lahiri, Erdrich, Garcia, Castillo, and Morrison. Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 422. MYTHIC THEMES IN CONTEMPORARY LITERATURE (3). Introduces the narrative, metaphorical and symbolic functions through which myth communicates the sacred truths of a culture. Emphasis on Graeco-Roman and Judeo-Christian themes that inflect the Western literary tradition. Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 423. TRUE CRIME (3). Explores the captivity narrative and descendant forms of "true crime" in American literature and documentary media, from the 17th century to the present. Authors may include Rowlandson, Jacobs, Riis, Capote, Morris, Koenig, Wright, Rankine. Cross listing: WGS 410M. Prerequisite(s): EN 300, or permission of instructor.

EN 423E-W. INTERDISCIPLINARY STUDIES IN AMERICAN LITERATURE (3). Examines themes in American literature from an interdisciplinary perspective. Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 425E-W. AMERICAN LITERATURE TO 1865 (3). Involves concentrated reading and analysis of a select literary theme, literary period, or group of authors (e.g. Hawthorne and Melville, Whitman and Dickinson, The American Renaissance, Early American Women Writers). Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 426E-W. AMERICAN LITERATURE 1865-1918 (3). Involves concentrated reading and analysis of a select literary theme, literary period, or group of authors (e.g. Twain, American Realism and Naturalism, Multi-Cultural Literature before World War I). Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 427E-W. AMERICAN LITERATURE 1918-PRESENT (3). Involves concentrated reading and analysis of a select literary theme, literary period, or group of authors (e.g. Twain, American Realism and Naturalism, Multi-Cultural Literature before World War I).  Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 428. LITERATURE OF THE ATOMIC AGE (3). Examines literature of the Cold War period up to the present, focusing on the paranoia and fragmentation of the atomic age. Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 429. ELLISON AND MORRISON (3). Focuses on issues of race and gender in 20th century American literature through the works of two renowned African Americans: Ralph Ellison (Invisible Man) and Toni Morrison (Song of Solomon, Jazz, Beloved). Cross- listing: WGS 410K. Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 430. FAULKNER (3). Read the greatest works of fiction from one of the greatest American writers. Includes The Sound and the Fury, Absalom, Absalom!, Light in August, and As I Lay Dying, among others. Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 431. CHAUCER (3). Involves the reading and analysis of The Canterbury Tales in the original Middle English, and similar study of other major poems by Chaucer. Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 432. CHAUCER VS. LANGLAND (3). Chaucer and Langland wrote the two masterworks of medieval English literature, poems that oppose each other in every conceivable way. Explores how each attempt to seize control of the future of English literature. Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 432E-W. SHAKESPEARE (3). Involves the study of Shakespeare’s poetry, plays, life, and age. Prerequisite(s): EN 300. Cross listing: PJ 432E-W.

EN 433. JAMES JOYCE (3). Studies James Joyce's works, including Dubliners, A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man, and Ulysses. Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 435. ANGELA CARTER’S SURREALIST LITERATURE (3). Explores the novels, essays, and short stories of Angela Carter, one of the most important and influential contemporary British writers. Investigates her works’ relation to several traditions, including surrealism, psychoanalysis, feminism, and contemporary Gothic literature. Prerequisite(s): EN 250 or EN 300. Cross- listing: WGS 410L.

EN 436. EMILY DICKINSON (3). A study of Dickinson's life and poetry. Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 439. CONTEMPORARY LITERATURE (3). Examines novels in contemporary fiction and other genres. Includes works by such authors as Franzen, DeLillo, Auster, Murakami, Zadie Smith, Chabon, Morrison, Lahiri, Nabokov, and Alexie. Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 443. OLD ENGLISH (3). Focusing on the masterful elegies and riddles of the Exeter book, this class explores how Anglo-Saxon communities composed and performed poetry. Students will learn to read and recite Old English verse in its cultural context. Prerequisite(s): EN 300.
EN 445. RADICAL PASTORAL (3) Surveys pastoral literature from the English Renaissance, while nodding back to classical and forward to modern examples. Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 446. THE 17TH CENTURY (3). Surveys the later Renaissance, Commonwealth, and Restoration eras, including representative works of Metaphysical, Cavalier, and/or Restoration poets, Jacobean and/or Restoration playwrights, and/or the prose stylists of the period. Prerequisite(s): EN 300.EN 447. AUSTEN (3). Studies the works of Jane Austen. Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 449. SENSE AND SENSIBILITY (3). Studies the competing notions of rationalism and sensibility in the fiction, poetry, and drama of eighteenth-century Britain, with a special focus on Jane Austen’s Sense and Sensibility. Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 450. ROMANTICS ON THE MIND (3). Involves the study of major figures of British Romanticism (Blake, Coleridge, Wordsworth, Keats, Shelley, Austen, etc..), particularly their ideas about and literary representations of the human mind. Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 451. DICKENS (3). Involves the study of Dickens’ novels, life and times. Prerequisite(s): EN 300

EN 452. WILLIAM WORDSWORTH (3). Treats the most influential poet of the British Romantic period through reading and study of Wordsworth's major publications, including Lyrical
Ballads and The Prelude, a biography of the poet, and criticism from
Coleridge to Hartman. Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 453. MODERNIST BRITISH LITERATURE (3). Examines literature in the British Isles from 1900 to 1950. Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 454. LINGUISTIC APPROACHES TO LITERATURE (3). Introduces historical and comparative linguistics, semantics, syntax, phonology, stylistics, and pragmatics, and emphasizes their
application in the analysis of literary texts. Prerequisite(s): EN 300 and one 400-level EN course. NOTE: Junior standing or permission of instructor.

EN 455. VICTORIAN LITERATURE (3). Involves reading and analysis of such novelists as Bronte, Eliot, and Hardy; such
essayists as Carlyle, Mill, and Arnold; and such poets as Tennyson, Browning, and the Pre-Raphaelites. Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 457. 20TH CENTURY IRISH LITERATURE (3). Studies Irish writers of the 20th century including Shaw, Yeats, Joyce, Synge, O’Casey and Beckett. Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 460. AMERICAN MODERNIST POETRY (3). Involves the reading and analysis of such major American poets as Eliot, Frost, Pound, Stevens, Williams. Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 461. MODERN AND CONTEMPORARY AMERICAN POETRY (3). Explores poetry by modern and contemporary poets, considering diverse aesthetics and lines of influence. Includes authors such as H.D., Hughes, Moore, Jordan, Rich, Chin, Harjo, and Herrera. Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 463. LATINX LITERATURE (3). Explores 20th/21st century literature from American writers of Hispanic/Latin American descent, including Mexico, Puerto Rico, the Dominican Republic, and South America. Prerequisite(s): EN 300.


EN 464. POSTCOLONIAL WORLD LITERATURE (3). Investigates writings in and about previously colonized countries throughout the 20th century, paying close attention to the lingering effects of colonialism on the writing of the time. Literature includes works from India, the Caribbean, Africa, and Latin America. Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 465. HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE (3). Examines the linguistic history of English from its beginnings to the present day in order to explore how language change shapes how communities make and read literature and articulate their cultural experiences. Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 466. LITERARY THEORY (3). Surveys the varied approaches to literary study applied by scholars, attends to the differences in textual interpretation that result from the application of these approaches, and evaluates what these approaches reveal and conceal about literary texts. Prerequisite(s): EN 300 and one 400- level EN course. NOTE: Junior standing or permission of instructor.

EN 467. TEXTUAL CRITICISM AND MANUSCRIPT STUDIES (3). Approaching texts as cultural artifacts grounded in, and transformed by, their material contexts, this course examines the processes that shape the production, transmission, and reception of texts, from manuscripts and printed editions to hypertext. Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 468. COGNITIVE LITERARY STUDIES (3). Introduces the related fields of Cognitive Literary Studies and Empirical Literary Studies, concentrating on theoretical and experimental developments concerning production, representation, and reception in the major literary genres of drama, lyric, and narrative. Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 469. THE AMERICAN SHORT STORY (3). A study of the origins, development, and flourishing of the short story in American literature, focusing primarily on 19th and early 20th Century writers such as Poe, Hawthorne, James, Wharton, Cather, Anderson, Hemingway, and Toomer. Prerequisite(s): EN
300.

EN 470. POSTMODERN LITERATURE AND FILM (3). Investigates the contemporary genre of philosophically-informed novels and films. Authors include Paul Auster, Julian Barnes, Angela Carter, Salman Rushdie, and Tom Stoppard. Prerequisite(s): EN 300, or permission of instructor.

EN 472 ADVANCED GRAMMAR (3). Covers advanced topics in English syntax and morphology. Prerequisite(s): RCC 200. NOTE: Required course for the TEFL/TESOL certificate program.

EN 474E-W. COMPARATIVE LITERATURE (3). Studies significant works in English translations in the context of their interrelation with various traditions in English and American literature. Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 478. CREATIVE WRITING: PLAYWRITING (3). Provides a workshop in playwriting emphasizing discussion of students? plays. Includes analysis of the elements of playwriting and techniques used by a variety of modern and contemporary writers. Prerequisite(s): EN 300, or permission or instructor.

EN 479. CREATIVE WRITING: SCREENWRITING (3). Provides a workshop in screenwriting emphasizing discussion of students’ screenplays. Includes analysis of the elements of screenwriting and
techniques used by a variety of modern and contemporary screenwriters. Prerequisite(s): EN 300 or permission of instructor.

EN 480, BUSINESS AND TECHNICAL WRITING (3). Working with nonprofit organizations and case studies, students will practice writing business documents, web-based multimedia documentation, instructions, and grants, as well as considering the ethics of business writing. Prerequisite(s): RCC*200 or permission of instructor.

EN 481. MULTIMEDIA WRITING (3). Examines current theory around evolving digital media and applies it to creating websites, video, podcasts, and games. Provides instruction in visual design and user-centered design. Prerequisite(s): RCC 200 or permission of instructor.

EN 483. CREATIVE WRITING: FICTION (3). Provides a workshop in fiction emphasizing discussion of students’ fiction. Includes analysis of the elements of fiction and techniques used by a variety of modern and contemporary writers. Prerequisite(s): EN 300 or permission of instructor.

EN 486. CREATIVE WRITING: POETRY (3). Provides a workshop in poetry writing emphasizing the discussion of students’ poetry. Includes analysis of the elements of poetry and techniques used by a variety of modern and contemporary writers. Prerequisite(s): EN 300 or permission of instructor.

EN 487. CREATIVE WRITING: ADVANCED FICTION (3). Advanced instruction in craft of fiction; professional perspectives on the art in the context of rigorous criticism. In workshop format, students practice the genre, further define it, examine its many forms, and receive professional peer review. Prerequisite(s): EN 300, or permission of instructor.

EN 488. CREATIVE WRITING: ADVANCED POETRY (3). Advanced instruction in craft of poetry; professional perspectives on the art in the context of rigorous criticism. In workshop format, student practice the genre, further define it, examine its many forms, and receive professional peer review.
Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 489. CREATIVE WRITING: NON-FICTION (3). Provides a workshop in creative non-fiction emphasizing discussion of students' non-fiction. Includes analysis of the elements of non- fiction and techniques used by a variety of modern and contemporary writers. Prerequisite(s): EN 300, or permission of instructor.

EN 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY (0-3). Develops independent exploration of areas of interest under the direction of a department member. Prerequisite(s): EN 300 and approval of department chair.

EN 492E-W. SPECIAL TOPICS IN LITERATURE (3). Involves the reading and analysis of selected topics in literature. Focuses on selected literary issues, periods, or theoretical problems (e.g., After the Apocalypse, Writing in the Nuclear Age, Teaching Banned Books, and The Small Town in Literature). Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 495E-Z. THEMES IN LITERATURE (3). Provides an opportunity for concentration on a single theme, a single author, or combination of authors in an intensive study (e.g., , Epic Failures, Arthurian Legend, Princess Brides, Freaks and Geeks: The Abnormal in Contemporary Literature, and Literature of the
Unconscious). Prerequisite(s): EN 300.

EN 498E-W. INTERNSHIP IN WRITING (3). Credit may be earned for employment in which the student is responsible for various kinds of writing and in which there is an integration of practical experience and academic guidance. Prerequisite(s): EN
300 and junior or senior class standing. Approval of department chair and director of Academic Internship Program. NOTE: Students may obtain as many as six (6) semester hours of credit, but only three (3) semester hours may be applied to the English major.

EN 499. SENIOR CAPSTONE: ENGLISH (3). Provides a capstone in English, including reflection, professionalization, a summative public presentation and instruction in multimedia design tools.

ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES (ENVS)

ENVS 250. INTRODUCTION TO ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE (3). Explores the environment and its modification by human activity within a scientific context. Considers the chemical, geological, climatological, and biological bases of current environmental issues. Co-requisite: ENVS 251. NOTE: Required for Environmental Studies majors and minors. Designed for non- science majors to meet the Natural Science Core requirement when taken with ENVS 251.

ENVS 251. ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE LABORATORY (1). Involves laboratory and field exercises accompanying and reinforcing lecture topics. May require a field trip outside of class time. Co-requisite: ENVS 250. NOTE: One three-hour laboratory per week.

ENVS 402. PRINCIPLES OF ECOLOGY (3). Explores the interactions of organisms in the context of their biotic and abiotic environments. Examines the basic models and principles used in evolutionary, behavioral, population, community, and ecosystem ecology.  Prerequisite(s): BL 258, BL 260, and MT 272. Cross listing: BL 402.  NOTE: Required for all Biology and Environmental Science majors.

ENVS 403. QUANTITATIVE ECOLOGY LABORATORY (1). Involves ecological research design and the collection, evaluation, and statistical analysis of ecological data in the laboratory and in the field.  Prerequisite(s): BL 259, BL 261 and MT 272. Cross
listing: BL 403.  NOTE: Required for all Biology and Environmental
Science majors.

ENVS 406 CLIMATE CHANGE: SCIENCE, SOCIETY, AND ACTION (3). Explores the scientific basis for human-caused climate change and examines how information about climate is generated, disseminated, and informs societal action. Prerequisite(s): Completion of natural science distributive core and junior standing, or permission of instructor.

ENVS 408. CONSUMPTION, CONTENTMENT, AND CLIMATE CHANGE (3). Explores the relationship between consumption, happiness and climate change, probing the assumption that economic growth promotes happiness and considering
alternatives to mainstream economics. NOTE: Junior standing or completion of Distributive Core required.

ENVS 410. AQUATIC ECOLOGY (3). Develops student knowledge of freshwater ecology in its physical and chemical
context. Emphasizes aquatic communities and includes exploration of the impacts of human activities on aquatic systems. Prerequisite(s): BL 258 and BL 260. Cross listing: BL 410.

ENVS 411. ECOTHEOLOGY (3). Explores contemporary environmental issues from the perspectives of different religious traditions. Compares spiritual and religious views of the environment, its meaning, and its relation to human beings. Explores scientific understandings of contemporary environmental issues, asking how religions engage these issues. NOTE: Completion of Natural Science Core requirement or permission
of instructor required

ENVS 414. RELIGION AND THE ENVIRONMENT (3). Examines the interconnection between religion and the environment, including: the ways in which religion may be used to frame and discuss environmental issues; the contribution to environmental ethics made by religion; and the ways in which the environmental movement is shaped by and related to spiritualism.

ENVS 415. ENVIRONMENTAL ETHICS (3). Examines the theories of value, justice, and gender and applies them to environmental problems such as sustainability, climate change, over-population, consumption and waste, and wilderness protection, with the goal of developing ethical and political responses to these problems. Prerequisite(s): One 200 Level Philosophy Course. Cross listing: PL 448J and PJ 473.

ENVS 416. JUST AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT (3). Integrates knowledge of development practice and theory from the perspective of communities, states, and the global system. Builds on community-based models of just and sustainable development success. Interdisciplinary, drawing on health, environment, politics, business and law. Prerequisite(s): POL 231, POL 241, or POL 281. Cross listing: POL 406. NOTE: Junior standing or completion of Distributive Core required.

ENVS 417. ENVIRONMENTAL RHETORIC (3). Explores the values, needs, and persuasive strategies of various communities engaged in environmental debate, and includes guest speakers from across the Front Range, readings from multiple genres, and applied writing practice. NOTE: Junior standing or completion of Distributive Core required.

ENVS 418. ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS AND LAW (3). Examines the economic, legal, and political systems that affect and regulate the use and conservation of the environment. Examines topics such as sustainable development and environmental regulation. Prerequisite(s): EC 200 or EC 3200. Cross listing: EC
4218.

ENVS 419. WILDERNESS: A STORY OF PASSION AND PERSEVERENCE (3). Introduces the philosophy, the literature, the legislation, and the current debate surrounding “wilderness.” Includes a mix of reading, discussion, writing, and a service
learning project.

ENVS 420. ENVIRONMENTAL POLITICS (3). Uses four case studies of environmental progress to drive analysis of local, regional, national, and global levels of dealing with change and conservation.  Examines civil society, state and UN system approaches to building environmental norms that shape policy and legislation. Prerequisite(s): POL 231, POL 241, and POL 281.
Cross listing:  POL 420. NOTE: Junior standing or completion of distributive core required.


ENVS 421. READ NATURE, WRITE THE WORLD (3). Integrates different types of disciplinary thinking through reading and writing across the genres of poetry, fiction, nonfiction essay/memoir, and research-based position papers. The latter genre will require the student to demonstrate a degree of scientific literacy and the ability to reason quantitatively. Prerequisite(s): Junior standing.

ENVS 428. CONSERVATION BIOLOGY (3). Introduces the fundamental principles of conservation biology including patterns of global biological diversity, biogeography, population genetics, extinction, restoration ecology, management, and conservation policy. Prerequisite(s): BL 258 and BL 260. Cross listing: BL 428. NOTE: Junior standing or completion of Distributive Core required.

ENVS 432. INTERNATIONAL POLITICAL ECONOMY (3). Evaluates interdependencies of politics and economics at systemic/global level. Reviews alternative frameworks for the analysis of the nature, dynamics, relationships, and implications of political and economic interactions. Application to key contemporary issues, problems and controversies. Prerequisite(s): EC 200 or EC 3200 and junior class standing. Cross listing: EC
4232, PJ 454 and POL 432.

ENVS 435. ADVANCED FIELD ECOLOGY LABORATORY (2). Introduces students to methods of sampling and studying a variety of organisms in the field. Develops student ability to design, conduct, and appropriately interpret field ecological studies. Prerequisite(s): BL 403 or ENVS 403. Cross listing: BL 435.

ENVS 437. ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE: RACE AND CLASS (3). Explores how race and class intersect with natural disasters, toxic waste dumps, pollution, inadequate sanitation, pesticides, childhood lead poisoning and asthma epidemics, inequities in
public transportation, and a wide range of ongoing social movements and success stories. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course, or permission of instructor. Cross-listing: CJ 437, SO 437, and PJ 437.

ENVS 438. THAT'S GARBAGE! MAKING DIGITAL STORIES OF AN ABOUNDING MYSTERY (3). Course explores the mysteries of garbage - its past and future, where it goes when you are done with it, the real people who deal with it, the human and environmental problems it causes, the untapped resource it is, and unique solutions for creating a world with less waste. Students
will explore ideas through books, blogs, websites, field trips, self- reflection, interviews, and discussions, then analyze and distill that information to write great stories and to craft a series of your own digital stories for the public. Students will produce non- fiction digital video stories for personal reflection, research, and social change. Pre-requisite: Junior Standing.

ENVS 440. ENVIRONMENT AND CULTURE (3). Provides an introduction to cultural perspectives on the environment focusing on how social categories such as race, gender and class shape the way humans interact with the natural environment and react to environmental degradation.

ENVS 441. SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES (3). Explores social, environmental, and economic issues that prevent and encourage more sustainable communities. Topics include transportation, sprawl, poverty, urban/wildlife interface, housing, population, consumption, municipal/toxic waste, community resources and empowerment, and a variety of proposed solutions from around
the world. Prerequisite(s): SO 200 or SO 203 or permission of instructor required. Cross listing: PJ 441 and SO 441.

ENVS 445. COMPARATIVE PUBLIC POLICY (3). Provides a comparative examination of public policy in western industrialized nation-states emphasizing the interaction and interdependency of politics and economics. Evaluates basic issues of public policy including distribution, extraction, and regulation focusing on identifying both the range of possible choices and the actual outcomes of adopted policies under a variety of circumstances. Prerequisite(s): EC 200 or EC 3200. Cross listing: EC 4245 or POL 445 or PJ 446.

ENVS 446. MARINE BIOLOGY (3). Develops student knowledge of the biology of the world ocean, emphasizing marine diversity and ecology in oceanographic context. Introduces students to issues of commercial fisheries, mariculture, and oceanic pollution and helps students develop integrative positions. Prerequisite(s): BL 258 and BL 260. Cross-listing: BL 446.

ENVS 448. PLANT DIVERSITY AND ECOLOGY (3). Surveys plant systematics and distributional aspects of plant community ecology. Emphasizes identification, classification, biogeography, and environmental effects on plant distribution and community structure. Focuses on the Colorado flora. Prerequisite(s): BL 258 and BL 260. Cross listing: BL 448. NOTE: One or two weekend field trips required.

ENVS 450. ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT (3). Focuses on the theory and methods of creating environmental impact assessment reports. Explores various perspectives including ecology, chemistry, geology, economics, and environmental justice. Prerequisite(s): Junior class standing, or completion of distributive core.

ENVS 451. MARKETING FOR SOCIAL CHANGE IN UGANDA (3).  Experiential immersion course, exploring multiple disciplinary perspectives (e.g., business, economics, gender, history,
geography, political science) on extreme poverty and economic development in Uganda. In the middle of the semester-long course, students will travel to Uganda. Cross-listing: BA 4488, PJ
451W, WGS 485W. NOTE: Junior standing required. Travel to
Uganda is required.

ENVS 455. MODELING SUSTAINABILITY (3). Sustainability can be defined in many different ways. This course explores the concept of sustainability and ask why it matters. Investigate the myriad of ways that services, products, business, institutions, and people can improve their sustainability, and discusses why that matters in a global context.

ENVS 458.  BEHAVIORAL ECOLOGY (3). Explores the mechanisms and functions of animal behavior with emphasis on the ecological and evolutionary bases of animal behavior. Some areas discussed include communication, reproductive behavior, and social behavior. Prerequisite(s): BL 258 and BL 260. Cross listing: BL 458.

ENVS 459. ANIMAL BEHAVIOR LABORATORY (1). Laboratory and field exercises accompany and reinforce lecture topics. Involves non-invasive work with live animals. Prerequisite(s): BL
259 and BL 261. Cross listing: BL 459.

ENVS 460. FOREST AND LANDSCAPE ECOLOGY (3). Investigates the unique ecological characteristics of forest ecosystems, surveys the diversity of world forests, and explores methods of analysis and management of forests at landscape scales. Prerequisite(s): BL 258, BL 260, and MT 272. Cross listing: BL 460. NOTE: May require participation in field trips outside of class time.

ENVS 461. WESTERN ECOLOGY, LAW, AND LAND STEWARDSHIP (3). Investigates how ecology and laws have interacted to produce the specific ecology of the Western United States, particularly Colorado and Utah. Students will camp every night of the second two weeks of this course in the areas that will studied.  Being in the field gives the student a unique opportunity to assess the ecological impacts of various land use laws.

ENVS 462. PRIMATE ECOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR (3). Explores the ecology and evolution of primates in the context of their biotic and abiotic environments. Emphasizes primate life history, behavior, social organization and conservation ecology. Prerequisite(s): BL 258 and BL 260. Cross listing: BL 462. NOTE: May require participation in field trips outside of class time.

ENVS 470. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (3). Studies various models/theories of economic development that traces a history of underdevelopment. Investigates the various barriers and problem areas in developing countries. Assesses possibilities, prospects,
and policies for the future. Prerequisite(s): EC 3200. Cross listing: BA 4170, EC 4170, and PJ 470.

ENVS 474. GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SCIENCE (3). Explores the basic concepts, assumptions, theories, and structures of geographic information systems (GIS). Covers GIS methods through hands on activities using up-to-date software. Emphasizes applications of GIS for the spatial analysis of environmental issues. NOTE: Completion of Natural Science Core requirement or permission of instructor required.

ENVS 481E-W. SPECIAL TOPICS IN ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES (1-4). Explores selected topics in environmentally focused topics not normally covered in regular course offerings. Prerequisite(s): Sophomore standing or higher.

ENVS 484. ANTHROPOLOGY OF TOURISM (3). Examines the phenomenon of tourism in relationship to modernity, authenticity, sexual and romantic tourism, ecotourism, and others. Prerequisite(s): SO 200 and SO 204 or AN 204 or permission of instructor. Cross listing: AN 484 and SO 484.

ENVS 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES (1-3). Offers an opportunity for advanced study in independent research projects in environmental studies. Prerequisite(s): Permission of instructor and approval of Environmental Studies director.

ENVS 495A. PORTFOLIO DEVELOPMENT I (1). Explores the expected program outcomes for a major in ENVS. Focuses on
the first steps in assembling an academic portfolio to demonstrate attainment of program outcomes. NOTE: Senior standing required.

ENVS 495B. PORTFOLIO DEVELOPMENT II (1). Involves completion and assessment of an academic portfolio. NOTE: Majors only.

ENVS 498E-W. INTERNSHIP IN ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES (3). Develops skills related to real-life working situations in major-
related field. Prerequisite(s): Approval of Environmental Studies director and Academic Internship Program director.

FINE ARTS: ARTS (FAA)

FAA 215. INTRODUCTION TO DIGITAL ART (3). Introduces students to the foundations, practice, history, and technical domain of electronic imaging and digital image processing. Aesthetic, technical, social, and ethical issues regarding the practice of electronic image making are discussed in the context of student’s own electronic image making. Course utilizes imaging programs (such as PhotoShop and Illustrator) and graphic design programs (such as PageMaker).

FAA 218. INTRODUCTION TO WEB ART AND NEW MEDIA (3). Covers the historical development and applied practices of internet art and other forms of new media. Through a variety of online and offline projects, explores the growing fields of internet art and new media.

FAA 220. INTRODUCTION TO THREE-DIMENSIONAL PRINTING (3). Familiarizes students with the 3-D printing process for the production of works of art.

FAA 240. INTRODUCTION TO PHOTOGRAPHY (3). Introduces photography as a medium of artistic expression that utilizes the camera, basic digital imaging techniques, and inkjet printers to develop and express ideas and experience through visual means. NOTE: Course fee required.

FAA 250. INTRODUCTION TO PAINTING (3). Uses various materials to teach fundamental painting techniques and to facilitate the development of individual expressive exploration.

FAA 260. INTRODUCTION TO SCULPTURE (3). Provides an extensive working knowledge of the basic three-dimensional techniques and concepts of sculpture.

FAA 270. INTRODUCTION TO DRAWING (3). Studies the fundamental principles of drawing with emphasis on the physical as well as mental aspects of creative drawing.

FAA 280. INTRODUCTION TO THE BOOK ARTS (3). Course uses the studio format and introduces student to the book arts including; an introduction to the history of the book, as well as the studio practices related to the book.

FAA 290. INTRODUCTION TO PRINTMAKING (3). Introduces students to the foundations, practice, history, and technique of Fine Art printmaking. Discusses esthetic, social, and ethical issues in the context of student’s own creative output. Covers reflex, intaglio, and Plano graphic techniques.

FAA 330. DESIGN FOUNDATION (3). Covers foundation concepts of two-dimensional and three-dimensional design including visual elements, composition, media and materials. Through a sequence of assignments, explores design concepts, creative process, and visual thinking.

FAA 331. GRAPHIC DESIGN FOUNDATION (3). Lecture/ studio course in graphic design covering historical and applied practices.  Covers foundation information and process in graphic design including an introduction to typography, page layout, design software, and logo development.


FAA 420. ADVANCED DIGITAL ART (3). Explores issues particular to the current practice of digital image making. Focuses on digital printmaking and presentation. Prerequisite(s): FAA 215 or permission of instructor.

FAA 421E-W. DIGITAL ART STUDIO (3). Provides continued supervised studio electronic imaging practice beyond the beginning level. Includes the development of student portfolios and enjoyment in peer and instructor critiques. Prerequisite(s): FAA 215 and FAA 420 or permission of instructor.

FAA 443. ADVANCED PHOTOGRAPHY (3). A continuation of the study of photography as a fine art with an exploration of various applications of photography that guide the student in the development of a portfolio of creative work. Prerequisite(s): FAA
240.

FAA 446E-W. PHOTOGRAPHY STUDIO (3). Provides supervised studio photography practice beyond the beginning
level. Involves the development of student portfolios and engaging in peer and instructor critiques. Prerequisite(s): FAA 443 or permission of instructor.

FAA 450. ADVANCED PAINTING (3). A continuation of FAA
250. Prerequisite(s): FAA 250 or equivalent, or permission of
instructor.

FAA 451E-W. PAINTING STUDIO (3). Provides continued supervised studio painting practice beyond the beginning level. Involves the development of student portfolios and engaging in peer and instructor critiques. Prerequisite(s): FAA 450 or permission of instructor.

FAA 460. ADVANCED SCULPTURE (3). A continuation of FAA
260. Prerequisite(s): FAA 260 or permission of instructor.

FAA 461E-W. SCULPTURE STUDIO (3). Provides continued supervised studio sculpture practice for students beyond the beginning level. Involves the development of student portfolios
and engaging in peer and instructor critiques. Prerequisite(s): FAA
460 or permission of instructor.

FAA 472. ADVANCED DRAWING (3). Provides advanced level drawing in studio format with critiques and discussions of student work. Prerequisite(s): FAA 270 or permission of instructor.

FAA 474E-W DRAWING STUDIO (3). Provides continued supervised studio drawing practice for students beyond the beginning level. Involves the development of student portfolios
and engaging in peer and instructor critiques. Prerequisite(s): FAA
472 or permission of instructor.

FAA 475E-W. LIFE DRAWING (3). Studies human figure as drawing subject matter. Anatomy will be discussed with emphasis on composition and examination of historical references. Prerequisite(s): FAA 230 or FAA 270 or permission of instructor.

FAA 480. ADVANCED PRINTMAKING (3). Explores issues particular to the current practice of Fine Arts printmaking. Focuses on extending technical proficiency and portfolio development. Prerequisite(s): FAA 290.

FAA 481E-W. PRINTMAKING STUDIO (3). Provides continued supervised studio printmaking practice beyond the advanced level. Focuses on extended portfolio development and engagement in the critical process. Prerequisite(s): FAA 480.
FAA 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN ART (1-3). Explores and pursues areas of interest. Prerequisite(s): Approval of department co-chair/art program director.

FAA 497. SENIOR ART STUDIO (3). Seminar style studio course develops the artist practice of art making of various media, critical thinking, writing, and speaking, and explores the evolution of student perspectives of historical precedents and historical tradition in art.  Prerequisite(s): One of the following: FAA 420, FAA 443, FAA 450, FAA 460, FAA 472, or FAA 480 NOTE:
Open to senior art majors and minors and senior art students who have completed two upper division studio course work in one media.

FAA 498E-W. INTERNSHIP IN ART (3). Provides practical experience and intellectual guidance in an area of art. Prerequisite(s): Approval of department co-chair/art program director and Academic Internship Program.

FAA 499. SENIOR THESIS (3). Presents a public exhibition of the student’s work, representative of their studio production. Prerequisite(s): Majors only.

FINE ARTS: CORE (FAC)

FAC 201E-W. TOPICS IN FINE ARTS CORE (3). Topics Fine
Arts Core provides an introduction to the historical, cultural, and aesthetic contexts of visual art and/or music. Emphasizes the ability to articulate and express relevant observations and ideas about the arts through objective critical thought and meaningful dialogue.

FAC 205. INTRODUCTION TO LITERACY AND ART (3). Examines artists’ work, vocabulary, and critical methods for evaluating and responding to visual arts. Visits to artists’ studios and non-profit art centers are integral as is work with children from the local Latino community. NOTE: Non-major’s only.

FAC 211. ART HISTORY: PREHISTORY TO THE PROTO- RENAISSANCE (3). Investigates major art developments from the pre-history to the proto-renaissance in western and non-western traditions. Discusses major works, figures, and world events as they relate to human artistic expression. Prerequisite(s): Majors, minors, or honors students only or permission of instructor required. Cross listing: FAHS 211. NOTE: Permission of
instructor required.

FAC 212. ART HISTORY SURVEY: RENAISSANCE TO PRESENT (3). Examines the style, content, and context of works of art from the Renaissance to the present. Cross listing: FAHS 212.

FAC 251. UNITED STATES FOLK, POP, AND JAZZ (3). Surveys various folk, popular and jazz styles cultivated in the United States from the 18th century to the present, with an emphasis on cultural diversity that contributes to ‘American’ music, manifested in cultural regionalism and cross-cultural developments. Students will identify, aurally recognize, and evaluate various cultural components and trends in vernacular music in the United States.

FAC 255C. MUSIC OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY (3). A survey of classical music in the western world in the twentieth century. Covers trends such as modality, atonality, serialism, neoclassicism, experimental music, and electronic and computer music and the social contexts surrounding these movements. NOTE: FAC 255C is a course that carries a communication focus in the course assignments, and enrollment is limited to student who took the paired/linked RCC 200 course in the fall.

FAC 256C. MUSIC IN AMERICAN CULTURE (3). Introduces music as an expression of the unique culture of the U.S.A. and develops critical methods for evaluating and responding to American music. Topics explored in this course may include popular, religious, traditional, art music or folk music of the various ethnic groups that comprise American society.

FAC 257. JAZZ IN AMERICAN CULTURE (3). Surveys jazz styles cultivated in the United States with an emphasis on cultural diversity that contributes to “American” music, manifested in cultural regionalism and cross-cultural development. Students will identify, aurally recognize, and evaluate various cultural components and trends in vernacular music in the United States.

FINE ARTS: HISTORY (FAHS)

FAHS 211. ART HISTORY: PREHISTORY TO THE PROTO- RENAISSANCE (3). Investigates major art developments from the pre-history to the proto-renaissance in western and non-western traditions. Discusses major works, figures, and world events as they relate to human artistic expression. Prerequisite(s): Majors, minors, or honors students only or permission of instructor required. Cross listing: FAC 211.

FAHS 212. ART HISTORY SURVEY: RENAISSANCE TO PRESENT (3). Examines the style, content, and context of works
of art from the Renaissance to the present. Prerequisite(s): Majors or honors students only or permission of instructor required. Cross listing: FAC 212.

FAHS 408E-W. THEMES IN ART HISTORY (3). A revolving seminar examining specialized topics in art history. NOTE: Minimum of sophomore class standing required.

FAHS 410. MODERN ART: NEO-CLASSICISM TO 1945 (3). Concentrates on issues of modernism in Western art from the late nineteenth century to approximately 1945, looking closely at how we observe, interpret, and write about art in its historical, religious, and political context. An integral part of this class will be to develop a working definition of “modernism”. Prerequisite(s): FAHS 211 or FAC 211 or FAC 201E or permission of instructor.

FAHS 415. CONTEMPORARY ART: 1945 TO THE PRESENT (3). Examines the shift in the art world from Paris to New York after World War II. Explores men and women artists whose work pursues a dialogue about the meaning of all media and whose lives are lived against the social, economic, political and cultural background of their times. Prerequisite(s): FAC 201E or FAHS
211 or HU 203.

FAHS 420. EARLY MODERN ART 1300-1800 (3). Examines the art of Europe from the proto-Renaissance to the Enlightenment with focus on the institutional and ideological shifts that lead to our modern conception of art. Topics include Renaissance, Baroque, Rococo, Neoclassicism, and Romanticism. Prerequisite(s): FAC 201E.

FAHS 430. ASIAN ART (3). Explores the artistic and cultural developments of South, Southeast, and East Asia from prehistory to present with a special emphasis on cultural and artistic
exchange among Asian cultures and the West. Prerequisite(s): FAC 201E.

FAHS 435. IMAGES OF WOMEN IN ART AND THE POPULAR MEDIA (3). Examines the visual representation of women in both art and the popular media. Emphasizes the examination of the construction of gender utilizing various theoretical models of analysis.  Prerequisite(s): FAC 201E or FAC 211 or FAC 212. Cross listing: WGS 435.

FAHS 440. AMERICAN ART: COLONIAL TO PRESENT (3). Examines American art from the pre-colonial era to the present day. Examines the role American art has played in the formation of values such as national identity, class formation, race, gender, and ethnicity. Emphasizing cultural history, considers a variety of media from painting and sculpture to films and theme parks. Prerequisite(s): FAC 201E or FAC 211 or FAC 212.

FAHS 445. HISTORY OF PHOTOGRAPHY (3). Explores the history of photography from its invention in the early 19th century to its practice as a fine art in the present time. Includes critical
and analytical readings as well as examination of photographic images in the fine arts. Prerequisite(s): FAC 201E or FAC 211or FAC 212 or FAHS 211 or FAHS 212.

FAHS 450. MEDIEVAL ART (3). Examines art from the late Roman period to the proto-renaissance. Topics include Early Christian, Byzantine, Medieval, Romanesque, and Gothic art, and architecture. Prerequisite(s): FAC 201E, or FAC 211, or FAC 212, or permission of instructor.

FAHS 453E-W. SPECIAL TOPICS IN MUSIC AND ART (3). Emphasizes the interconnectedness of art and music by stressing their similarities in style, content, and context. Prerequisite(s): FAC 201E or FAC 211 or FAC 212, Majors and minors only or permission of instructor.

FAHS 460. NEW MEXICO SANTOS TRADITION (3). Comprehensive overview of the major influences, themes, and styles in Chicano art from its emergence in the 1960's to the beginning of the 21st century. NOTE: Sophomore standing or completion of Distributive Core required.

FAHS 465. CHICANISMO/CHICANARTE (3). Comprehensive overview of the major influences, themes, and styles in Santo art form colonial era to present day. NOTE: Junior standing or completion of Distributive Core required.

FAHS 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN ART HISTORY (1-3). Explores and pursues areas of interest. Prerequisite(s): Approval
of department co-chair/art program director.

FAHS 497. SENIOR ART HISTORY THESIS RESEARCH (3). This is the first component of thesis research and writing for senior Art History Majors. In this course, students will begin researching and drafting their individual thesis in consultation with their instructor. NOTE: Majors only.

FAHS 499. SENIOR ART HISTORY THESIS (3). Provides the final step for a degree in Art History. Students write individual thesis in consultation with the program director. Prerequisite(s): Majors only. Senior standing. Permission of instructor required.


FINE ARTS: MUSIC (FAM)

FAM 202E-W. UNIVERSITY CHOIR (0-2). Students will study, prepare, and sing in performance, choral literature from the Gothic to the present.

FAM 203. BEGINNING CLASS VOICE (2). Involves basic vocal technique and music reading for non-music minors or majors with little or no prior vocal experience. Studies very easy classical or popular repertoire.

FAM 204. INTERMEDIATE CLASS VOICE (2). Continuation of FAM 203. Intermediate level vocal technique and music reading. Studies very easy classical or popular repertoire. Prerequisite(s): FAM 203 or permission of instructor required.

FAM 205. BEGINNING CLASS GUITAR (2). Introduces the guitar and music reading for music minors or majors with little or no prior guitar experience. Studies very easy classical or popular repertoire.

FAM 206. INTERMEDIATE CLASS GUITAR (2). Continuation of FAM 205. Focuses on development of music reading. Studies technical patterns and exercises. Easy classical or popular repertoire and improvisation. Prerequisite(s): FAM 205 or permission of instructor.

FAM 214E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: VIOLIN (1). Provides individual instruction in violin.

FAM 216E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: VIOLA (1). Provides individual instruction in viola.

FAM 218E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: CELLO (1). Provides individual instruction in cello.

FAM 220E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: CHAPEL CHOIR (1). Introduces students to the rich variety of Catholic liturgical choral music through preparation for and performances at weekly Masses.

FAM 221E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: FLUTE (1). Provides individual instruction in flute.

FAM 223E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: OBOE (1). Provides individual instruction in oboe.

FAM 225E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: BASSOON (1). Provides individual instruction in bassoon.

FAM 227E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: RECORDER (1). Provides individual instruction in recorder.

FAM 230E-W. COLLEGIUM MUSICUM (0-3). Performing ensemble designed to offer students a chance to explore music from the 13th through the early 18th centuries. Through the use of early instruments and voice, students will develop an understanding of musical forms, performance practices, and styles in both sacred and secular traditions. A wide variety of topics will be examined including early medieval chant, troubadour songs, sacred motets and mass movements, renaissance dances, and music composed at the European courts. Prerequisite(s): FAM
235 or permission of instructor.

FAM 235. FOUNDATIONS OF MUSIC (3). Introduces the fundamental concepts of Western music theory: notation, clefs, meter and rhythm, major and minor scales, key signatures, intervals, chords, Roman numerals, and basic composition.
FAM 236. BASIC MUSICIANSHIP (2). Designed to improve a student’s musicianship skills. Focuses on sight singing and dictation of diatonic melodies in major and minor keys (treble and bass clefs); sight reading of rhythms in simple and compound meters; and performance at the keyboard of scales, intervals, and triads.

FAM 239E-W. WORLD MUSIC ENSEMBLE (0-2). explores the music of Zimbabwe, covering a variety of styles with a focus on their rich history of marimba music. All levels of musical experience welcome.

FAM 240. BEGINNING CLASS PIANO (2). Introduces the keyboard and music reading to non-music minors or majors with little or no prior keyboard experience. Studies very easy classical or popular repertoire.

FAM 241. INTERMEDIATE CLASS PIANO (2). Members perform selections of their choice, prepare program notes, improve performance skills, join in critique, and hear new repertoire. Outside concert attendance required. Not a “how to play piano” course but “how to play better!” All levels of ability beyond beginner welcome! Prerequisite(s): FAM 240 or permission of instructor.

FAM 246E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: VOICE (1-2). Provides individual instruction in voice. Prerequisite(s): FAM 203 and FAM 204 or permission of instructor. NOTE: Participation in a voice recital required.

FAM 247E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: PIANO (1-2). Provides individual instruction in piano. Prerequisite(s): FAM 240 and FAM 241 or permission of instructor. NOTE: Participation in a piano recital required.

FAM 248E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: GUITAR (1-2). Provides individual instruction in guitar. Accommodates any level of guitar understanding of chords and chord relationships. Advanced levels explore scales and improvisation.

FAM 252E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: BANJO (1-2). Provides individual instruction in banjo.

FAM 254E-W. MUSICAL THEATER ENSEMBLE (0-3). Provides an applied opportunity for students to engage in a music production with an emphasis on music and music performance. Studies staging, choreography, lighting, costumes and other production aspects.  Culminates in a musical theater performance(s).

FAM 255E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: MANDOLIN (1-2). Provides individual instruction in mandolin.

FAM 259E-W. JAZZ ENSEMBLE (0-3). The Regis Jazz Ensemble explores the American jazz repertoire, covering a variety of styles that developed from the early 20th century to today. Ensemble is open to wind, percussion, piano, bass, guitar, and brass instruments.

FAM 260E-W. BAND (0-3). Explores quality band literature, covering a variety of styles and time periods. Ensemble is open to woodwind, brass, and percussion instruments.

FAM 261E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: CLARINET (1-2). Provides individual instruction in clarinet.

FAM 265E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: JAZZ PIANO (1-2). Provides instruction in jazz piano concepts and techniques. Includes melodic improvisation, chord voicing, accompaniment styles in both solo and ensemble settings, and playing by ear.

FAM 269E-W. CHAMBER ENSEMBLE (0-2). The Regis Chamber Ensemble explores music from1750 to today, concentrating on the wealth of literature for strings, woodwinds, and percussion.

FAM 278E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: BASS (1-2). Provides individual instruction on double bass and/or electric bass guitar.

FAM 280E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: SAXOPHONE (1-2). Provides individual instruction in saxophone.

FAM 282E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: TRUMPET (1-2). Provides individual instruction in trumpet.

FAM 284E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: TROMBONE (1-2). Provides individual instruction in trombone.

FAM 286E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: PERCUSSION (1-2) Provides individual instruction in percussion.

FAM 288E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: HARP (1-2) Provides individual instruction in harp.

FAM 294E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: COMPOSITION (1-2). Covers techniques of music composition.

FAM 402E-W. CONCERT CHOIR (0-3). Advanced choral ensemble work including more complex and challenging literature as well as on- and off-campus performance. NOTE: Audition required.

FAM 405. THEATRE AND JUSTICE WORKSHOP (3). An interdisciplinary theatre, dialogue, workshop and community project-based course in which performance itself is viewed as a mode of inquiry and a way of making the invisible visible, fostering storytelling, listening, collaboration and transformation. Prerequisite(s): COM 210. COM 380 required for Communications majors and PJ 200 required for Peace and Justice majors. Cross listing: COM 419 and PJ 495W.

FAM 409A. APPLIED VOICE: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE I (1-2). Private instruction for voice designed for students with prior vocal training and knowledge of basic music theory. Surveys repertoire from the classical period to contemporary styles. Focuses on development of technique suitable for student’s level of proficiency. Prerequisite(s): FAM 235 and FAM 236 or equivalent. Majors and minors only.

FAM 409B. APPLIED VOICE: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE II (1-2). Continuation of FAM 409A. Private instruction for voice designed for students with prior vocal training. Surveys repertoire from the classical period to contemporary styles. Focuses on development of technique suitable for student’s level of proficiency. Prerequisite(s): FAM
409A or approval of program director required.

FAM 409C. APPLIED VOICE: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE III (1-2). Continuation of FAM 409B. Private instruction for voice designed for students with prior vocal training. Focuses on two pieces from different style periods that demonstrates an upper intermediate to advanced technical proficiency. Culminates in end-of-semester student recital. Prerequisite(s): FAM 409B or approval of program director required.
FAM 409D. APPLIED VOICE: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE IV (1-2). Continuation of FAM 409C. Private instruction for the voice. Offers students with substantial prior vocal training a chance to continue private studies. Continues to develop material suitable for performance. May include a student recital. Prerequisite(s): FAM 409C or approval of program director required.

FAM 414E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: ADVANCED VIOLIN (1-2). Provides advanced individual instruction in violin. Offers opportunities for on- and off-campus performance. Prerequisite(s): FAM 214E-W or permission of instructor.

FAM 415A. APPLIED VIOLIN: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE I (1-2). Private instruction on the violin designed for students with prior string training and knowledge of basic music theory. Surveys repertoire from the classical period to contemporary styles. Focuses on development of technique
suitable for student’s level of proficiency. Prerequisite(s): FAM 235 and FAM 236. Majors and minors only.

FAM 415B. APPLIED VIOLIN: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE II (1-2). Continuation of FAM 415A. Private instruction on the violin designed for students with prior string training. Surveys repertoire from the classical period to the contemporary styles. Focuses on development of technique suitable for student’s level of proficiency. Prerequisite(s): FAM
415A or approval of program director.

FAM 415C. APPLIED VIOLIN: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE III (1-2). Continuation of FAM 415B. Private instruction on the violin designed for students with prior string training. Focuses on two pieces from different style periods that demonstrates an upper intermediate to advanced technical proficiency on the violin. Culminates in end-of-semester student recital. Prerequisite(s): FAM 415B or approval of program director required.

FAM 415D. APPLIED VIOLIN: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE IV (1-2). Continuation of FAM 415C. Private instruction on the violin. Offers students with substantial prior string training a chance to continue private studies. Continues to develop material suitable for performance. May include a student recital. Prerequisite(s): FAM 415C or approval of program director.

FAM 416E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: ADVANCED VIOLA (1-2). Provides advanced individual instruction in viola. Offers opportunities for on- and off-campus performance. Prerequisite(s): FAM 216E-W or permission of instructor.

FAM 417A. APPLIED VIOLA: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE I (1-2). Private instruction on the viola designed for students with prior string training and knowledge of basic music theory. Surveys repertoire from the classical period to contemporary styles. Focuses on development of technique
suitable for student’s level of proficiency. Prerequisite(s): FAM 235 and FAM 236. Majors and minors only.

FAM 417B. APPLIED VIOLA: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE II (1-2). Continuation of FAM 417A. Private instruction on the viola designed for students with prior string training. Surveys repertoire from the classical period to contemporary styles. Focuses on development of techniques suitable for student’s level of proficiency. Prerequisite(s): FAM 417A or approval of program director.

FAM 417C. APPLIED VIOLA: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE III (1-2). Continuation of FAM 417B. Private instruction on the viola designed for students with prior string training. Focuses on two pieces from different style periods that demonstrates an upper intermediate to advanced technical proficiency on the viola. Culminates in end-of-semester student recital. Prerequisite(s): FAM 417B or approval of program director.

FAM 417D. APPLIED VIOLA: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE IV (1-2). Continuation of FAM 417C. Private instruction on the viola. Offers students with substantial prior string training a chance to continue private studies. Continues to develop material suitable for performance. May include a student recital. Prerequisite(s): FAM 417C or approval of program director.

FAM 418E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: ADVANCED CELLO (1-2). Provides advanced individual instruction in cello. Offers opportunities for on- and off-campus performance. Prerequisite(s): FAM 218E-W or permission of instructor.

FAM 419A. APPLIED CELLO: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE I (1-2). Private instruction on the cello designed for students with prior string training and knowledge of basic music theory. Surveys repertoire from the classical period to contemporary styles. Focuses on development of technique suitable for student’s level of performance. Prerequisite(s): FAM
235 and FAM 236. Majors and minors only.

FAM 419B. APPLIED CELLO: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE II (1-2). Continuation of FAM 419A. Private instruction on the cello designed for students with prior string training. Surveys repertoire from the classical period to contemporary styles. Focuses on development of technique suitable for student’s level of proficiency. Prerequisite(s): FAM
419A or approval of program director.

FAM 419C. APPLIED CELLO: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE III (1-2). Continuation of FAM 419B. Private instruction on the cello designed for students with prior string training. Focuses on two pieces from different style periods that demonstrates an upper intermediate to advanced technical proficiency on the cello. Culminates in end-of-semester student recital. Prerequisite(s): FAM 419B or approval of program director.

FAM 419D. APPLIED CELLO: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE IV (1-2). Continuation of FAM 419C. Private instruction on the cello. Offers students with substantial prior string training a chance to continue private studies. Continues to develop material suitable for performance. May include a student recital. Prerequisite(s): FAM 419C or approval of program director.

FAM 421E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: ADVANCED FLUTE (1-2). Provides advanced individual instruction in flute. Offers opportunities for on- and off-campus performance. Prerequisite(s): FAM 221E-W or permission of instructor.

FAM 422A. APPLIED FLUTE: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE I (1-2). Private instruction on the flute designed
for students with prior woodwind training and knowledge of basic music theory. Surveys repertoire from the classical period to contemporary styles. Focuses on development of technique suitable for student’s level of proficiency. Prerequisite(s): FAM 235 and FAM 236. Majors and minors only.

FAM 422B. APPLIED FLUTE: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE II (1-2). Continuation of FAM 422A. Private instruction on the flute designed for students with prior woodwind training. Surveys repertoire from the classical period to contemporary styles. Focuses on development of technique suitable for student’s level of proficiency. Prerequisite(s): FAM
422A or approval of program director required.

FAM 422C. APPLIED FLUTE: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE III (1-2). Continuation of FAM 422B. Private instruction on the flute designed for students with prior woodwind training. Focuses on two pieces from different style periods that demonstrates an upper intermediate to advanced technical proficiency on the flute. Culminates in end-of-semester student recital. Prerequisite(s): FAM 422B or approval of program director required.

FAM 422D. APPLIED FLUTE: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE IV (1-2). Continuation of FAM 422C. Private instruction on the flute. Offers students with substantial prior woodwind training a chance to continue private studies. Continues to develop material suitable for performance. May include a student recital. Prerequisite(s): FAM 422C or approval of program director.

FAM 423E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: ADVANCED OBOE (1-2). Provides advanced individual instruction in oboe. Offers opportunities for on- and off-campus performance. Prerequisite(s): FAM 223E-W or permission of instructor.

FAM 424A. APPLIED OBOE: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE I (1-2). Private instruction on the oboe designed for students with prior woodwind training and knowledge of basic music theory. Surveys repertoire from the classical period to contemporary styles. Focuses on development of technique suitable for student’s level of proficiency. Prerequisite(s): FAM 235 and FAM 236. Majors and minors only.

FAM 424B. APPLIED OBOE: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE II (1-2). Continuation of FAM 424A. Private instruction on the oboe designed for students with prior woodwind training. Surveys repertoire from the classical period to contemporary styles. Focuses on development of technique suitable for student’s level of proficiency. Prerequisite(s): FAM
424A or approval of program director.

FAM 424C. APPLIED OBOE: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE III (1-2). Continuation of FAM 424B. Private instruction on the oboe designed for students with prior woodwind training. Focuses on two pieces from different style periods that demonstrates an upper intermediate to advanced technical proficiency on the oboe. Culminates in end-of-semester student recital. Prerequisite(s): FAM 424B or approval of program director.

FAM 424D. APPLIED OBOE: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE IV (1-2). Continuation of FAM 424C. Private instruction on the oboe. Offers students with substantial prior woodwind training a chance to continue private studies. Continues to develop material suitable for performance. May include a student recital. Prerequisite(s): FAM 424C or approval of program director.

FAM 425E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: ADVANCED BASSOON (1-2). Provides advanced individual instruction in bassoon. Offers opportunities for on- and off-campus performance. Prerequisite(s): FAM 225E-W or permission of instructor.

FAM 426A. APPLIED BASSOON: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE I (1-2). Private instruction on the bassoon designed for students with prior woodwind training and knowledge of basic music theory. Surveys repertoire from the classical period to contemporary styles. Focuses on development of technique suitable for student’s level of proficiency. Prerequisite(s): FAM 235 and FAM 236. Majors and minors only.

FAM 426B. APPLIED BASSOON: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE II (1-2). Continuation of FAM 426A. Private instruction on the bassoon designed for students with prior woodwind training. Surveys repertoire from the classical period to contemporary styles. Focuses on development of technique suitable for student’s level of proficiency. Prerequisite(s): FAM
426A or approval of program director.

FAM 426C. APPLIED BASSOON: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE III (1-2). Continuation of FAM 426B. Private instruction on the bassoon designed for student with prior woodwind training. Focuses on two pieces from different style periods that demonstrates an upper intermediate to advanced technical proficiency on the bassoon. Culminates in end-of- semester student recital. Prerequisite(s): FAM 426B or approval of program director.

FAM 426D. APPLIED BASSOON: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE IV (1-2). Continuation of FAM 426C. Private instruction on the bassoon. Offers students with substantial prior woodwind training a chance to continue private studies. Continues to develop material suitable for performance. May include a student recital. Prerequisite(s): FAM 426C or approval of program director.

FAM 427E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: ADVANCED RECORDER (1-2). Provides advanced individual instruction in recorder. Offers opportunities for on- and off-campus performance.
Prerequisite(s): FAM 227E-W or permission of instructor.

FAM 428A. APPLIED RECORDER: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE I (1-2). Private instruction on the recorder designed for students with prior woodwind training and knowledge of basic music theory. Surveys repertoire from the medieval period to contemporary styles. Focuses on development of technique suitable for student’s level of proficiency. Prerequisite(s): FAM 235 and FAM 236. Majors and minors only.

FAM 428B. APPLIED RECORDER: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE II (1-2). Continuation of FAM 428A. Private instruction on the recorder designed for students with prior woodwind training. Surveys repertoire from the medieval period to contemporary styles. Focuses on development of technique suitable for student’s level of proficiency. Prerequisite(s): FAM
428A or approval of program director.

FAM 428C. APPLIED RECORDER: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE III (1-2). Continuation of FAM 428B. Private
instruction on the recorder designed for students with prior woodwind training. Focuses on two pieces from different style periods that demonstrates an upper intermediate to advanced technical proficiency on the recorder. Culminates in end-of- semester student recital. Prerequisite(s): FAM 428B or approval of program director.

FAM 428D. APPLIED RECORDER: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE IV (1-2). Continuation of FAM 428C. Private instruction on the recorder. Offers students with substantial prior woodwind training a chance to continue private studies.
Continues to develop material suitable for performance. May include a student recital. Prerequisite(s): FAM 428C or approval of program director.

FAM 430E-W. CONCERT COLLEGIUM MUSICUM (0-3). Explores an array of literature from Gregorian Chant through the works of J.S. Bach. Advanced participants perform on- and off- campus. Prerequisite(s): FAM 230. NOTE: Audition required.

FAM 442E-W. PIANO ENSEMBLE (2). The Piano Ensemble is designed for intermediate to advanced pianists. Offers an ensemble opportunity for piano performance. May include piano duets and/or trios, quartets, quintets, with strings or winds. Prerequisite(s): FAM 247E-W or FAM 467E-W.

FAM 443A. APPLIED PIANO: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE I (1-2). Private instruction on the piano
designed for students with prior keyboard training and knowledge of basic music theory. Surveys repertoire from the classical period to contemporary styles. Focuses on development of technique suitable for student’s level of proficiency. Prerequisite(s): FAM 235 and FAM 236. Majors and minors only.

FAM 443B. APPLIED PIANO: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE II (1-2). Continuation of FAM 443A. Private instruction on the piano designed for students with prior keyboard training. Surveys repertoire from the classical period to contemporary styles. Focuses on development of technique suitable for student’s level of proficiency. Prerequisite(s): FAM
443A or approval of program director required.

FAM 443C. APPLIED PIANO: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE III (1-2). Continuation of FAM 443B. Private instruction on the piano designed for students with prior keyboard training. Focuses on two pieces from different style periods that demonstrate an upper intermediate to advanced technical proficiency on the keyboard. Culminates in end-of- semester student recital. Prerequisite(s): FAM 443B or approval of program director required.

FAM 443D. APPLIED PIANO: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE IV (1-2). Continuation of FAM 443C. Private instruction on the piano. Offers students with substantial prior keyboard training a chance to continue private studies. Continues to develop material suitable for performance. May include a student recital. Prerequisite(s); FAM 443C or approval of program director.

FAM 448E-W. GUITAR ENSEMBLE (0-2). Emphasizes styles of music, dynamics, rhythm, and harmonic structure in an acoustic ensemble. Prerequisite(s): FAM 248E or permission of instructor.

FAM 449A. APPLIED GUITAR: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE I (1-2). Private instruction on the guitar designed for students with prior fretboard training and knowledge of basic music theory. Surveys repertoire from the classical period to contemporary styles. Focuses on development of technique suitable for student’s level of proficiency. Prerequisite(s): FAM 235 and FAM 236. Majors and minors only.

FAM 449B. APPLIED GUITAR: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE II (1-2). Continuation of FAM 449A. Private instruction on the guitar designed for students with prior fretboard training. Surveys repertoire from the classical period to contemporary styles. Focuses on development of technique suitable for student’s level of proficiency. Prerequisite(s): FAM
449A or approval of program director.

FAM 449C. APPLIED GUITAR: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE III (1-2). Continuation of FAM 449B. Private instruction on the guitar designed for students with prior fretboard training. Focuses on two pieces from different style periods that demonstrates an upper intermediate to advanced technical proficiency on the guitar. Culminates in end-of-semester student recital. Prerequisite(s): FAM 449B or approval of program director.

FAM 449D. APPLIED GUITAR: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE IV (1-2). Continuation of FAM 449C. Private instruction on the guitar. Offers students with substantial prior fretboard training a chance to continue private studies. Continues to develop material suitable for performance. May include a student recital. Prerequisite(s): FAM 449C or approval of program director.

FAM 452E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: ADVANCED BANJO (1-2). Provides advanced individual instruction on the banjo. Offers opportunities for on- and off-campus performance. Prerequisite(s): FAM 252E-W or permission of instructor.

FAM 453A. APPLIED BANJO: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE I (1-2). Private instruction on the banjo
designed for students with prior fretboard training and knowledge of basic music theory. Surveys repertoire from the 18th century to contemporary styles. Focuses on development of technique suitable for student’s level of proficiency. Prerequisite(s): FAM 235 and FAM 236. Majors and minors only.

FAM 453B. APPLIED BANJO: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE II (1-2). Continuation of FAM 453A. Private instruction on the banjo designed for students with prior fretboard training. Surveys repertoire from the 18th century to contemporary styles. Focuses on development of technique suitable for student’s level of proficiency. Prerequisite(s): FAM
453A or approval of program director.

FAM 453C. APPLIED BANJO: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE III (1-2). Continuation of FAM 453B. Private instruction on the banjo designed for students with prior fretboard training. Focuses on two pieces from different style periods that demonstrates an upper intermediate to advanced technical proficiency on the banjo. Culminates in end-of-semester student recital. Prerequisite(s): FAM 453B or approval of program director.

FAM 453D. APPLIED BANJO: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE IV (1-2). Continuation of FAM 453C. Private instruction on the banjo. Offers students with substantial prior fretboard training a chance to continue private studies. Continues
to develop material suitable for performance. May include a student recital. Prerequisite(s): FAM 453C or approval of program director.

FAM 454E-W. ADVANCED MUSICAL THEATER ENSEMBLE (0-
3). Provides an advanced applied opportunity for students to engage in a music production with an emphasis on music and music performance. Studies staging, choreography, lighting, costumes, and other production aspects. Culminates in a musical theater performance(s).

FAM 455E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: ADVANCED MANDOLIN (1-2). Provides advanced individual instruction on the mandolin.

FAM 456A. APPLIED MANDOLIN: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE I (1-2). Private instruction on the mandolin designed for students with prior fret board training and knowledge of basic music theory. Surveys repertoire from the classical period to contemporary styles. Focuses on development of technique suitable for students’ level of proficiency.

FAM 456B. APPLIED MANDOLIN: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE II (1-2). Private instruction on the mandolin designed for students with prior fret board training and knowledge of basic music theory. Surveys repertoire from the classical period to contemporary styles. Focuses on development of technique suitable for students’ level of proficiency.

FAM 456C. APPLIED MANDOLIN: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE III (1-2). Private instruction on the mandolin designed for students with prior fret board training and knowledge of basic music theory. Surveys repertoire from the classical period to contemporary styles. Focuses on development of technique suitable for students’ level of proficiency.

FAM 456D. APPLIED MANDOLIN: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE IV (1-2). Private instruction on the mandolin designed for students with prior fret board training and knowledge of basic music theory. Surveys repertoire from the classical period to contemporary styles. Focuses on development of technique suitable for students’ level of proficiency.

FAM 459E-W. CONCERT JAZZ ENSEMBLE (0-3). The Regis Concert Jazz Ensemble continues to explore material covered in FAM 259 with a focus on performance practice, especially improvisation and arrangement. The ensemble is open to wind, percussion, piano, bass, guitar, and brass instruments. Prerequisite(s): FAM 259E-W.

FAM 460E-W. CONCERT BAND (0-3). Explores quality band literature, covering a variety of styles and time periods. Ensemble is open to woodwind, brass, and percussion instruments. Prerequisite(s): FAM 260.

FAM 461E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: ADVANCED CLARINET (1-2). Provides advanced individual instruction in clarinet. Offers opportunities for on- and off-campus performance. Prerequisite(s): FAM 261E-W and permission of instructor.

FAM 462A. APPLIED CLARINET: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE I (1-2). Private instruction on the clarinet designed for students with prior woodwind training and knowledge of basic music theory. Surveys repertoire from the classical period to the contemporary styles. Focuses on development of technique suitable for student’s level of proficiency. Prerequisite(s): FAM 235 and FAM 236. Majors and minors only.

FAM 462B. APPLIED CLARINET: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE II (1-2). Continuation of FAM 462A. Private instruction on the clarinet designed for students with prior woodwind training. Surveys repertoire from the classical period to contemporary styles. Focuses on development of technique suitable for student’s level of proficiency. Prerequisite(s): FAM
462A or approval of program director required.

FAM 462C. APPLIED CLARINET: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE III (1-2). Continuation of FAM 462B. Private instruction on the clarinet designed for students with prior woodwind training. Focuses on two pieces from different style periods that demonstrates an upper intermediate to advanced technical proficiency on the clarinet. Culminates in end-of- semester student recital. Prerequisite(s): FAM 462B or approval of program director required.

FAM 462D. APPLIED CLARINET: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE IV (1-2). Continuation of FAM 462C. Private instruction on the clarinet. Offers students with substantial prior woodwind training a chance to continue private studies. Continues to develop material suitable for performance. May include a student recital. Prerequisite(s): FAM 462C or approval of program director required.

FAM 465E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: ADVANCED JAZZ PIANO (1-
2). Provides advanced instruction in jazz piano concepts and techniques. Includes advanced topics in melodic improvisation, chord voicing, and reharmonization. Prerequisite(s): FAM 265E or permission of instructor.

FAM 466E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: ADVANCED VOICE (1-2). Advanced vocal instruction, including more complex and challenging literature as well as exploring opportunities for on- and off-campus performance. Prerequisite(s): FAM 246E-W and permission of instructor. NOTE: Audition required.

FAM 467E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: ADVANCED PIANO (1-2). Advanced piano instruction, including more complex and challenging literature as well as exploring opportunities for on- and off-campus performance. Prerequisite(s): FAM 247E-W and permission of instructor. NOTE: Audition required.

FAM 468E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: ADVANCED GUITAR (1-2). Advanced instruction, including more complex and challenging literature as well as exploring opportunities for on- and off- campus performance. Prerequisite(s): FAM 248E-W and permission of instructor. NOTE: Audition required.

FAM 469E-W. CONCERT CHAMBER ENSEMBLE (0-2). The Regis Concert Chamber Ensembles are performing ensembles that explore literature from 1750 with an emphasis on material that demands a high level of performance technique and mastery. Prerequisite(s): FAM 269E-W, or permission of instructor.

FAM 478E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: ADVANCED BASS (1-2). Provides advanced individual instruction in double bass and/or electric bass guitar. Offers opportunities for on- and off-campus performance. Additional Prerequisite(s): Permission of Instructor required. Prerequisite(s): FAM 278E.

FAM 480E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: ADVANCED SAXOPHONE (1-
2). Provides advanced individual instruction on the saxophone.
Offers opportunities for on- and off-campus performance. Prerequisite(s): FAM 280E-W and permission of instructor.

FAM 481A. APPLIED SAXOPHONE: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE I (1-2). Private instruction on the saxophone designed for students with prior saxophone training and knowledge of basic music theory. Focuses on development of technique suitable for student’s level of proficiency. Prerequisite(s): FAM 235 and FAM 236. Majors and minors only.

FAM 481B. APPLIED SAXOPHONE: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE II (1-2). Continuation of FAM 481A. Private instruction on the saxophone designed for students with prior saxophone training and knowledge of basic music theory. Focuses on development of technique suitable for student’s level of proficiency. Prerequisite(s): FAM 481A or approval of program director.

FAM 481C. APPLIED SAXOPHONE: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE III (1-2). Continuation of FAM 481B. Private instruction on the saxophone designed for students with prior saxophone training and knowledge of basic music theory. Focuses on two pieces from different style periods that demonstrates an upper intermediate to advanced technical proficiency on the saxophone. Culminates in end-of-semester student recital. Prerequisite(s): FAM 481B or approval of program director.

FAM 481D. APPLIED SAXOPHONE: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE IV (1-2). Continuation of FAM 481C. Private instruction on the saxophone. Offers students with substantial prior saxophone knowledge a chance to continue private studies. Continues to develop material suitable for performance. May include a student recital. Prerequisite(s): FAM 481C or approval of program director.

FAM 482E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: ADVANCED TRUMPET (1-2). Provides advanced individual instruction on the trumpet. Offers opportunities for on- and off-campus performance. Prerequisite(s): FAM 282E-W and permission of instructor.

FAM 483A. APPLIED TRUMPET: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE I (1-2). Private instruction on the trumpet designed for students with prior trumpet training and knowledge of basic music theory. Focuses on development of technique
suitable for student’s level of proficiency. Prerequisite(s): FAM 235 and FAM 236. Majors and minors only.

FAM 483B. APPLIED TRUMPET: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE II (1-2). Continuation of FAM 483A. Private instruction on the trumpet designed for students with prior trumpet training and knowledge of basic music theory. Focuses on development of technique suitable for student’s level of proficiency. Prerequisite(s): FAM 483A or approval of program director.

FAM 483C. APPLIED TRUMPET: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE III (1-2). Continuation of FAM 483B. Private instruction on the trumpet designed for students with prior trumpet training and knowledge of basic music theory. Focuses on two pieces from different style periods that demonstrates an
upper intermediate to advanced technical proficiency on the trumpet. Culminates in end-of-semester student recital. Prerequisite(s): FAM 483B or approval of program director.

FAM 483D. APPLIED TRUMPET: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE IV (1-2). Continuation of FAM 483C. Private instruction on the trumpet. Offers students with substantial prior trumpet knowledge a chance to continue private studies. Continues to develop material suitable for performance. May include a student recital. Prerequisite(s): FAM 483C or approval of program director.

FAM 484E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: ADVANCED TROMBONE (1-
2). Provides advanced individual instruction on the trombone. Offers opportunities for on- and off-campus performance. Prerequisite(s): FAM 284E-W and permission of instructor.

FAM 485A. APPLIED TROMBONE: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE I (1-2). Private instruction on the trombone designed for students with prior trombone training and knowledge of basic music theory. Focuses on development of technique suitable for student’s level of proficiency. Prerequisite(s): FAM 235 and FAM 236. Majors and minors only.

FAM 485B. APPLIED TROMBONE: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE II (1-2). Continuation of FAM 485A. Private instruction on the trombone designed for students with prior trombone training and knowledge of basic music theory. Focuses on development of technique suitable for student’s level of proficiency. Prerequisite(s): FAM 485A or approval of program director.

FAM 485C. APPLIED TROMBONE: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE III (1-2). Continuation of FAM 485B. Private instruction on the trombone designed for students with prior trombone training and knowledge of basic music theory. Focuses on two pieces from different style periods that demonstrates an upper intermediate to advanced technical proficiency on the trombone. Culminates in end-of-semester student recital. Prerequisite(s): FAM 485B or approval of program director.

FAM 485D. APPLIED TROMBONE: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE IV (1-2). Continuation of FAM 485C. Private instruction on the trombone. Offers students with substantial prior trombone knowledge a chance to continue private studies. Continues to develop material suitable for performance. May include a student recital. Prerequisite(s): FAM 485C or approval of program director.

FAM 486E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: ADVANCED PERCUSSION (1-
2). Provides advanced individual instruction in percussion. Offers opportunities for on- and off-campus performance. Prerequisite(s): FAM 286E or permission of instructor.

FAM 487A. APPLIED PERCUSSION: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE I (1-2). Private instruction in percussion designed for students with prior percussion training and knowledge of basic music theory. Surveys repertoire from the classical period to contemporary styles. Focuses on development of technique suitable for students' level of proficiency. Prerequisite(s): FAM 235 and FAM 236.

FAM 487B. APPLIED PERCUSSION: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE II (1-2). Continuation of FAM 487A. Private instruction in percussion designed for students with prior percussion training and knowledge of basic music theory. Surveys repertoire from the classical period to contemporary styles. Focuses on development of technique suitable for students' level of proficiency. Prerequisite(s): FAM 487A.
FAM 487C. APPLIED PERCUSSION: TECHNIQUES AND PERFORMANCE III (1-2). Continuation of FAM 487B. Private instruction in percussion for students with prior percussion training. Focuses on two pieces from different style period that demonstrate an upper-intermediate to advanced technical proficiency in percussion. Culminates in end-of-semester student recital. Prerequisite(s): FAM 487B.

FAM 487D. APPLIED PERCUSSION: TECHNIQUEST AND PERFORMANCE IV (1-2). Continuation of FAM 487C. Private instruction in percussion. Offers students with substantial percussion training a chance to continue private studies. Continues to develop material suitable for performance. May include a student recital. Prerequisite(s): FAM 487C.

FAM 488E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: ADVANCED HARP (1-2). Provides advanced individual instruction in harp. Offers opportunities for on- and off-campus performance. Prerequisite(s): FAM 288E-W or permission of instructor.

FAM 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN MUSIC (1-3). Explores area of special interest. Prerequisite(s): Approval of department
co-chair/music department director.

FAM 494E-W. APPLIED MUSIC: ADVANCED COMPOSITION (1-2). Advanced private music composition lessons. Prerequisite(s): FAM 294.

FAM 498E-W. INTERNSHIP IN MUSIC (3). Provides practical experience and intellectual guidance in an area of music. Prerequisite(s): Approval of department co-chair/music department director and director of Academic Internship Program.

FAM 499. SENIOR THESIS: MUSIC IN THE ARTS (3). Offers sequence of practical activities covering topics such as professional music internships, archival research, scholarly collaboration, public musicology, and music entrepreneurship. Prerequisite(s): Majors only. Senior standing.

FINE ARTS: MUSIC HISTORY (FAMH)

FAMH 450E-W. WORLD MUSIC LITERATURE (3). Studies musical practices of diverse cultures, including instrumental and vocal styles, dance, drama, and ceremonies, with an emphasis on research. Prerequisite(s): FAM 235 and FAM 236 or permission of instructor.

FAMH 451. HISTORY OF U.S. FOLK, POP, AND JAZZ (3). Surveys various folk, popular, and jazz styles cultivated in the United States from the 18th century to the present. Research project will explore a topic in American Music. Prerequisite(s): FAM 235 and FAM 236 or permission of instructor.

FAMH 452. EUROPEAN MUSIC LITERATURE (3). Examines Western European art music traditions, through a historical survey of the style, structure, and function of music. Students discover the rich variety of Western European art music while developing a working vocabulary and understanding of musical
terms. Improves listening skills and advances the ability of students to articulate relevant observations about music through independent, objective, and critical musical thought.
Prerequisite(s): FAM 235 and FAM 236 or permission of instructor.


FAMH 453E-W. TOPICS IN MUSIC AND ART (3). Emphasizes the interconnectedness of art and music by stressing their similarities in style, content, and context. Prerequisite(s): FAM 235 and FAM 236. Majors and minors only. Permission of instructor required.

FAMH 454. HISTORY AND PERFORMANCE OF AMERICAN MUSICAL THEATER (3). Provides students with a historical and cultural background to the major developments of American Musical Theatre. Prerequisite(s): FAM 235 and FAM 236 or permission of instructor required.

FAMH 455E-W. TOPICS IN MUSIC HISTORY (3). Provides an in- depth examination of musical styles and genres, as well as the cultural and historical content in which music was created in each area of study. Emphasizes writing, research, and musical analysis that draws on each student’s earlier experiences and training in music theory and history. Prerequisite(s): FAMH 452.

FAMH 457. WOMEN IN MUSIC (3). Using the lenses of gender studies and feminist criticism, this course will examine the historically marginalized roles of women in Western music as composers and performers. NOTE: Sophomore standing or completion of Distributive Core required.

FINE ARTS: MUSIC RECITAL (FAMR)

FAMR 200A/B. FRESHMAN RECITAL HOUR A/B (0). Required for all music majors and minors each semester. Promotes a culture of concert attendance for student and faculty recitals and guest artists. Tracks student attendance for on- and off-campus music events. Prerequisite(s): Majors and minors only. Pass/No Pass grading only.

FAMR 300A/B. SOPHOMORE RECITAL HOUR A/B (0). Required for all music majors and minors each semester. Promotes a
culture of concert attendance for student and faculty recitals and guest artists. Tracks student attendance for on- and off-campus music events. Prerequisite(s): Majors and minors only. Pass/No Pass grading only.

FAMR 400A/B. JUNIOR RECITAL HOUR A/B (0). Required for all music majors and minors each semester. Promotes a culture of concert attendance for student and faculty recitals and guest artists. Tracks student attendance for on- and off-campus music events. Prerequisite(s): Majors and minors only. Pass/No Pass grading only.

FAMR 402. MUSIC MINOR RECITAL (0). All music minors perform at least a 20-minute recital that demonstrates ability to perform in several style periods. Music minor recitals are typically given in conjunction with the third semester of techniques and performance. NOTE: Presentation of music minor recital requires successful “hearing” at least one month before recital date. Pass/No Pass grading only.

FAMR 403. JUNIOR RECITAL (0). All music majors with an emphasis in performance are required to perform at least a 30- minute recital that demonstrates the student’s ability to perform in three style periods. The Junior Recital is typically given in the junior year in conjunction with the second semester of Techniques and Performance. Prerequisite(s): Majors only. Junior standing. Pass/No Pass grading only.
FAMR 404. SENIOR RECITAL (0). All music majors with an emphasis in performance are required to perform a Senior Recital in their senior year; at least 45 minutes of music that
demonstrates a wide variety of musical styles and ability to memorize a portion or all of the music is expected. The Senior Recital is typically given in conjunction with the fourth semester of Techniques and Performance. Prerequisite(s): Majors only. Senior standing. Pass/No Pass grading only.

FAMR 450A/B. SENIOR RECITAL HOUR A/B (0). Required for all music majors and minors each semester. Promotes a culture of concert attendance for student and faculty recitals and guest artists. Tracks student attendance for on- and off-campus music events. Prerequisite(s): Majors and minors only. Pass/No Pass grading only.

FINE ARTS: MUSIC THEORY/TECHNOLOGY (FAMT)

FAMT 200. MUSIC THEORY I (3). Students gain fluency in four- part writing and voice leading principles in four-voice textures using root position and inverted triads and seventh chords; analysis of music literature; the identification and use of non- chord tones; the identification of various forms in music; and other in-depth theoretical concepts. Prerequisite(s): FAM 235 or permission of instructor.

FAMT 201. AURAL SKILLS I (2). Students gain fluency in sight singing and dictation of diatonic melodies; sight reading rhythms using subdivision and syncopation in simple and compound meters; and performance at the keyboard of various diatonic chord progressions. Prerequisite(s): FAM 236 or permission of instructor.

FAMT 230. INTRODUCTION TO MUSIC TECHNOLOGY (3). Introduces the fundamental techniques of recording, generating, and editing sounds using a digital audio workstation. Topics include the physics of sound, microphones, speakers, mixing, mastering, and MIDI.

FAMT 300. MUSIC THEORY II (3). A continuation of concepts and materials learned in Music Theory I. Emphasizes chromatic harmony, various types of modulation, more complex forms, and extended tonality. Co-requisite: FAMT 200. Prerequisite(s): FAMT
201 or permission of instructor

FAMT 301. AURAL SKILLS II (3). A continuation of materials learned in Aural Skills I. Students gain fluency in sight singing and dictation of chromatic melodies, sight reading rhythms with changing and unequal meters, and performance at the keyboard of more complex chord progressions. Prerequisite(s): FAMT 201 or permission of instructor.

FAMT 350. MUSIC THEORY III (3). A continuation of Music Theory II.  Study structures and systems used in music throughout the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries, including extended tonality, modality, set theory and serialism, contemporary
rhythmic and metrical techniques, and other contemporary compositional trends. Includes composition. Co-requisite: FAMT
301. Prerequisite(s): FAMT 300 or permission of instructor.

FAMT 400. ORCHESTRATION, ARRANGING, AND CONDUCTING (3). Study of instruments in band and orchestra regarding range, color, quality, and technical restriction as applied to scoring for solo and ensemble performance. Fundamental study of conducting, score reading, and arranging skills applicable to instrumental and choral ensembles. Prerequisite(s):   FAMT 200
or permission of instructor

FAMT 401. COUNTERPOINT (3). Studies 16th century and 18th century counterpoints. Evaluation materials include both analysis and composition. Prerequisite(s): FAMT 200 or permission of instructor.

FAMT 431. MUSIC TECHNOLOGY FOR TODAY’S WORLD (3). Teaches recording techniques: generating, and editing sounds
using a digital audio workstation and the presentation of music content on the Internet. Topics include the physics of sound, microphones, speakers, mixing, mastering, MIDI, and live and studio production. Contains significant hands-on component in a recording studio.

FAMT 432. RECORDING ARTS/ LIVE PRODUCTION I (3). Students master basic recording arts; sound, acoustics & design; microphones; digital audio and digital audio workstations; ProTools; and operation of the Regis Recording Studio & Claver Recital Hall.

FAMT 442. RECORDING ARTS/ LIVE PRODUCTION II (3). Continuation of FAMT 432 (Live and Studio Digital Recording) where more advanced recording arts students will continue to hone their recording, mixing, promotion, and performance skills in the recording arts. Prerequisite(s): FAMT 432.

GEOLOGY (GE)

GE 204E-W. TOPICS IN GEOLOGY (3). Develops course content around a central geological theme on selected topics chosen by the instructor. Co-requisite: GE 205E-W. NOTE: This course has been approved to satisfy the core natural science with laboratory requirement when taken with GE 205E-W.

GE 205E-W. TOPICS IN GEOLOGY LABORATORY (1). Involves laboratory exercises accompanying and reinforcing lecture topics. Co-requisite: GE 204E-W.

GE 208. INTRODUCTION TO GEOLOGY (3). Introduces students to natural science through study of the Earth. Develops student knowledge of geology; notably Earth materials, Earth history, topography, tectonics, fossil fuels, groundwater, and soils. Highlights social and ethical issues. NOTE: Designed primarily for Environmental Studies students and students fulfilling the natural science core requirement. This course has been approved to satisfy the core natural science with laboratory requirement when taken with GE 209. Co-requisite: GE 209.

GE 209. INTRODUCTION TO GEOLOGY LABORATORY (1). Introduces students to scientific inquiry through participation in field and laboratory activities. Involves exercises reinforcing lecture content. Co-requisite: GE 208.

GE 481E-W. SPECIAL TOPICS IN GEOLOGY (1-4). Explores selected topics in the field of Earth science. Course format varies according to topic selected. Prerequisite(s): Completion of the natural science core requirement.  NOTE: Certain topics may include a laboratory.
HISTORY (HS)

HS 200. SUSTAINABILITY AND COLLAPSE IN WORLD HISTORY (3). Takes an evidence-based, case study, theoretical and integrative approach to the challenge of sustainability across world history.  Draws on disciplines of history, politics, and international studies. Cross listing: POL 200.

HS 201. ORIGINS AND CHALENGES OF THE MODERN WORLD (3).  Takes an evidence based, case study, theoretical, and integrative approach to underlying origins and present challenges of the modern world. Draws on disciplines of history, politics, and international studies. Cross-listing(s): POL 201.

HS 213. EUROPE TO 1789 (3). Studies the evolution of Europe from Greece/Rome through Age of Absolutism. Includes major themes on the formation of the great religions, which have influenced the West, Classical culture, the Middle Ages, the Renaissance, the Reformation, and the Wars of Religion.

HS 214.  EUROPE SINCE 1789 (3). Traces the evolution of modern Europe, and those events and institutions that have had a decisive influence on modern Western culture. Includes major themes on the Enlightenment, the French Revolution, the great wars of the 20th century and the ideologies of the modern world.

HS 223. HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES TO 1865 (3). Surveys the development of United States from settler colonial origins through revolution, slavery and the Civil War.

HS 224/224C. HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES SINCE 1865 (3). Studies the evolution of modern industrial United States from the end of the Civil War to the present. HS 224C is a course that carries a communication focus in the course assignments, and enrollment is limited to student who took the paired/linked RCC
200 course in the fall.

HS 226. HISTORY OF THE AMERICAN WEST (3) Surveys the major political, social, environmental and cultural changes of the trans-Mississippi American West, from pre-Columbian times to the late 20th Century.

HS 231. WORLD HISTORY TO 1500 (3). Investigates the roots of the modern world through the origins and evolution of the major world cultures and civilizations, the Middle East, India,
China and the Americas, through classical civilizations and Europe.

HS 232. WORLD HISTORY SINCE 1500 (3). An introduction that focuses on how millennia-old, multi-cultural, land-based empires became colonies of newly created national trans-oceanic empires based in Northwest Europe.

HS 238. THE MIDDLE EAST TO 1800 (3). Examines the political, economic, religious and social history of the Middle East from the rise of Islam through the fall of the Islamic empires: the Ottomans, Safavids, and Mughals.

HS 239.  THE MIDDLE EAST SINCE 1800 (3). Examines the political, economic, religious and social history of the Modern Middle East with a special emphasis on the Arab-Israeli conflict.

HS 242C. THE ISRAEL-PALESTINE CONFLICT (3). Seeks to understand the multiple facets of the Israel-Palestine conflict which is one of the most complicated and controversial conflicts affecting the Middle East and the world today. NOTE: Communication-intensive course. Enrollment is limited to students who took RCC 200 in the Fall.

HS 250.  AFRICA TO 1800 (3). Examines the power, complexity and sophistication of pre-colonial African kingdoms and empires while investigating Africans’ roles in making the modern world. Topics include globalization, innovation, slavery and the growth of racial thought.

HS 251. AFRICA SINCE 1800 (3). Examines the political, economic, religious and social history of Modern Africa with emphases on complexity, diversity, global interactions and African voices. Topics include pre-colonial states, imperialism, decolonization, and post-colonial challenges and prospects.

HS 253. PREMODERN EAST ASIA (3). Surveys the history of East Asia (China, Japan, and Korea) from earliest times to the arrival of Western imperialism.

HS 254/254C. MODERN EAST ASIA (3). Provides an overview of East Asia (China, Japan, and Korea) during modern times, emphasizing cultural developments, modern institutions, increased trade, industrialization, imperialistic intrusions, destructive
warfare, and burgeoning population. HS 254C enrollment is limited to students who completed linked RCC course in the fall.

HS 255/255C. DEMOCRACY AND DEVELOPMENT IN TAIWAN: HISTORY AND POLITICS IN A GLOBAL POWERHOUSE (3). Explores the forces that have shaped contemporary Taiwan through an interdisciplinary approach that places Taiwan’s development in historical perspective as part of larger developments in East Asia and the world. Cross-listing: POL 255.

HS 260. SURVEY OF LATIN AMERICA TO 1826 (3). Draws on primary and secondary materials to survey and interpret cultural, political, and historical developments up to the colonial period of the early 19th century.

HS 261. SURVEY OF LATIN AMERICA SINCE 1826 (3). Draws on primary and secondary materials to survey and interpret cultural, political, and historical developments from the colonial period and revolutionary movements, to 20th Century strong states and Dirty Wars, and the effect of North American and globalist forces.

HS 412. IMMIGRATION IN AMERICAN HISTORY (3). Examines the history of immigration into the United States from the early
19th century to the present. Explores federal policies, public debates surrounding the issue of immigration, and the social, economic, political consequences of immigration and the historical experiences of immigrants. Cross listing: PJ 412.

HS 413. THE POLITICS OF MASS INCARCERATION (3). The United States make up almost 5% of the global population, and comprises 25% of the world’s prison population. This course investigates the reasons explaining this exceptional feature of American politics, and explores proposals for transforming it. Cross listing(s): PJ 411 and POL 416.

HS 425. THE CIVIL WAR AND GILDED AGE AMERICA (3). Examines 19th century America, focusing on the roots of the American Civil War and the dazzling changes of the Gilded Age (1789-1900).
HS 426. AMERICA DURING THE JAZZ AGE (3). Examines the social, cultural, political, and economic changes of the first three decades of 20th century America – focusing on progressive reform, World War I and the “Roaring 20s”.

HS 427. THE UNITED STATES AND THE WORLD WARS (3). Examines the history of the United State in the World Wars of the 20th century, focusing on the political, economic, and social changes between 1914 and 1945.

HS 428. UNITED STATES HISTORY, 1945 TO THE PRESENT (3). Studies recent events and trends in the United States since the end of World War II.

HS 429. UNITED STATES IN THE 1960’S AND 70’S (3). Studies the United States from the election of John F. Kennedy to the Reagan Revolution, examining politics, culture and society.

HS 430. HISTORY OF COLORADO (3). Surveys Indian, Spanish, French, and United States influences; the impact of traders, trappers, miners, cattlemen and farmers; the creation and organization of the Territory; the movement for statehood and the problems of a rapidly growing commonwealth.

HS 433. HISTORY OF THE CARIBBEAN AND THE ATLANTIC WORLD (3). Examines the various social, cultural, economic, and political contacts and interactions that shaped the culture of the Atlantic World, focusing on Africans, Native Americans, and Europeans.

HS 437. THE WEST IN UNITED STATES HISTORY (3). Includes an inquiry into the influence of the West on United States history, the settlement of the western regions, problems of frontier transportation and finance, and the organization of new government entities.

HS 441. THE CULTURE AND POLITICS OF PUBLIC MEMORY (3). Examines the constructed nature of our national memories by posing questions regarding the authenticity of memorial representations, the ownership of public histories, and the rhetorical functions memory texts serve for society. Prerequisite(s): COM 380. Cross-listing: COM 456 and PJ 416E.

HS 442. ORAL HISTORY; THEORY AND METHODS (3). Examines the theory and methods of collecting and using individual narratives to create synthesized historical accounts. Students learn the scholarly skills necessary to implement best practices in oral history documentation and production. Prerequisite(s): Sophomore standing.

HS 451.  PREMODERN JAPAN (3). Surveys Japanese historical development to the 17th century, focusing on change in social, economic, political, and cultural structures and experiences that created ‘traditional” Japan.

HS 452.  MODERN JAPAN (3). Explores the transformation of Japan from a semi-feudal system to its rise as a world economic power, focusing on the trajectory of its conflict and cooperation with the West in the 19th and 20th centuries.

HS 453.  PREMODERN CHINA (3). Examines the foundational social, cultural, political, and economic forces that shaped the formation and transformation of China as a civilization and empire and the role played by non-Chinese in the creation of China.

HS 454.  MODERN CHINA (3). Investigates the long-term divergence of state and society beginning in the imperial period which shaped the development of late imperial and modern Chinese society, culture, and politics, particularly during the age of Western imperialism.

HS 455. STORIES FROM WARTIME (3). Encourages students to critically examine modern conflict and explore the variety of ways those affected by conflict have sought to find meaning in their experience. NOTE: Junior standing or permission of instructor. Cross-listing: PJ 451P and POL 455.

HS 458. THE HISTORY OF CHINESE FOOD (3). Explores the role that Chinese cuisine has played in the development of society, culture, and identity in the United States over the past
150 years among Asian-American (especially Chinese-American) and European-American communities. NOTE: Sophomore standing required.

HS 464. 19TH CENTURY EUROPE, 1789-1914 (3). Studies the great age of European dynamism emphasizing political and economic events. Includes the French Revolution,
industrialization, the rise of the working class, Marxism, unification of Italy and Germany, nationalism, the New Imperialism and the origins of World War I. Prerequisite(s): Junior standing.

HS 465. EUROPE FROM 1914 T0 1945 (3). Studies the transformation of Europe from World War I emphasizing military, economic, political, and ideological developments. Includes World War I, Versailles, the rise of totalitarianism, World War II, the collapse of the European empires and the loss of European preeminence.

HS 476. HUMAN RIGHTS AND HUMANITARIANISM IN AFRICA AND THE MIDDLE EAST (3). Examines the history of the global human rights movement, and humanitarianism in Africa and the Middle East over the last 150 years. Case studies will focus on aid, refugees, and minority and women’s rights. Cross- listing: PJ 451S.

HS 477. REVOLUTION IN THE MIDDLE EAST (3). Explores the complex nature of revolution in the Middle East, particularly the Arab world, by examining a number of revolutionary movements from the late 1800s to the Arab uprisings of 2011-2012. Cross listing: PJ 477.

HS 478. INTER-RELIGIOUS RELATIONS IN THE MIDDLE EAST (3). Examines the long history of inter-religious relationships among the major religions of the region and their sects, including Judaism, Zoroastrianism, Christianity, and Islam, from the rise of Christianity to the present. Cross listing: RT 430E.

HS 480. RELIGION AND POLITICS IN MODERN AFRICA (3). Examines the intersection of faith and politics in Africa since 1830 by focusing on the complex relationships between African faiths (Islam, Christianity, and African traditional religions) and colonialism, nationalism, apartheid, democracy and terrorism. Cross listing: RT 430F.

HS 481. HISTORY OF CHRISTIANITY IN AFRICA (3). Explores the history of Christianity in the African continent beginning with Africa’s contribution to the formation of the faith up until the present, while discussing issues of African spirituality, theology, and social justice. Cross listing: RC 430G.

HS 482. THE INDIAN OCEAN WORLD (3). Examines the long history of interconnections between the people and cultures surrounding the Indian Ocean. Topics include: piracy, migration,
slavery, intellectual and religious exchange, maritime technology, commerce, imperialism, decolonization and the Non-Aligned Movement.

HS 484E-W. TOPICS IN HISTORY: TOPICAL/THEMATIC (3). Provides and in-depth analysis of topics or themes in history. Content varies from year to year. NOTE: Junior standing or permission of instructor.

HS 485E-W. TOPICS IN HISTORY: NATIONAL/REGIONAL (3). Provides and in-depth analysis of a significant national or regional topic. Content varies from year to year. NOTE: Junior standing or permission of instructor.

HS 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN HISTORY (1-3). Offers an opportunity for independent exploration of areas of interest under the direction of a department member. Prerequisite(s): Approval of department chair.

HS 494. RESEARCH APPRENTICESHIP (3). Offers students the opportunity to develop and hone their historical research skills by assisting in the supervising faculty member's research project as directed. NOTE: Senior standing and/or permission of instructor.

HS 498E-W. INTERNSHIP IN HISTORY (3). Provides practical experience in applied history. Students are placed according to their interest at national archives, museums, historical societies, public interest groups, nonprofit organizations, international businesses, at the local, regional, national, or international level. Includes research work in history with the Department’s faculty. Prerequisite(s): Approval of department chair and director of Academic Internship Program. NOTE: 10-20 hours per week required.

HS 499A. CAPSTONE I: THEORY AND METHODS (3). Explores historical theory and method as well as the philosophy and history of the discipline. Throughout the semester students will put these ideas and skills to work in preparation for the senior thesis. NOTE: Senior standing or permission of instructor.

HS 499B. CAPSTONE II: THE SENIOR THESIS (3). The second of two capstones, the course draws on historical theory and
methods from History 499A. Students meet collectively and work independently to complete a summative research project with advising from History faculty. NOTE: Senior standing or permission of instructor.


RCC 200H. HONORS WRITING SEMINAR: THE IDEA OF A UNIVERSITY (3). As the foundational offering in a five-semester honors sequence, this course opens a dialogue about what constitutes a university education. It is a first in a series of seminars designed to bring the traditions of classical learning into fruitful engagement with newer developments in science and the humanities. Examines the human heart and mind, the timeless struggle between reason and emotion, situating the conversation within an ongoing dialog on the nature of education and a university’s role in fostering it. NOTE: Honors students only.

RCC 400H. HONORS SEMINAR: TRADITION AND INNOVATION (3). As the second course in a series of five honors seminars, Tradition and Innovation is rooted in questions regarding the creative tension between our formative relationships to the past and the ways in which we seek to create novel futures, between tradition and innovation. It involves an integrative blend of literature, philosophy, history, science, religion, film, art, and music. Prerequisite(s): RCC 200H or permission of instructor. NOTE: Honors students only.

RCC 410H. HONORS SEMINAR: CHAOS AND ORDER (3). As the third course in a five-semester honors sequence, this course invites students to consider the human person in relation to both society and the natural world. Uses a historically recursive approach, to investigate the scientific methods as modes of understanding our world. Prerequisite(s): RCC 200H & RCC
400H or permission of instructor. NOTE: Honors students only.

RCC 420H. HONORS SEMINAR: JUSTICE FOR ALL (3). As the fourth course in a five-semester honors core sequence, this team- taught interdisciplinary course examines the implications of
“justice for all” in a global context. The course examines historical and contemporary notions of peace and justice as it cultivates an international perspective on fundamental questions of peace, security, and justice. Prerequisite(s): RCC 410H or permission of instructor. NOTE: Honors students only.

RCC 430H. HONORS SEMINAR: MAGIS AND THE SEARCH FOR MEANING (3). Explores the Jesuit concept of magis in relation to the fundamental human quest for meaning. Drawing upon a variety of personal and literary narratives that seek to come to terms with the central question animating the Regis core experience, “How ought we to live?”, this historically recursive and interdisciplinary course will end with a profound reflection on what it means to be in our time. Prerequisite(s): RCC 420H or permission of instructor. NOTE: Honors students only.

RCC 450A/B. ARRUPE SCIENCE MENTORSHIP (0-1). Students will support Arrupe Jesuit High School seniors complete their Science Capstone projects. Regis students needn’t be science majors to participate. Most of the mentorship will occur at Arrupe Jesuit High School.

RCC 490E-W. INTEGRATIVE CORE (3). Focuses around the themes of Diversity & Cultural Tradition, Global Environmental Awareness, Justice & the Common Good, or Search for Meaning. Deliberately value-laden and emphasizes Jesuit values. Examines relevant fundamental issues and the student's role in an increasingly interconnected world. Prerequisite(s): Junior standing or completion of Distributive Core required.

HONORS (HO)

HO 440A. CULTURE OF SELF AND OTHER (1). Contextualizes upcoming international experiences within a scholarly framework in order to set intentions for meaningful experiences abroad and in life. Develops critical analysis tools to engage in meaningful intercultural interactions as members of local and global communities. NOTE: Honors Students only. HO 440 A, B, and C, are mandatory for study abroad participants and in conjunction with a Regis-sponsored study abroad program, satisfy the RCC
420H requirement. HO 440A is completed prior to the study abroad semester, HO 440B is completed during the study abroad semester, and HO 440C is completed following the study abroad semester.
HO 440B. INTERCULTURAL REFLECTION (0-2). Promotes students' intercultural growth and personal discernment through a series of semi-guided intercultural reflection essays. NOTE: Honors Students only. HO 440 A, B, and C, are mandatory for study abroad participants and in conjunction with a Regis- sponsored study abroad program, satisfy the HO 420H requirement.

HO 440C. CULTURE AND MEANING (1). Fosters intercultural development and personal discernment by helping students process, contextualize, and articulate insights about culture, identity, power, meaning, and well-being gained through individual international experiences. NOTE: Honors Students only. HO 440
A, B, and C, are mandatory for study abroad participants and in conjunction with a Regis-sponsored study abroad program, satisfy the RCC 420H requirement.

HO 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN HONORS (1-3). Offers an opportunity to explore an idea, issue, problem, or project from an interdisciplinary perspective with the consent and collaboration of an instructor. Prerequisite(s): Approval of director of the Honors Program.

HO 493A. HONORS THESIS RESEARCH SEMINAR A (0-2). Focuses on the application of research methodology appropriate to the student’s thesis topic. Students conduct research, prepare an annotated bibliography, complete a literature review, and present a specific proposal for their thesis. Prerequisite(s): Junior standing.

HO 493B. HONORS THESIS RESEARCH SEMINAR B (0-2). A continuation of HO 493A. Focuses on the application of research methodology appropriate to the student’s thesis topic. Students conduct research and complete a draft of their thesis. Prerequisite(s): Senior standing.

HO 499. HONORS THESIS (0-2). Students prepare the honors thesis produced in HO 493A and HO 493B for presentation in a defense or symposium. Students submit final drafts of the thesis, prepare the document for publication in the library archives, and make a public presentation of their work. Prerequisite(s): HO
493A and HO 493B. Senior standing.

HONORS DISTRIBUIVE CORE

BL 259H. HONORS ORGANISMIC BIOLOGY LABORATORY (1). Introduces study design, primary literature, data interpretation, and written presentation of results. Reinforces lecture content and explores broader themes of history and philosophy of biology. Includes fieldwork and one dissection. NOTE: One three hour laboratory per week. Honors students only, or permission of instructor. Co-requisite(s): BL 258 except for students with AP high school credit for BL 258.

BL 261H. HONORS MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOLOGY LABORATORY (1). Introduces study design, primary literature, data interpretation, and oral presentation of results. Reinforces lecture content and explores broader themes of history and philosophy of biology. Includes work with recombinant DNA. NOTE: One three hour lab per week. Honors students only or permission of instructor. Co-requisite(s): BL 260 excepts for student with AP credit for BL 260.

CH 220. Honors Principle of Chemistry (4). An honors-level course for students with strong skills in math and/or chemistry. Topics are similar to CH 210, but with more in-depth coverage. Intended for students considering a major in chemistry, biochemistry or pre-medicine. Co-requisite: CH 221. NOTE: Minimum score of 28 on the ACT math required for enrollment. Honors students only or permission of instructor.

CH 221. Honors Principles of Chemistry Laboratory (1). Inquiry based examination of fundamental chemical concepts in context of their impact on research, humanity and the environment using modern laboratory techniques and instrumentation. Co-requisite: CH 220. NOTE: Minimum score of 28 on the ACT math required for enrollment. Honors students only or permission of instructor.

COM 250H. HONORS SPEAKING TO MAKE A DIFFERENCE (3). Develops engaged, competent, confident communicators, preparing speakers to connect with small and large, live and remote audiences. Encourages critical listening, writing, rehearsing, revising and speaking skills relevant to everyday, civic, professional and family/social life.  NOTE: Honors students only.

EC 200H. ECONOMICS FOR RESPONSIBLE CITIZENSHIP (3). Explores the interdisciplinary nature and historical evolution of economic theory and policy with particular emphasis on its impact on attitudes, politics, society, and the environment. Highlights the pressing problems of inequality and climate change as they relate to economics. Provides students with basic quantitative,
economic, and financial literacy.

EN 300H. LITERARY ANALYSIS (3). Introduces and develops advanced approaches to thinking and writing about literature. Explores the fundamentals of poetry, drama, and narrative form, while seeking a more complex understanding of literary analysis and evaluation. Prerequisite(s): RCC 200. NOTE: Majors only.

PL 270H. HONORS PHILOSOPHICAL EXPLORATIONS (3). An introductory course in philosophy which acquaints students with the range of questions and issues raised in both philosophical tradition and contemporary thought. Engages students in a critical analysis and evaluation of different philosophical positions, including their own. NOTE: Honors Students only.

PSY 250H. HONORS GENERAL PSYCHOLOGY (3). Introduction to the scientific study of behavior and mental processes, including the biological basis of behavior, sensation/perception, learning, memory, cognition, language, motivation, emotion, intelligence, personality, social behavior, psychological disorders, and therapy. Addresses the applicability
of psychology to understanding societal problems. NOTE: Honors
Students only.

RT 201H. HONORS RELIGION AND THE HUMAN QUEST (3). Cultivates curiosity about what it means to be human in the fact
of the sacred, the ultimate, the mystery of existence, and how different people historically have understood this. Develops and enhances ability to evaluate critically various approaches to existential and social questions about meaning, suffering, goodness, and ultimacy. NOTE: Honors students only.

RT 411H. HONORS RELIGIOUS STUDIES (3). Explores themes central to the study of religion, such as, classics of Christian thought, major thinkers, topics in Christianity, including church history, ethics, or spirituality; topics from Old and New Testament studies; intersections between various traditions, as well as between Religious Studies and other disciplines.
Prerequisite(s): RT 201H or permission of instructor. NOTE: Honors students only.

HUMANITIES (HU)

HU 365. A LITERARY TOUR OF IRELAND (3). Introduces students to the works and work places of such writers as Yeats, Shaw, Synge, Beckett, Kavanagh, Behan, Joyce, and others. Studies a variety of genres and disciplines, and will visit important spiritual and intellectual places while in Ireland.

HU 492E-W. TOPICS IN HUMANITIES (3). Provides a value- based approach to explore special topics focusing on the integration of literature, humanities, and the arts. Prerequisite(s): EN 210 or HU 201.

LEARNING SUPPORT (LS)

LS 103. MATH LEARNING STRATEGIES (1). Provides help for students with learning difficulties in the areas of mathematics or science. Emphasizes better self-understanding as learners in these disciplines. Enables students to select and employ appropriate and effective learning/study strategies. Co-requisite: Any Mathematics course.

LS 201. STRATEGIES FOR SUCCESS I (1). Explores students' relationship to learning and university life. Focuses on the development and mastery of skills related to comprehending and analyzing college-level texts. Assists students in the development of effective study strategies.

LS 202. STRATEGIES FOR SUCCESS II (1). Continuation of LS
201. Explores students' relationship to learning and university life. Focuses on the development and mastery of skill related to comprehending and analyzing college-level texts. Assists students in the development of effective study strategies.

LS 230. WRITERS WORKSHOP (1). Develops ability to write clearly and effectively, and organize and develop ideas through frequent writing practice. Provides opportunities for individual conferences with the instructor and for small group writing and editing sessions with other students.

LS 231. BASIC WRITING WORKSHOP II (1). Continuation of LS
230. Provides additional study of analytical and argumentative writing with both lecture and workshop sessions. Includes significant research component to support students work in seminar courses.

MATHEMATICS (MT)

MT 204. CONTEMPORARY MATHEMATICS (3). Presents topics in contemporary mathematics that are relevant to the Liberal Arts student. Develops the skills required to understand and interpret quantitative information that students encounter in the Liberal Arts curriculum.

MT 205. CONTEMPORARY MATHEMATICS FOR LIBERAL ARTS STUDENTS (3). Presents contemporary mathematics for liberal arts students. It emphasizes the use of mathematics in the natural world using concepts such as social choice, networking, scheduling, symmetry in art and nature, fractals, growth, the Golden Ratio, music and poetry. NOTE: Cannot receive credit for MT 204 and MT 205.

MT 206. CONTEMPORARY MATHEMATICS FOR BUSINESS STUDENTS (3). Presents topics in contemporary mathematics for business students. It emphasizes the use of mathematics in everyday life using real world applications such as set
relationships, percentages, statistics, probability, personal finance, and business applications. NOTE: Cannot receive credit for MT
204 and MT 206.

MT 225. MASTERY OF FOUNDATIONAL MATHEMATICS (3). Makes connections between K-12 experiences in math and college-level abstract mathematical foundations.

MT 250. QUANTITATIVE SKILLS AND REASONING (3). Emphasizes processing information, applying quantitative skills and reasoning, and interpreting conclusions in context. Topics include numeracy, quantitative reasoning, problem solving, and algebraic reasoning in scientific and business contexts. NOTE: Course fee required.

MT 260. PRE-CALCULUS (4). Reviews the fundamental topics from Algebra and Trigonometry that are necessary for success in calculus. Topics include graphs, polynominals, rational functions, trigonometric functions, exponentials, logs, and vectors. Prerequisite(s): C- or higher in MT 250 or placement by the department. NOTE: Course fee required.

MT 270/MT 270C. INTRODUCTION TO STATISTICS (3). Presents standard topics in introductory statistics for students whose major is not mathematics. Topics include descriptive statistic, probability distributions, estimations, hypothesis testing, linear regression and correlation, and other topics. Prerequisite(s): Two (2) years of High School Algebra required. NOTE: MT 270C is a course that carries a communication focus in the course assignments, and enrollment is limited to students who took the paired/linked RCC 200 course in the fall.

MT 272/MT 272C. STATISTICS FOR THE LIFE SCIENCES (3). Presents introductory statistics emphasizing applications in biology, psychology, neuroscience, and kinesiology. Includes descriptive statistics, hypothesis testing, regression, t-tests, Chi- square, and ANOVA with particular emphasis to analysis using p- scores. Prerequisite(s): Two (2) years of High School Algebra required. NOTE: MT 272C is a course that carries a
communication focus in the course assignments, and enrollment is limited to student who took the paired/linked RCC 200 course in the fall.

MT 274. INTRODUCTION TO STATISTICS FOR HEALTH PROFESSIONS (3). Provides basic understanding of statistical analysis in the health sciences. Focuses on the interpretation and analysis of health care data as it applies to organizational and clinical decision-making. Uses case studies to demonstrate measures of central tendency, position, and variation. Explores quantitative epidemiology concepts as applied to analysis of the health needs of a population, skills needed to evaluate inference in hypothesis testing including the t-test, F-test, and chi-square test.

MT 320. INTRODUCTION TO DISCRETE MATHEMATICS (3). Introduces mathematical tools used by computer scientists with an emphasis on developing problem solving abilities. Topics include machine logic, set theory, Boolean algebra, mathematical induction, and data structures. Prerequisite(s): Two years of high school algebra.
MT 330. BUSINESS CALCULUS (3). Introduces standard topics of calculus, including functions and their graphs, exponential and logarithmic functions, differentiation, and integration, and presents them in the context of examples from the business world. Prerequisite(s): C- or higher in MT 250 or placement by the department. NOTE: Course fee required.

MT 360A. CALCULUS I (4). Treats standard topics of single variable calculus including limits, continuity, derivatives, applications of derivatives, and elements of integration. Prerequisite(s): MT 201. NOTE: Course fee required. Prerequisite(s); ACT math score of 26 or greater, SAT math score of 610 or greater, or C- or higher in MT 260, or placement by the department.

MT 360B. CALCULUS II (4). Continues treatment of single variable calculus including definite and indefinite integrals, applications of integrals, transcendental functions, techniques of integration and infinite series. Prerequisite(s): C- or higher in MT
360A or placement by department.

MT 360C. CALCULUS III (4). Presents topics of multivariable calculus including calculus of vector functions, multivariable functions, partial derivatives, multiple integrals, applications and other topics as time permits. Prerequisite(s): C- or higher in MT
360B, or placement by department.

MT 401. LOGIC AND PROOF (3). Provides an introduction to mathematical reasoning and proof writing. Topics include set theory, logic and methods of proof. Prerequisite(s): MT 360B or permission of instructor.

MT 405. NUMERICAL AND COMPUTATIONAL METHODS (3). Uses Python or MATLAB  in solving linear and nonlinear equations, approximation theory, numerical integration and differentiation, numerical solution of differential equations, and linear programming. Prerequisite(s): C- or higher in MT 463, or permission of instructor.

MT 415. LINEAR ALGEBRA (3). Studies vector spaces, linear transformations, matrices, determinants, systems of equations, eigenvalues, and characteristic matrices. Prerequisite(s): C- or higher in MT 360A. NOTE: Required for students preparing to teach secondary mathematics.

MT 420A. INTRODUCTION TO OPERATIONS RESEARCH I (3). Summarizes matrix and vector algebra. Introduces hyperplanes and convex geometry in n-dimensions, scanning extreme points and tableau pivots, the simplex algorithm and slack variables, degeneracy and classification of linear programming problems, duality theory and shadow variables, imputed values and sensitivity analysis. Prerequisite(s): MT 360B or permission of instructor.

MT 420B. INTRODUCTION TO OPERATIONS RESEARCH II (3). Introduces sequential search techniques, Fibonnacci search, three point interval search, convex functions, gradient techniques, exploratory sequences and accelerated pattern moves for an n- dimensional setting; the feasible direction algorithm; dynamic programming; active versus inactive constraints and penalty functions. Prerequisite(s): MT 360B.

MT 423A. ABSTRACT ALGEBRA I (3). Provides an axiomatic treatment of basic concepts of groups, rings, and fields.
Prerequisite(s): C- or higher in MT 401 and MT 415, or permission of instructor.

MT 423B. ABSTRACT ALGEBRA II (3). A continuation of MT
423A. Prerequisite(s): MT 423A.

MT 426. HISTORY AND FOUNDATIONS OF MATHEMATICS (3). Discusses topics in ancient methods of numeration and calculation, the history and solution of classical problems, including topics from number theory, algebra, geometry, and calculus. Includes contributions of the great mathematicians, under-represented groups (including minorities and women), and diverse cultures. Investigates the role of mathematics in civilization. Prerequisite(s): MT 360B. NOTE: Required for students preparing to teach secondary mathematics.

MT 430. INTRODUCTION TO MATHEMATICAL MODELING (3). Studies principles of constructing mathematical models using techniques such as: difference equations, proportionality, geometric similarity, graphical analysis and dimensional analysis, simulation with random numbers, and systems of differential equations. Prerequisite(s): MT 360B.

MT 435. APPLIED COMBINATORICS (3). Studies methods for counting arrangements and selections, generating functions, recurrence relations, the inclusion-exclusion principle, elements of graph theory, covering circuits, trees and searching and network algorithms. Prerequisite(s): MT 360B. NOTE: Required for
students preparing to teach secondary mathematics.

MT 437. CRYPTOGRAPHY (3). Includes a brief history of code making and code breaking, modern private key systems (AES), and public key cryptosystems. Prerequisite(s): MT 415.

MT 441. MODERN GEOMETRY (3). Studies Euclidean and non- Euclidean geometries such as: Mobius, hyperbolic, elliptic,
absolute, and projective geometries. Geometries are studied using analytic methods. Prerequisite(s): MT 360B. NOTE: Required for students preparing to teach secondary mathematics.

MT 445. ADVANCED LINEAR ALGEBRA (3). Continues the study of matrices, determinants, systems of equations eigenvalues, characteristics matrices, and sparse  matrices. Prerequisite(s): MT
415.

MT 454. REAL ANALYSIS (3). Provides rigorous treatment of real numbers, functions, sets, and limits-the foundations underlying Calculus. Studies sequences and series of numbers and functions, basis topology, continuity and differentiability of functions, and integration. Prerequisite(s): C- or higher in MT 401.

MT 463. DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS (3). Studies solutions of first and second order differential equations, applications, linear differential equations, series solutions, laplace transforms, numerical solutions, and systems of linear differential equations with constant coefficients. Prerequisite(s): C- or higher MT 360B. NOTE: Required for students preparing to teach secondary mathematics.

MT 470A. MATHEMATICAL STATISTICS I (3). Introduces probability; distribution functions and moment generating functions, correlation and regression; development and applications of binomial, normal, student’s T, chi square, and F distributions. Prerequisite(s): MT 360B. NOTE: Required for students preparing to teach secondary mathematics.
MT 470B. MATHEMATICAL STATISTICS II (3). A continuation of
MT 470A. Prerequisite(s): C- or higher in MT 470A or MT 472.

MT 472. PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS (3). Introduces probability and statistics and the underlying mathematical theory, discrete and continuous distributions, sampling distributions, estimation, hypothesis testing and regression. Prerequisite(s): MT
360B.

MT 480. COMPLEX ANALYSIS (3). Studies calculus of complex variables including algebra of complex numbers, analytic functions, complex integration, series for complex functions and residue theory. Focuses on applications in mathematics and science. Examines the difference between real and complex variables. Prerequisite(s): MT 360B.

MT 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN MATHEMATICS (1-3). Provides an opportunity for independent exploration of areas of interest. Prerequisite(s): Approval of department chair.

MT 495E-W. ADVANCED TOPICS IN MATHEMATICS (3). Provides an intensive examination of the theory of a particular mathematical area of study.

MT 498E-W. INTERNSHIP IN MATHEMATICS (3). Gain experience working with professional mathematicians and scientists in a technical field. Students will be able to relate the mathematics, which they are learning in the classroom to the work they expect to be doing after graduation.

MODERN AND CLASSICAL LANGUAGES AND LITERATURE

CHINESE (CHN)

CHN 209A. ELEMENTARY CHINESE I (4). Provides a groundwork for studying Modern Chinese. Studies the essentials of grammar and oral drill, dictation, reading of elementary and intermediate texts, conversation, and written exercises and introduces some of the most important cultural traits of the Chinese speaking world.

CHN 209B. ELEMENTARY CHINESE II (4). A continuation of
CHN 209A. Prerequisite(s): CHN 209A or equivalent.

CH 290E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY (3). Lower level
Independent study.

CHN 309A.  INTERMEDIATE CHINESE I (3). Focuses on daily communication in both oral and written forms. Centers on important linguistic structures to build and refine the student's understanding of Chinese grammar and gradually introduces more formal speech and written-style language. Prerequisite(s): CHN
209B or equivalent.

CHN 309B. INTERMEDIATE CHINESE II (3). A continuation of
CHN 309A.  Prerequisite(s): CHN 309A or equivalent.

CHN 409. ADVANCED CHINESE I (3). Provides an intensive review of Chinese grammar, focusing on development of oral competency and reading and writing skills to promote in-depth understanding of the histories and the diverse socio-cultural linguistic practices of the Chinese speaking world. Prerequisite(s): CHN 309B.


CHN 410. ADVANCED CHINESE II (3). Continues an intensive review of Chinese grammar, focusing on development of oral competency and reading and writing skills to promote in-depth understanding of the histories and the diverse socio-cultural linguistic practices of the Chinese speaking world. Prerequisite(s): CHN 409.

CHN 411 ADVANCE CHINESE III (3). Continues development of oral competency and reading and writing skills by focusing primarily on literary criticism and introduction to formal research methods through the introduction of major literary periods, genres, and themes. Prerequisite(s): CHN 410.

CHN 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY (1-3) Upper division
Independent study.



FR 209A. ELEMENTARY FRENCH I (4). Studies the essentials of grammar and oral drill, dictation, reading of elementary and intermediate texts, conversation, and written exercises and introduces some of the most important cultural traits of the French speaking world.

FR 209B. ELEMENTARY FRENCH II (4). A continuation of FR
209A. Prerequisite(s): FR 209A or equivalent.

FR 290E-W. DIRECTED STUDY IN FRENCH (0-4). Offers an opportunity for independent exploration of topics in French or Francophone literature and art.

FR 309A. INTERMEDIATE FRENCH I (3). Provides intensive study in current idiomatic French. Develops accuracy and proficiency in the use of the language by means of a thorough grammar review, oral exercises, and written work. Includes reading of intermediate and semi-advanced texts. Emphasizes the use of French linguistic skills to gain a more in-depth
understanding of the cultural practices, products, and perspectives of the French speaking world. Prerequisite(s): FR 209B or equivalent.

FR 309B. INTERMEDIATE FRENCH II (3). A continuation of FR
309A. Prerequisite(s): FR 309A or equivalent.

NOTE: ALL 400-LEVEL FRENCH COURSES ARE TAUGHT IN FRENCH.

FR 409. ADVANCED FRENCH I (3). Provides an intensive review of French grammar focused primarily on development of oral competency and composition skills to promote in-depth understanding of the histories and the diverse socio-cultural and linguistic practices of the French speaking world. Prerequisite(s): FR 309B or equivalent.

FR 410. ADVANCED FRENCH II (3). Provides an intensive review of French grammar focused primarily on French cultural history and politics. Prerequisite(s): FR 309B or equivalent.

FR 411. ADVANCED FRENCH III (3). Provides an intensive review of French grammar focused primarily on literary criticism and an introduction to formal research methods through the introduction of major literary periods, genres, and themes. Prerequisite(s): FR 309B or equivalent.
FR 415. FRENCH POLITICS AND CULTURE (3). Analyzes the political and cultural evolution of France and francophone countries and the European Union. Prerequisite(s): FR 309B.

FR 423. TRANSLATION/INTERPRETATION/COMPOSITION (3). Offers practice in advanced composition, translation, and stylistic analysis in French to develop grammar, vocabulary and analytic skills in a contemporary and realistic context. Prerequisite(s): FR 309B or equivalent.

FR 426. ADVANCED FRENCH CONVERSATION I (3). Involves conversation based on readings and current events, film and cultural excursions as well as other topics selected by the instructor and students. Provides an informal format for development of communication skills and understanding of contemporary Francophone issues. Prerequisite(s): FR 309B or permission of instructor.

FR 427. ADVANCED FRENCH CONVERSATION II (3). Phonetics-based, advanced-level discussion of contemporary French and francophone, social, political and cultural issues. Emphasizes development of oral proficiency. Prerequisite(s): FR
309B or permission of instructor.

FR 429. SURVEY OF FRENCH LITERATURE FROM THE MEDIEVAL PERIOD THROUGH THE 17TH CENTURY (3). Examines major French writers and literary movements from the medieval through the classical periods. Prerequisite(s): FR 309B or equivalent.

FR 435. SURVEY OF FRENCH THEATER (3). A critical study of representative French plays from the Middle Ages to the 21st Century through reading, viewing, discussion and in-class performance. Taught in French. Prerequisite(s): FR 309B or equivalent.

FR 439. DIVERSITY IN THE FRENCH-SPEAKING WORLD (3). Multi-disciplinary study of representative works from the Francophone world including Canada, France, North and sub- Saharan Africa, Haiti, Martinique and Guadeloupe. Prerequisite(s): FR 309B. Sophomore standing and permission of instructor required.

FR 460. ROMANCE LINGUISTICS (3). Studies the fundamental structures of the romance languages: phonology, morphology, syntax, and semantics. Explores evolution of the romance languages from Latin and studies relationships among language, thought and culture. Prerequisite(s): FR 309B. Cross listing: SP
460.

FR 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN FRENCH (3). Offers an opportunity for independent exploration of topics of interest in French or Francophone literature and art. Prerequisite(s): FR 409, or FR 410, or FR 411 or equivalent and approval of department chair.

FR 495E-W. SEMINAR IN FRENCH AND FRANCOPHONE STUDIES (3). Provides an intensive study of French and francophone authors, genres or literary movements. Prerequisite(s): FR 409, or FR 410 or FR 411 or equivalent or permission of instructor.

FR 498E-W. INTERNSHIP IN FRENCH (3). Provides practical on- site experience in the use of French and an opportunity to enhance reading, writing, speaking, and listening skills.
Prerequisite(s): Junior standing and approval of department chair and director of Academic Internship Program.

FR 499. SENIOR SEMINAR (1). Individualized reading and writing assignments based on courses previously taken. Prerequisite(s): Permission of instructor. NOTE: Future departmental recommendations based on successful completion of the course.

GERMAN (GR)

GR 209A. ELEMENTARY GERMAN I (4). Provides an intensive review of basic grammatical structures and conversation. and conversation and introduces some of the most important cultural traits of the German speaking world. NOTE: Minimum of one- hour language laboratory each week in addition to four class meetings required.

GR 209B. ELEMENTARY GERMAN II (4). A continuation of GR
209A. Prerequisite(s): GR 209A or equivalent.

GR 309A. INTERMEDIATE GERMAN I (3). Provides an intensive review of current idiomatic German and grammatical structures, developing accuracy and proficiency in the use of the language. Involves readings of prepared illustrative texts. Prerequisite(s): GR
209B or equivalent. NOTE: Minimum of one-hour language laboratory each week in addition to three class meetings required.

GR 309B. INTERMEDIATE GERMAN II (3). A continuation of GR
309A. Prerequisite(s): GR 309A or equivalent.

GR 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN GERMAN (3). Provides independent exploration of topics of interest and of German authors. Prerequisite(s): Approval of department chair and director of Academic Internship Program required.

LATIN (LT)

LT 201A. INTRODUCTORY LATIN I (4). Studies Latin vocabulary, grammar, and syntax for students beginning in Latin.

LT 201B. INTRODUCTORY LATIN II (4). A continuation of LT
201A. Prerequisite(s): LT 201A or equivalent.

LT 301A. INTERMEDIATE LATIN I (3). Introduces classical Latin literature, prose, and poetry, with readings from Cicero, Catullus, Horace and Virgil and further study of Latin grammar. Prerequisite(s): LT 201A and LT 201B or equivalent.

LT 301B. INTERMEDIATE LATIN II (3). A continuation of LT
301A. Prerequisite(s): LT 301A or equivalent.

LT 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN LATIN (3). Offers and independent exploration of topics of interest and of Latin authors. Prerequisite(s): Approval of department chair and director of Academic Internship Program required.

LT 499. SENIOR SEMINAR (1). Provides a capstone experience for senior Latin majors. Requires extensive reading, writing, and research in a Latin-related topic.

SPANISH (SP)

SP 209A. ELEMENTARY SPANISH I (4). Provides a thorough grounding in essentials of grammar, oral drill, dictation, elementary and intermediate texts, conversation, and written
exercises and introduces some of the most important cultural traits of the Spanish speaking world.

SP 209B. ELEMENTARY SPANISH II (4). A continuation of SP
209A. Prerequisite(s): SP 209A or equivalent.

SP 309A. INTERMEDIATE SPANISH I (3). Provides an intensive grammar review to develop accuracy and proficiency in the use of the language. Emphasizes the use of Spanish linguistic skills to gain a more in-depth understanding of the cultural practices, products,
and perspectives of the Spanish speaking world. Prerequisite(s): SP
209B or equivalent.

SP 309B. INTERMEDIATE SPANISH II (3). A continuation of SP
309A. Prerequisite(s): SP 309A or equivalent.

SP 320. SPANISH FOR MEDICAL AND HEALTH CARE WORKERS (4). Provides Spanish students and medical and health care workers the opportunity to better communicate with the growing Spanish community in the United States. Explores how to progressively merge grammar, content, and health care vocabulary in various medical contexts. Provides flexibility and will be tailored to students with different proficiency levels in Spanish.

NOTE: ALL 400-LEVEL SPANISH COURSES ARE TAUGHT EXCLUSIVELY IN SPANISH UNLESS OTHERWISE INDICATED.

SP 408A. SPANISH FOR HERITAGE SPEAKERS I (3). Expands the bilingual range and literacy skills of heritage speakers while fostering the acquisition of different linguistic registers and promoting in-depth understanding of the histories and diverse socio-cultural and linguistic practices of the Spanish speaking world. Prerequisite(s): SP 309B.

SP 408B. SPANISH FOR HERITAGE SPEAKERS II (3). Continuation of SP 409A. Prerequisite(s): SP 408A.

SP 409. ADVANCED SPANISH I (3). Provides an intensive review of Spanish grammar focusing on development of oral competency and reading and writing skills to promote in-depth understanding of the histories and the diverse socio-cultural and linguistic practices of the Spanish speaking world. Prerequisite(s): SP 309B or equivalent.

SP 410. ADVANCED SPANISH II (3). Continues intensive review of Spanish grammar focusing on development of oral competency and reading and writing skills to promote in-depth understanding of the histories and the diverse socio-cultural and linguistic practices in the Spanish speaking world. Prerequisite(s): SP 309B or equivalent.

SP 411. ADVANCED SPANISH III (3). Continues development of oral competency and reading and writing skills by focusing primarily on literary criticism and introduction to formal research methods through the introduction of major literary periods, genres, and themes. Prerequisite(s): SP 309B or equivalent.

SP 415. SPANISH CIVILIZATION (3). Studies the development of Spain from prehistoric times to the present. Includes the art, literature, and music of the Spanish culture. Prerequisite(s): SP
409, or SP 410, or SP 411.

SP 417. BUSINESS COMMUNICATION AND CULTURE IN SPANISH (3).  Familiarizes students with basic business concepts in Spanish and provides an overview of commerce in a global economy with a focus on sustainable business practices in Latin America and Spain. Prerequisite(s): SP 309B. NOTE: Students should have at least two years of college level Spanish or permission of the instructor.

SP 423. TRANSLATION/INTERPRETATION/ COMPOSITION (3). Offers practice in advanced composition, translation, and stylistic analysis in Spanish to develop grammar, vocabulary, and analytic skills in a contemporary and realistic context. Prerequisite(s): SP 309B or equivalent.

SP 424. SPANISH FOR THE MEDICAL AND HEALTH CARE WORKER (3). Provides Spanish students, medical, and health care workers the opportunity to enhance communication skills with
the vast number of Spanish speaking patients. Examines direct and Indirect commands; formal and informal speech; and the nuance of language paired with cultural aspects of communication. Prerequisite(s): Two or more semesters of Spanish or permission of instructor. Majors and minors only.

SP 430A. SURVEY OF SPANISH LITERATURE (3). Studies advanced composition centered on a survey of Spanish literature. Prerequisite(s): SP 409, or SP 410, or SP 411.

SP 430B. SURVEY OF LATIN AMERICAN LITERATURE (3). Studies advanced composition centered on a survey of Latin American literature. Prerequisite(s): SP 409, or SP 410, or SP 411.

SP 432. 18TH AND 19TH CENTURY SPANISH LITERATURE (3). A survey of the most important literary movements in 18th and 19th century Spain. Emphasizes the works of Jovellanos, El Duque de Rivas, Espronceda, Zorrilla, Becquer, Galdós, and Pardo Bazán. Prerequisite(s): SP 409, SP 410, and SP 411.

SP 435, LATIN AMERICAN AND LATINO LITERATURE, CULTURE, AND SOCIETY (3). Multidisciplinary study of contemporary Latin American society represented in literature from the United States and Latin America emphasizing social, economic, and political issues. Prerequisite(s): SP 409A.

SP 436. NATIVE LATIN AMERICAN LITERATURE (3). Introduction to Indigenous literature and cultural production within the Spanish colonies in the Americas. Includes texts from the colonial period to the present. This class is taught in Spanish. Prerequisite(s): SP 409, SP 410, or SP 411.

SP 437. WRITING BY AND ABOUT HISPANIC WOMEN (3). Analyzes the creation and re-creation of the female persona in selected texts by and about Hispanic women writers from the middle ages to the present. Emphasizes critical analysis and the continued development of speaking, reading, writing, listening, and cultural proficiency. Prerequisite(s): SP 309B or equivalent or permission of instructor required. Cross listing: WGS 437.

SP 439. THEATRICAL PERFORMANCE IN SPANISH (3) Explores dramatic works from Spain and Latin America. Students will perform these works and examine the cultural and historical contexts in which they were first performed. Conducted in Spanish. Prerequisite(s): SP 309B, or permission of instructor.

SP 445. SPANISH PHONETICS AND PHONOLOGY (3). Introduction to practical and theoretical aspects of phonetics and phonology. Analyzes important contrasts between sounds of Spanish and English by means of phonetic transcription. Prerequisite(s): SP 409.

SP 460. ROMANCE LINGUISTICS (3). Studies the fundamental structures of the romance languages: phonology, morphology,
syntax, and semantics. Explores the evolution of the romance languages from Latin and studies the relationships among language, thought and culture. Prerequisite(s): SP 309B. Cross listing: FR
460.

SP 461. LATIN AMERICAN CIVILIZATION (3). Studies the development of Latin American cultures from pre-Columbian times to the present. Traces the general history of these countries as well as art, literature, and music. Prerequisite(s): SP
409 or SP 410 or SP 411 or equivalent.

SP 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN SPANISH (1-3). Offers an opportunity for independent exploration of topics of interest and Spanish and Latin American authors. Prerequisite(s): Approval of department chair and director of Academic Internship Program required.

SP 495E-W. HISPANIC STUDIES (3). Provides an intensive study of individual authors, works, periods, or literary movements. Prerequisite(s): Majors only.

SP 496. SENIOR PROJECT (1). Provides a capstone experience
for senior Spanish majors. Requires extensive reading, writing, and research in a Spanish topic and an oral comprehensive examination. Prerequisite(s): Majors only and Senior standing.

SP 498E-W. INTERNSHIP IN SPANISH (3). Provides practical on- site experience in the use of Spanish and an opportunity to enhance reading, writing, speaking, and listening skills. Prerequisite(s): Junior standing and approval of department chair and director of Academic Internship Program.

NEUROSCIENCE (NS)

NS 260/260C/260H. INTRODUCTION TO BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR (3). Introduces the scientific study of how the brain relates to behavior. Explores how brain structure and function are involved in sensorimotor functions, motivation and emotion, cognition, and neurological disorders. Co-requisite: NS 261.

NS 261. INTRODUCTION TO BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR LABORATORY (1). Introduces scientific methods used to study brain- behavior relationships such as sensorimotor, emotional, and cognitive functions as well as neurological disorders and the effects of drugs on behavior. Co-requisite: NS 260.

NS 401. ADVANCED NEUROSCIENCE METHODS (1). Emphasizes current neuroscience laboratory research techniques including recording cellular activity of nervous tissue, drug effects, brain lesions, histology, microscopy, and behavioral tests for assessing brain-behavior functions in non-human nervous systems. Prerequisite(s): NS 260 and PSY 423.

NS 410. NEUROLOGICAL DISORDERS (3). Applies a biopsychosocial approach to understanding brain-behavior relationships through the study of diseases of the nervous system. Prerequisite(s): NS 260. NOTE: A background in neuroscience or psychology, while helpful, is not essential for this course.

NS 450. NEUROSCIENCE METHODS (3). Examines historical and cutting-edge neuroscience research methodology and design. Students will explore research techniques, data analysis, and interpretation of experimental results in the context of ongoing work in the field. Prerequisite(s): MT 272, NS 480, and NS 481. Corequisite(s): NS 451.

NS 451. NEUROSCIENCE METHODS LABORATORY (1). Explores current neuroscience research techniques for monitoring behavior, investigating drug effects, examining anatomy, and observing cellular activity in the nervous system. Prerequisite(s): MT 272, NS 480, and NS 481. Corequisite(s): NS
450.

NS 466. NEUROPHARMACOLOGY (3). Examines relationships between brain functions and major psychoactive drugs, including drugs used to treat psychological and neurological disorders. Includes an analysis of the cellular and physiological effects of each drug on neuronal functioning as well as psychological functioning. Prerequisite(s): NS 260, BL 258, and BL 260.

NS 470. NEUROETHICS (3). Explores ethical, legal, and societal implications and challenges arising from our continued understanding of the nervous system. Prerequisite(s): NS 260.

NS 472. NEUROPLASTICITY (3). Explores the role of neuroplasticity in learning, memory, aging, and recovery from
brain injury. This course will emphasize in-depth critical analysis of current literature covering molecular, cellular, genetic, electrophysiological, and behavioral studies. Prerequisite(s): BL
258, BL 260, and NS 260.

NS 474. NEURODEVELOPMENT (3). Explores the development of the nervous system, including the cellular and molecular mechanisms that are crucial for the formation of the brain and spinal cord, and the establishment, maintenance, and remodeling of neuronal connections. We will also examine the experimental approaches used to study neural development. Prerequisite(s): BL
258, BL 260, and NS 260.

NS 480. CELLULAR AND MOLECULAR NEUROSCIENCE (3). Examines current questions and experimental approaches in cellular and molecular neuroscience, including the ionic basis of electrical signaling, the biochemistry of synaptic transmission, mechanisms of learning and memory, and selected current topics in the field.  Co-Requisite: NS 481. Prerequisite(s): NS 260, BL
258, and BL 260.

NS 481. CELLULAR AND MOLECULAR NEUROSCIENCE LABORATORY (1). Provides students with broad exposure to classic and current experimental approaches in cellular and molecular neuroscience. Utilized approaches will include anatomical, physiological, and biochemical methods for investigating the structure and function of neurons. CO-Requisite: NS 480. NOTE: One three-hour laboratory per week.

NS 485. NEUROANATOMY AND NEUROPHYSIOLOGY (3). Explores the functional significance of neural physiology and connectivity, including effects related to neural development, how nerve cells communicate with one another, how patterns of
neural interconnections give rise to different perceptual, cognitive, and motor responses, and how neural communication is modified by experience. Co-requisite: NS 486. Prerequisite(s): NS 260, BL
258, and BL 260. or permission of instructor. Cross listing: BL
485.

NS 486.  NEUROANATOMY AND NEUROPHYSIOLOGY LABORATORY (1). Involves laboratory experiments and computer simulations of neural functions as well as gross dissection, and historical study of Neuroanatomy. Co-requisite: NS 485. Cross listing: BL 486. NOTE: One three-hour laboratory per week.
NS 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN NEUROSCIENCE (3). Offers an opportunity for advanced study in independent research in neuroscience.

NS 491E-W. RESEARCH IN NEUROSCIENCE (1-3). Offers an opportunity for collaborative research in neuroscience under faculty direction. Prerequisite(s): NS 260 and permission of instructor.

NS 495E-W. SEMINAR: CURRENT TOPICS IN NEUROSCIENCE (3). Focuses on a broadly defined topical area or theme in neuroscience. Neuroscience researchers with expertise in the topic present lectures on their area of research specialty.
Students develop skills needed to examine background research for each lecture and explore the potential impact of the research on understanding brain function. Topics are announced prior to registration. Prerequisite(s): NS 260 and NS 485.

NS 498E-W. INTERNSHIP IN NEUROSCIENCE (3). Involves a placement that draws on skills related to neuroscience, such as a clinical or research agency, for advanced neuroscience students. Prerequisite(s): Junior standing and minimum GPA of 2.80. Approval of director of Academic Internship is required.

NS 499. SENIOR THESIS (2). Students meet regularly with the thesis advisor to prepare for the defense of the research before a panel of faculty, to present the research in a public forum, and to submit a final thesis that is approved by the faculty examination committee.

PARACURRICULAR(PC)

PC 200A. LEADERSHIP SEMINAR: MAGIS PROGRAM (0-1). Surveys basic leadership skills and issues for students entering the Regis College Leadership Program. Prerequisite(s) Enrollment limited to MAGIS program students only.

PC 200B. LEADERSHIP SEMINAR: MAGIS PROGRAM (0-1). Surveys basic leadership skills and issues for students entering the Regis College Leadership Program. Prerequisite(s): PC 200A or permission of instructor.

PC 204E-W. LEADERSHIP DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM (0-1). Discover leadership by exploring different leadership theories and concepts. The Leadership Development Program offers three courses that are focused on Social Change, Heroic Leadership,
and Organizational Leadership. Receive credit for the Leadership Certificate Program, the Leadership Minor, or enroll in a course solely to learn leadership skills that you can utilize both in your current leadership roles and in future roles. Completion of one of the three courses is required before enrollment into the Leadership Certificate Program.

PC 210A.  BEST PRACTICES WORKING WITH STUDENT WRITERS (0 - 1). Provides an introduction to writing theory and reviews practical issues such as grammar and usage. Prepares students to work with other writers by examining peer tutoring techniques. Prerequisite(s): Permission of instructor.

PC 215. BEST PRACTICES WITH STUDENT DIALOGUE (0-1). Provides an introduction to dialogue theory and reviews practical issues connected with dialogue facilitation. Prepares students to work with fellow discussants by examining peer mentoring techniques. Permission of instructor required.

PC 220. CAREERS & YOUR CALLING (2). Designed for students who have not yet declared a major and/or are revisiting a major decision by connecting academic choices with career decision making.  Throughout the course we will navigate the question,
'how ought we to live?' by diving critically into your vocational discernment, meaning making and purpose.

PC 231A. SERVICE/COMMUNITY BASED LEARNING A (0-2). Students become a contributing member of an established Denver social-service agency with weekly responsibilities for the entire semester. Students will be asked to draw connections between their experiential learning off-campus and their classroom learning by fostering habits of observation, reflection and deliberation. NOTE: Offered Fall semester.

PC 231B. SERVICE/COMMUNITY BASED LEARNING B (0-2). Students become a contributing member of an established Denver social-service agency with weekly responsibilities for the entire semester. Students will be asked to draw connections between their experiential learning off-campus and their classroom learning by fostering habits of observation, reflection and deliberation. NOTE: Offered Spring semester.

PC 232. IN THE SERVICE OF OTHERS (1). Provides opportunities for students to experience, analyze, and reflect upon the intellectual and spiritual benefits of direct community service.

PC 233. IN THE SERVICE OF OTHERS II (1). Continuation of PC
232.

PC 240. FR. WOODY SERVICE LEARNING SEMINAR I (1). Provides opportunities to experience, analyze, and reflect upon the intellectual and spiritual benefits of direct community service. In keeping with the Jesuit Mission of "...educating men and women in the service of others," students will study the life and work of Msgr. C.B. Woodrich, read and discuss books devoted to the human search for meaning, and participate in weekly projects established in the name, and modeled on the unique style, of Father Woody. Transportation to these projects will be provided by "Father Woody’s Wheels," vehicles dedicated to furthering the legacy of Father Woody. NOTE: Service learning component required.

PC 241. FR. WOODY SERVICE LEARNING SEMINAR II (1). Provides academic service context for exploring the life and work of Fr. Woody in the Jesuit tradition of educating men and women in the service of others. NOTE: Service learning component required

PC 242. FR. WOODY SERVICE LEARNING SEMINAR III (1). Provides continued opportunities to participate in the Regis University Mission of ‘leadership in the service of others.’ Service projects involve direct service to the poor, primarily Denver’s homeless population. Course requires weekly participation in a Father Woody Project, weekly meetings with instructor, and reflective writing about the service work. NOTE: Service learning component required.

PC 243. COLLEGIATE EXPERIENCE SEMINAR (1). Introduction to college transition, academics and life for first generation college attendees during their freshman year. Provides opportunities to experience, analyze, and reflect upon the intellectual and spiritual benefits of direct community service. Includes readings and discussions of books devoted to the human search for meaning,
and participation in a service project designed through the
Centers for Service Learning. NOTE: Service learning component required.

PC 244. COLLEGIATE EXPERIENCE SEMINAR II (1). Follow up to PC 243. Introduction to college transition, academics and life for first generation college attendees during their freshman year. Provides opportunities to experience, analyze, and reflect upon the intellectual and spiritual benefits of direct community service. Includes readings and discussions of books devoted to the human search for meaning, and participation in a service project designed through the Centers for Service Learning. NOTE: Service
learning component required.

PC 245A. FIRST SCHOLARS LEADERSHIP SEMINAR I (0-1), Provides the opportunity to experience, analyze, and reflect upon the Jesuit mission of Regis University, to define student success and identify resources to support that success, and to recognize one's strengths and leadership qualities. Students must be accepted through the formal application process. NOTE: Permission of instructor required.

PC 245B. FIRST SCHOLARS LEADERSHIP SEMINAR II (0-1). Provides the opportunity to apply learning from PC 245A the previous semester and to enhance one's leadership capacities within the context of the campus community. Students will design and implement a project over the semester with the goal of enriching the first-generation student experience at Regis. Prerequisite(s): PC 245A. NOTE: Permission of instructor required.

PC 345A. FIRST SCHOLARS LEADERSHIP SEMINAR III (0-1). Building on PC 245A and B, this seminar continues to develop leadership skills by focusing on discerning personal and collective strengths and putting those strengths in service of the common good. Prerequisite(s): PC 245A and B, or by permission of instructor.

PC 345B. FIRST SCHOLARS LEADERSHIP SEMINAR IV (0-1). Provides an opportunity for students to continue their exploration of Ignatian Spirituality and Leadership. They will use the tools of Ignatian Spirituality to examine moral leadership and their responsibilities as students on a Jesuit University campus. Students will create a personal narrative to guide them as they begin to fashion goals for a values-centered life. Prerequisite(s): PC 345A or by permission of instructor.

PC 260.E-W. PEER ASSISTANT TRAINING (0-2). Includes an examination of psychological, educational and health concerns of college students. Emphasizes techniques and strategies for coping with life demands. Prerequisite(s): Permission of instructor.

PC 390.E-W. FIELD EXPERIENCE (3). Offers an opportunity for placement in industry, nonprofit, government, or other agency for applied learning and experience. Progress is guided and monitored by both on-site and faculty supervisors. Site selection emphasizes the best combination of prior academic learning, experience, and student interest. Available to all majors. Prerequisite(s): Sophomore standing, approval of instructor and director of the Academic Internship Program. Note: Ten - fifteen hours per week at placement site required.

PC 410. TRAVEL LEARNING IMMERSION (1). Students who wish to participate in the Travel Learning portion of an applicable course also will register for this one-credit Paracurricular course. Please note that an additional Travel Fee will be required in addition to the cost of the course. Trip to France is required. Travel Learning application is due March 1, 2022. Additional fee required. This course is restricted to students who are taking HS
475F, RC 400F, RCC 430M X01, MARS 601 The Middle Sea: Religion.

PC 439. COMMUNITY-BASED LEARNING SYNTHESIS ACTION (1-3). Students participating in international intercultural, experiential learning opportunities process and synthesize their learning, acting as agents for social change. NOTE: Permission of Instructor Required.

PC 445A. FIRST SCHOLAR LEADERSHIP SEMINAR V (0-1). Building on PC 345A and B, this seminar continues to develop leadership skills by focusing on discerning personal and collective strengths and putting those strengths in service of the common good. Prerequisite(s): PC 345A and B, or by permission of instructor.

PC 445B. FIRST SCHOLAR LEADERSHIP SEMINAR VI (0-1). Building on PC 445A, this seminar continues to develop leadership skills by focusing on discerning personal and collective strengths and putting those strengths in service of the common good. Prerequisite(s): PC 445A, or by permission of instructor.

PC 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN LEADERSHIP STUDIES (3). Upper division course in Leadership Studies developed conjointly with the advanced leadership studies student. Prerequisite(s): RCC 200. Majors or minors only. Fee required.

PC 497E-W. HEALTHCARE INTEREST PROGRAM (1). Provides practical experience and mentoring to pre-med students in a clinical setting off campus. Students must be accepted through the formal application process. Contact the Academic Internship Program for information. Course takes place at Denver Health. Prerequisite(s): Sophomore standing, permission of instructor,
and approval of director of the Academic Internship Program.

PC 498E-W. LEADERSHIP INTERNSHIP (1-3). Through the Academic Internship Program and small group discussion, the Leadership Internship helps students apply the theories and models of leadership through a cycle of knowing, being, and doing through volunteer work at an off-campus organization. Prerequisite(s): RCC 200. Majors or minors only. Approval of Program Director and Director of the Academic Internship Program required.

PC 499. CAPSTONE: PUBLIC SCHOLARSHIP (3). Public scholarship integrates many educational practices including volunteerism, experiential learning, civic engagement, and reflection through the application of scholarship. Steps include preparation (identifying a community partner), participation (field observation), executing research, and disseminating findings. Prerequisite(s): Leadership minor students only.

PEACE AND JUSTICE STUDIES (PJ)

PJ 200/PJ 200C. INTRODUCTION TO PEACE AND JUSTICE (3). Introduce students to themes within the academic discipline of peace and justice studies. Discussion is focused on nonviolence in theory and practice, and includes interdisciplinary threads from history, philosophy, literature, religion, economics, and social analysis.
PJ 400. FOUNDATIONS OF PEACE AND JUSTICE (3). Provides an overview of conceptual approaches to the study of peace and justice. Examines the theory and practice of nonviolence, explores domestic and international social issues and uses case studies to discuss social change strategies. Prerequisite(s): PJ 200.

PJ 401, RESEARCH AND WRITING IN THE COMMUNITY (3). Practical introduction to community-based research methodologies and writing in peace and justice studies, including historical methods, news and other content analysis, data collection, field research, in-depth interviews, focus groups, and surveys. Prerequisite(s): PJ 200. NOTE: This is a writing-intensive course and includes community-based learning.

PJ 403. INTERNATIONAL LAW AND HUMAN RIGHTS (3). Examines how International Law has become a process of normative regime-building that secures the inherent Human Rights of all people with the help of global monitoring, domestic education and law enforcement and international discourse through the UN system. Prerequisite(s): POL 231, POL 241, or POL 281. Cross listing: POL 404.

PJ 405. INTERPERSONAL CONFLICT STUDIES (3). Examines conflict in a variety of human relationships. Explores conceptual and practical skills to analyze and mange conflicts including face-
to-face and third-party negotiations. Prerequisite(s): COM 380 or permission of instructor. Cross listing: COM 405.

PJ 408A. LEADING DIALOGUES ACROSS DIFFERENCE  (3). Engage with models of dialogue for inclusive, constructive conversation and addressing conflict while practicing skills for facilitation, examining difference, social identities, and connections to power, privilege, and oppression. Co-facilitate dialogues for
first-year students in the spring semester. NOTE: PJ 408B in the spring semester is a required practicum with this course.

PJ 408B. PRACTICUM IN DIALOGUE FACILITATION (0-1). Design and implement peer-facilitated educational workshops and dialogues, for example, in first-year classrooms drawing directly
on the learning from their previous semester’s coursework.

PJ 411. THE POLITICS OF MASS INCARCERATION (3). The United States make up almost 5% of the global population, and comprises 25% of the world’s prison population. This course investigates the reasons explaining this exceptional feature of American politics, and explores proposals for transforming it. Cross listing(s): HS 413 and POL 416.

PJ 412. IMMIGRATION IN AMERICAN HISTORY (3). Examines the history of immigration into the United States from the early
19th century to the present. Explores federal policies, public debates surrounding the issue of immigration, and the social, economic, political consequences of immigration and the historical experiences of immigrants. Cross listing: HS 412.

PJ 413. DIVISIVE DISCOURSES AND DIFFICULT CONVERSATIONS (3). Examines the dynamics of histories, discourses, and narratives through theoretical lenses and looks at how public discourse impacts conflict, group and interpersonal communication. Explores some difficulties in negotiating high- stakes or emotional terrain, and practical approaches for imagining, conducting and participating in productive dialogues. Prerequisite(s): COM 380. Cross listing: COM 413.


PJ 414. DIVERSITY IN THE WORKFORCE (3). Examines changing roles of African Americans, Latinos, Asian Americans, physically disabled, and elderly. Focuses on the internationalization of the workforce with respect to peace and justice. Provides an extended case application of theories of organizational behavior and change with an eye on globalization. Prerequisite(s): Junior standing. Cross listing: BA 4314.

PJ 415. DISCOURSES OF CONFLICT RESOLUTION (3). Explores the genealogy and discourses of conflict resolution by analyzing and critiquing key theories and approaches to research and practice in three different epochs each tied to their historical context and events of the day. Cross listing(s): COM 485F.

PL 415. 17TH CENTURY PHILOSOPHY (3). Examines key philosophers and key topics of the 17th Century. Authors examined may include: Descartes, Hobbes, Spinoza, and Princess Elizabeth.  Topics may include: emotion, the existence of God, providence and connections to previous philosophers from the Classical, Later Classical, and Medieval periods. Prerequisite(s): One-200 level Philosophy course.

PJ 416E-W. TOPICS IN PEACE AND JUSTICE AND COMMUNICATION (3). Explores historical and contemporary issues and problems as they relate to the intersection of speech, communication and culture.

PJ 417. HINDU RELIGIOUS AND SOCIAL ISSUES (3). Provides an examination of Hindu scriptures, social and religious tradition, and the implications for social justice.

PJ 418. PEACE AND JUSTICE IN CATHOLIC SOCIAL THOUGHT (3). Studies the sources and influence of Catholic social teaching related to issues including human rights, poverty, economic justice, and war. Examines biblical and Church documents on justice and peace themes. Prerequisite(s): RT 201 and one 300-level RT course. NOTE: Junior Standing required. Service learning component required.

PJ 419E-W. THEMES IN CHRISTIANITY (3). Examines peace and justice themes in Christianity. Explores such themes historically (e.g., Biblical themes on peace and social justice) or analytically (e.g., contemporary Catholic or Christian thoughts in topics of peace and social justice). Prerequisite(s): RT 201.

PJ 420. SEGREGATION IN UNITED STATES HISTORY (3). Explores segregation in the U.S. comparing histories of settler colonialism (including land dispossession and boarding schools), slavery and Jim crow (including housing/schooling and mass incarceration), histories of immigration and xenophobia. We explore these and other histories by centering intersectional analysis of race, class, gender, sexuality, citizenship status, and native subjectivity. Cross listing(s): CIL 421 and HS 484E.

PJ 421. 20TH CENTURY AMERICAN LABOR HISTORY (3). Provides an overview of the development of an industrial labor force in the United States. Focuses on gender, ethnicity and class, while tracing the historical influence and contributions of the working class in American history. Major themes include the transformation of the organization of work, the everyday lives of workers, and the role of the government.

PJ 422. DIVERSITY IN THE U.S. SOCIETY (3). Introduces a critical analysis of diversity issues including racism, ethnic group status, and political movement for self-determination.
Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course or permission of the instructor required. Cross-Listing: CIL 422, CJ 422 and SO 422.

PJ 423. ORGANIZATIONAL COMMUNICATION (3). Surveys contemporary organizational communication theories and practices. Investigates issues such as diversity, participation, technology, corporate ethics, the environment, and globalization. Focuses on analyzing and critiquing current organizational practices and assumptions, with an aim toward increasing social justice and ethics. Prerequisite(s): COM 380 and Junior standing. Cross listing: COM 423B.

PJ 424. EDUCATIONAL DISPARITY AND JUSTICE (3). Examines current issues in education including how disparity in school systems impacts children, teachers and communities in a democratic society. Focuses on: How do issues of inequity relate to democratic principles on which public education is founded,
and does the system promote justice? Prerequisite(s): Junior
Standing Required.

PJ 425. LITERATURE OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND SOCIAL CHANGE (3). Integrates different types of disciplinary thinking across the genres of poetry, fiction, drama and film. Explicitly interdisciplinary, in the context of literary history, ethics/philosophy, justice theory, sociology, peace and justice studies, and history/history of social change. Prerequisite(s): Junior Standing Required.

PJ 426. FOOD JUSTICE (3). Explores our relationship with food through analysis of power, privilege, and culture. Learn ways to change the alienation, structural violence, and injustice experienced within dominant systems of food production and consumption. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course. Cross listing: AN 412 and SO 412.

PJ 427. SOCIAL INEQUALITY (3). Provides a comparative examination of theoretical and ethnographic patterns of inequality in the United States and other countries. Prerequisite(s): SO 200 or SO 203 or permission of instructor required. Cross listing: SO
470.

PJ 437. ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE: RACE AND CLASS (3). Explores how race and class intersect with natural disasters, toxic waste dumps, pollution, inadequate sanitation, pesticides, childhood lead poisoning and asthma epidemics, inequities in
public transportation, and a wide range of ongoing social movements and success stories. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course, or permission of instructor. Cross-listing: CJ 437, SO 437, and ENVS 437.

PJ 431. THE ROOTS OF BLACK LIVES MATTER (3). Focuses on literary and cultural expressions of Black Americans prior to and leading up to the Black Lives Matter movement.

PJ 432E-W. READING SEMINAR IN PEACE AND JUSTICE (3). Introduces scholarly reading in the field of peace and justice studies. Prerequisite(s): PJ 200 and one 300-level English course.

PJ 433. VIETNAM AND THE UNITED STATES (3). Studies the long view of Vietnamese history including the Vietnam War and current relations with the U.S. Examines multiple perspectives from history, culture, literature, religion, politics, and economics by way of historical fiction, biographies, film, and local speakers.
Note: Junior standing or completion of Distributive Core required. Cross-listing: POL 496F.

PJ 437E-W. TOPICS IN ENVIRONMENT AND JUSTICE (3). Explores historical and contemporary issues and problems as they relate to the intersection of justice and the environment. Prerequisite(s): Junior standing or completion of distributive core.

PJ 438. UNITED STATES FOREIGN POLICY SINCE WORLD WAR II (3). Reviews and evaluates the nature and conduct of U.S. foreign policy since 1945. Considers policies adopted by the U.S. to deal with the perceived international system, including intended outputs and actual outcomes of policy, and contemporary challenges. Prerequisite(s): POL 231 or POL 241. Junior or Senior standing required. Cross listing: POL 439.

PJ 439. BLACK SOCIAL THOUGHT (3). Focuses on African- American social thought and the West African influence from historical, political, sociological and cultural perspectives from pre-1492 to present day. Includes intensive pre-departure
seminars, a two-week Ghanaian service-oriented field experience and service in Denver communities. Prerequisite(s): SO 200 or SO 204 or AN 204 or permission of instructor. Cross listing: SO
439. NOTE: Acceptance into the Tinansa Program required.

PJ 440. GENDER, SEXUALITY, AND COMMUNICATION (3). Explores connections between communication, gender, and sexuality in close relationships, organizations and the media. Course involves readings, dialogues, films, field trips, and group projects. Prerequisite(s): COM 380 or WGS 400 or permission of instructor. Cross listing: COM 440 and WGS 440.

PJ 441. SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES (3). Explores social, environmental, and economic issues that prevent and encourage more sustainable communities. Topics include transportation, sprawl, poverty, urban/wildlife interface, housing, population, consumption, municipal/toxic waste, community resources and empowerment, and a variety of proposed solutions from around the world. Prerequisite(s): SO 200 or SO 203 or permission of instructor required. Cross listing: ENVS 441 and SO 441.

PJ 445. GENDER AND GLOBALIZATION (3). This class asks: what questions are raised by global flows of people, culture and capital, and how do these flows relate to the problems faced by men and women in different parts of the world? Prerequisite(s): One 200-level anthropology or sociology course. Cross listing(s): AN 445, SO 445, and WGS 445.

PJ 446. WOMEN AND GENDER IN THE MIDDLE EAST (3). Focuses on women's rights and LGBTQ rights in the Middle East. Often women and differing sexualities in the Middle East tend to be represented stereotypically without attention to context and historical background. Focuses on the everyday lives of Muslim women and men in the Middle East and their daily struggles. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Anthropology or Sociology course. Cross listing(s): AN 446, SO 446, WGS 446.

PJ 447. GLOBAL JUSTICE (3). Explores aspects of global economic justice, and how it can be attained, through consideration of theoretical and practical issues in human rights and development. Cross listing: PL 448P. Prerequisite(s): One
200-level Philosophy course.

PJ 450. POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY (3). Explores basic issues in political philosophy such as the relation of individual and society,
freedom and authority and justice and equality. Considers the writings of political thinkers from Plato to Rawls. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Philosophy course or permission of instructor. Cross listing: PL 450.

PJ 451E-W. GLOBAL ISSUES IN PEACE AND JUSTICE (3). Explores global issues through the lens of justice, peace building and social change. Prerequisite(s): PJ 200.

PJ 452. PUNISHMENT AND CORRECTIONS (3). Provides an historical, political, and economic analysis of the penal system in the United States. Pre-requisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course. Cross listing: CJ 452 or SO 452.

PJ 453. VIOLENCE AND POWER (3). Interdisciplinary course that explores the relationship between inequality, power, and violence. The course examines how power and violence are co- constructed in various contexts-including the family, culture, law and governmental institutions, medical institutions, and the mass media-and considers how people respond to and resist violence. Co-listing(s): AN 453 and SO 453. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Anthropology or Sociology course.

PJ 454. INTERNATIONAL POLITICAL ECONOMY (3). Evaluates interdependencies of politics and economics at systemic/global level. Reviews alternative frameworks for the analysis of the nature, dynamics, relationships, and implications of political and economic interactions. Application to key contemporary issues, problems and controversies. Prerequisite(s): EC 200 or EC 3200 and junior class standing. Cross listing: EC 4232 or ENVS 432 or POL 432.

PJ 455. DRUGS, HEALTH, AND CULTURE (3). Rooted in medical anthropology and ethnography, analyzes the cultural meanings associated with health and illness: biomedicine and health care, medical knowledge production, and medical decision-
making. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Anthropology or Sociology course. Cross listing(s): AN 455, CJ 455, and SO 445.

PJ 456. LIBERATION AND THE DYNAMICS OF TRANSFORMATION (3). Explores the concept of liberation in the context of personal and social change through text, and fieldwork with agencies working for change in the Denver area. Prerequisite(s): PL 270 and Junior Standing or permission of instructor. Cross listing: PL 492X. NOTE: Junior standing or completion of Distributive Core required.

PJ 460. SOCIAL MOVEMENTS (3). Examines a variety of U.S. social movements from the 1950’s through the present. Explores theoretical questions of how movements emerge, who joins them, the effect of various tactics, and the factors that contribute to a movements’ success or demise. Pre-requisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course. Cross listing: SO 460.

PJ 461. JUSTICE: ECONOMIC SYSTEMS AND GENDER (3). Focuses on early works that explore economic systems, the ways in which these systems have raised questions about justice and how these systems have affected the lives of women and men. Covers Locke, Smith, Marx, Pateman, Lerner and Dorothy Day. Also covers contemporary authors Rawls, Nozick, Young and Cudd. Pre-requisite(s): PL 270. Cross listing: PL 492J and WGS
485M.

PJ 462. AMERICAN POLITICAL THEORY (3). Provides an intensive study of selected issues of U.S. politics, emphasizing individual research projects. Includes preparation and presentation of a major research project. Cross listing: POL 496E. Prerequisite(s): Junior standing.

PJ 463. PUNK AS SOCIAL MOVEMENT (3). Analyzes the relationship between the punk community and modes of cultural resistance. Studies the rhetorical strategies employed by the punk community and various subcultures associated with punk rock (i.e. straight edge, riot grrrl and skinheads). Theoretically driven with punk as the object of analysis. Cross listing: COM 485K. Prerequisite(s): Sophomore standing.

PJ 464. STAND UP AND FIGHT: COMMUNITY ORGANIZING (3). Presents history, theory and strategies of community organizing in the United States, and experience of community organizing techniques by developing and implementing a community organizing project on the Regis campus or working with the local community organizers. NOTE: One 200-level sociology or anthropology course required for sociology major or minor. Cross listing: SO 464 and POL 464.

PJ 465. ANARCHY AND ANARCHISM (3). Relying on case studies and ethnographies, examines anarchism as a social, cultural, and political practice, one rooted largely in the left-wing critique of the liberal state and capitalism. Prerequisite(s): One
200-level Anthropology or Sociology course. Cross listing(s): AN
465, CJ 465, and SO 465.

PJ 466. JUSTICE AND ECONOMIC SYSTEMS IN PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT (3). Examines economic justice as discussed by Adam Smith, Karl Marx, John Rawls, and Robert Nozick and others. Looks at the ways in which these thinkers are in conversation with one another, as well as the ways in which
they touch on topics such as property, comparable worth, hunger, social choice, and government.

PJ 468E-W. TOPICS IN JUSTICE/COMMON GOOD (3). Explores topics central to the study of justice and the common good, using an interdisciplinary and integrative approach. NOTE: Junior standing or completion of Distributive Core required.

PJ 470. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (3). Studies various models/theories of economic development that traces a history of underdevelopment. Investigates the various barriers and problem areas in developing countries. Assesses possibilities, prospects,
and policies for the future. Prerequisite(s): EC 3200. Cross listing: BA 4170, EC 4170, and ENVS 470.

PJ 471. ANIMALS, SOCIETY, AND CULTURE (3). Introduces students to the debate about the proper relationship between humans and our animal cousins. Utilizes ethnographic reading, philosophy and an examination of political economy to highlight the cultural, economic and social impacts of our treatment of animals on our ecosystems and ourselves. Prerequisite(s): One
200-level Anthropology or Sociology course. Cross Listing(s): AN
471, and SO 471.

PJ 473. ENVIRONMENTAL ETHICS (3). Examines the theories of value, justice, and gender and applies them to environmental problems such as sustainability, climate change, over-population, consumption and waste, and wilderness protection, with the goal of developing ethical and political responses to these problems. Prerequisite(s): One 200 Level Philosophy Course. Cross listing: PL 448J and ENVS 415.
PJ 474. MODERN SLAVERY AND TRAFFICKING (3). Modern Slavery and human trafficking in global perspective. Covers sex trafficking, bonded labor, forced labor, child soldiers, chattel slavery, and domestic servant slavery. Explores the role of the state, organized crime, the media, culture, corruption, and debates about prostitution. Includes testimonies by survivors research reports, theoretical essays, policy statements, expert testimonies, and videos. Prerequisite(s): SO 200 or PJ 400 or permission of instructor. Cross listing: SO 474 and CJ 474.

PJ 477.  REVOLUTION IN THE MIDDLE EAST (3). Explores the complex nature of revolution in the Middle East, particularly the Arab world, by examining a number of revolutionary movements from the late 1800s to the Arab uprisings of 2011-2012. Cross listing: HS 477.

PJ 478. ECONOMIC POLICY, JUSTICE AND THE COMMON GOOD (3). Uses readings in economics, philosophy and Catholic social teaching to evaluate economic theory and economic policies that address social ills (e.g., poverty, unequal income distribution, unequal access to health care.) Prerequisite(s): EC
200, EC 3200, or EC 3300. Cross listing: CAS 443 and EC 4243.

PJ 479. SPIRITUALITIES AND THE CALL TO ACT (3). Why do we work for justice and how do we persist through the struggles? Explore belief systems offering vision of justice and calls to action, as well as spiritualities offering tools for action and resilience.

PJ 482E-W. TOPICS IN POLITICAL THEORY (3). Provides an intensive examination of the nature and aims of various forms of political theory, specific periods of political thought, major political thinkers or significant topics in political theory. Cross listing: POL 482E-W.

PJ 484. VALUES-FOCUSED PUBLIC POLICY (3). Examines the policies and procedures utilized by government to improve economic performance. Explores the role that individual and community worldviews and commitments to justice have in defining appropriate state and federal regulatory action, with particular attention to the Catholic worldview and Catholic social thought. Areas of study include anti-trust, consumer protection, employment law, and environmental law. Prerequisite(s): EC 200 or EC 3200. Cross listing: BA 4384, EC 4384, and CAS 460G.

PJ 486. NEGOTIATION AND MEDIATION (3). Explores analysis, theory, and practice of negotiation and mediation. Develops skills and improves understanding through simulations, feedback, and written analysis. Prerequisite(s): PJ 405 or COM 380 and sophomore standing. Cross listing: COM 485G.

PJ 487. TRANSNATIONAL FEMINISMS (3). Develops a gendered, historical, and contextual understanding of transnationalism, solidarity, social justice, feminist activism and globalization as specific processes. It will encourage acting on global issues in
more ethically and politically conscious ways. Prerequisite(s): One
200-level course in Anthropology or Sociology. Cross listing(s): AN 487, SO 487, WGS 487.

PJ 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN PEACE AND JUSTICE
(1-3). Offers independent exploration of areas of interest beyond the current curriculum.

PJ 495E-W. SELECTED TOPICS IN PEACE AND JUSTICE (3). Offers an opportunity to explore special topics such as nonviolent social change, regional conflicts, international violence and terrorism, and conflict resolution and management.

PJ 496. PEACE AND JUSTICE STUDIES PROJECT (4). The Peace and Justice Studies Project requires an Academic Internship with placement consistent with the primary area of concentration in the major; faculty advisor literature review; integrative demonstration illustrating area of concentration utilizing multiple perspectives; a reflective analysis essay; and public presentation of project. Capstone course for the Peace and Justice Studies major. Students will critically reflect on the Peace and Justice studies, read current books on peace and justice theory and fulfill requirements for an internship. Prerequisite(s): PJ 200 and Senior Standing.

PJ 498E-W. INTERNSHIP IN PEACE AND JUSTICE (3). Provides an intensive work experience appropriate to concerns for peace and justice. Prerequisite(s): PJ 400 and approval of program director required.

PHILOSOPHY (PL)

PL 270/PL 270C. PHILOSOPHICAL EXPLORATIONS (3). An introductory course in philosophy which acquaints students with the range of questions and issues raised in both the philosophical tradition and contemporary thought. Engages students in a critical analysis and evaluation of different philosophical positions, including their own. NOTE: PL 270C is a course that carries a communication focus in the course assignments and enrollment is limited to student who took the paired/linked RCC 200 course in the fall.

PL 404. CLASSICAL GREEK PHILOSOPHY (3). Examines the origins of Western philosophical thinking in classical Greece. Traces the beginnings of metaphysical speculation and ethical reflection from the pre-Socrates to Plato and Aristotle. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Philosophy course.

PL 406. LATER CLASSICAL PHILOSOPHY (3). Explores the movements of philosophy in the post-classical Greek and Roman periods with special emphasis on Stoicism, Epicureanism, and
Neo-Platonism. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Philosophy course.

PL 411. MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY (3). Explores Western philosophy from Augustine to the later Middle Ages. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Philosophy course.

PL 415. 17TH CENTURY PHILOSOPHY (3). Examines key philosophers and key topics of the 17th Century. Authors examined may include: Descartes, Hobbes, Spinoza, and Princess Elizabeth.  Topics may include: emotion, the existence of God, providence and connections to previous philosophers from the Classical, Later Classical, and Medieval periods. Prerequisite(s): One-200 level Philosophy course.

PL 417. THE EMERGENCE OF MODERNITY (3). Examines the significance and implications of the intellectual revolution in 17th century philosophical and scientific thought. Among the thinkers to be discussed may be Descartes, Galileo, Hobbes, Locke, and Newton. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Philosophy course.

PL 418. THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE ENLIGHTENMENT (3). Explores the development of philosophy in the 18th century,
often referred to as the period of Enlightenment. Among thinkers
to be discussed may be Hume, Rousseau, and Kant. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Philosophy course.

PL 419. 19TH CENTURY PHILOSOPHY (3). To what extent is reality, and hence our knowledge of reality, historical? Does history itself have an overall meaning? Explores these questions and others, in term of developments in philosophy during the 19th century. Thinkers discussed may include Hegel, Marx,
Kierkegaard, and Nietzsche. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level
Philosophy course.

PL 420. CONTEMPORARY CURRENTS (3). Summarizes key schools and movements on the contemporary philosophical scene. May emphasize analytic movement, phenomenology, existentialism and postmodern movements. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Philosophy course.

PL 428. THE PHENOMENOLOGICAL TRADITION (3). Traces the evolution of Continental philosophy from pure phenomenology to existential-phenomenology and more recent developments. Among the thinkers to be discussed may be Husserl, Heidegger, Merleau-Ponty, Sartre, Camus, Foucault, and Derrida. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Philosophy course.

PL 433. ASIAN PHILOSOPHIES AND RELIGIONS (3). Surveys major religious traditions of Asia, including Hinduism, Buddhism, Confucianism, and Taoism, emphasizing understanding the world, the human and the Transcendent. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Philosophy course or RT 201.

PL 435E-W. THEMES IN ASIAN PHILOSOPHIES AND RELIGIONS (3). Studies Asian religious traditions and attitudes, ancient and sacred scriptures, key historic figures, and contemporary issues. May cover the traditions of Buddhism, Hinduism, Confucianism, and Taoism in more depth. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Philosophy course or RT 201.

PL 438. ETHICS (3). Questions the foundation of ethical judgment. Examines key responses to this question and explores various issues (e.g. abortion, capital punishment and the socioeconomic order). Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Philosophy course.

PL 440E-W. SELECTED TOPICS IN METAPHYSICS (3). An in- depth study of a metaphysical topic(s) such as the nature of reality, the make-up of human beings (mind-body problem), notions of truth, the experience of God, etc. or of a prominent
metaphysical thinker(s). Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Philosophy course.

PL 441. THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE (3). How does human knowing occur? What is the meaning of “meaning”? What is required for validation? What are the relationships among language, thought and reality? Deals with these questions in such a way as both to provide a historical perspective and to elicit a personal stand. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Philosophy course.

PL 442. PHILOSOPHY OF SCIENCE (3). Studies origins, nature, and development of scientific knowledge. Includes scientific method and the status of scientific conclusion. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Philosophy course.

PL 443. PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION (3). Surveys philosophical discussions of religion and religious ideas from both a classical and contemporary perspective. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Philosophy course or RT 201.

PL 445. PHILOSOPHY OF ART (3). Examines the good and the beautiful, the relation of the beautiful to the artistic and the scientific, and the growth of human, moral good. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Philosophy course.

PL 448E-W. SPECIAL TOPICS IN ETHICS (3). Offers an in-depth study of a particular ethical thinker(s) both classical (e.g., Aristotle or Hume or Kant) and contemporary (e.g., MacIntyre or Nussbaum or Murdoch) or of a particular moral problem (e.g., capital punishment, just war theory, social justice). Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Philosophy course.

PL 450. POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY (3). Explores basic issues in political philosophy such as the relation of individual and society, freedom and authority and justice and equality. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Philosophy course or permission of instructor. Cross listing: PJ 450.

PL 452. PHILOSOPHY OF LAW (3). Explores various issues in the philosophy of law, such as the relation of law to morality, the relation of natural law to morality, the question of natural law, and the nature and purpose of human law. Prerequisite(s): One
200-level Philosophy course. Cross listing: CJ 456.

PL 454E-W. PHILOSOPHY AND SOCIAL ISSUES (3). Emphasizes philosophical analysis of contemporary social issues. May include war and morality, the nature of power and violence, philosophy and feminism, the social construction of human persons, etc. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Philosophy course.

PL 456E-W. PHILOSOPHY IN LITERATURE (3). Explores the philosophical themes reflected in literature of specific authors and genres. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Philosophy course.

PL 457. TOPICS IN POLITICAL THEORY: ANCIENT THOUGHT (3) Provides an intensive examination of the nature and aims of ancient political theory, related historical developments, major political thinkers, and significant topics of ancient western and non-western civilizations. Prerequisite(s): POL 281, or one 200-level Philosophy course. Cross listing: PJ
482K and POL 482K. NOTE: Junior standing.

PL 458. TOPICS IN POLITICAL THEORY: MODERN (3) Provides an intensive examination of the nature and aims of modern and post-modern political theory, related historical and contemporary developments, major political thinkers, and significant topics of western and non-western modernity. Prerequisite(s): PJ 200 or POL 281, or one 200-level Philosophy course. Cross listing: PJ 482L and POL 482L.

PL 459. TOPICS IN POLITICAL THEORY: FEMINISM (3) Provides an intensive examination of the nature and aims of feminist political theory, related historical and contemporary developments, major political thinkers, and significant topics of western and non-western gender in state and social affairs. Prerequisite(s): POL 281, or one 200-level Philosophy course. Cross listing: PJ 482M, POL 482M, and WGS 490J.

PL 460. CRITICAL THINKING (3). Provides a basic logic course aimed at developing the capacity to think clearly and critically, detecting and dealing with fallacious reasoning, unclear or misleading language, and manipulative techniques in various forms of human communication. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Philosophy course.
PL 461. LOGIC AND INTUITION (3). Explores and compares the nature and worth of logical and intuitional modes of thinking, and their relationship to life problems. Prerequisite(s): One 200- level Philosophy course.

PL 470. FEMINIST THEORY (3). Focuses on the striking emergence of feminist philosophy in the last half of the twentieth century. Studies the development of this movement, its impact on philosophy, and the changes it portends for future philosophizing. Emphasis may be on different approaches within feminist thinking (e.g., Anglo-American vs. French feminist writers) or on specific issues in feminist thought. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Philosophy course or WGS 400. Cross listing: WGS 470.

PL 486. PHILOSOPHICAL AND RELIGIOUS THEMES IN FILM (3). Integrates interests in grammar and meaning of film with inquiries into the “big questions” that are abiding concerns of philosophy and religion. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Philosophy course or RT 201. Cross listing: RT 465E.

PL 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN PHILOSOPHY (1-3). Provides an opportunity for independent study in an area of philosophical interest. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Philosophy course and approval of department chair.

PL 491E-W. SELECTED THINKERS IN PHILOSOPHY (3). Explores selected thinkers from ancient, medieval, modern, or contemporary periods of philosophy. Prerequisite(s): One 200- level Philosophy course.

PL 492E-W. SELECTED THEMES IN PHILOSOPHY (3). Offers an opportunity to explore special topics such as war and peace, human sexuality, creative imagination, technological culture based on historical, literary, religious, and philosophical contexts. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Philosophy course.

PL 494. PHILOSOPHICAL PRACTICUM (3). Students will bring together their heads, their hearts, and their hands. Combines a variety of readings with a student-developed semester long project; projects might include service-learning, an internship, or another type of project that reflects a student's interests. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Philosophy course and one 400- level Philosophy course.

PL 498E-W. INTERNSHIP IN PHILOSOPHY (3). Offers an opportunity to explore philosophy in its practical application to the various working areas or contemporary life and to reflect critically and constructively on the experience. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Philosophy course, junior class standing, and
minimum GPA of 2.80. Approval of department chair and director of the Academic Internship Program. NOTE: Majors and minors only.

PHYSICAL EDUCATION (PE)

PE 207. YOGA (1). Explores various Yoga techniques and incorporates a series of static stretching postures performed in specific sequences. Breathing patterns and body awareness will be used for relaxation and stress management.

PE 210. WEIGHT TRAINING (1). Studies resistive exercise emphasizing individual programs from beginning through advanced levels. Offers instruction in the use of free weights and machines, different types of resistive exercises, correct technique for exercises and safety procedures in the weight room. Includes flexibility, anaerobic and aerobic exercises, and their importance in relation to resistive training.

PE 217. ROCK CLIMBING I (1). Introduces basic techniques and safety skills required for mountain climbing. Includes on-campus instruction and conditioning followed by four, off-campus rock climbing experiences. NOTE: Travel required.

PE 220. ICE CLIMBING (1). Introduces basic techniques and safety skills for ice climbing. Includes two on campus meetings with instruction followed by three off campus ice climbing experiences.  NOTE: Travel required.

PE 223. GOLF I (1). Introduces basic swing, approach shots and putting for the novice or non-skilled golfer. Teaches rules, etiquette and course play followed by application of knowledge and skill through play at a local golf course. NOTE: Travel required.

PE 237. ROCK CLIMBING II (1). Provides advanced experience in rock climbing techniques. Emphasizes the safety aspects of the sport. Taught concurrently with PE 217. Prerequisite(s): PE 217. NOTE: Travel required.

PE 333. FIRST AID EMERGENCY RESPONSE (3). Consists of recognizing and caring for victims of any age. Situations, which include breathing, choking, and cardiac emergencies, are examined. Studies the care of injuries such as cuts, burns, sprains, fractures, and sudden illnesses. Certification in First Aid, Adult, Child, and Infant CPR are offered.

PE 401. WOMEN’S HEALTH ISSUES (3). Focuses on the maintenance and promotion of women’s health across the full spectrum of women’s lives. Topics explore physiological, psychological, cultural, economic, sociological, and spiritual factors that influence women’s health over the life span. Cross listing: HSC 401 and WGS 401. NOTE: For non-Nursing majors.

PE 413. PRINCIPLES OF EXERCISE PERFORMANCE AND SPORT NUTRITION (3). Designed for students interested in applying fitness principles into their daily lives. Offers the latest findings in exercise physiology and sport medicine, along with tools for self-assessment and guidelines for improving fitness levels.

PE 415. EXPLORING WELLNESS THROUGH HIKING (3). Offers the student a unique opportunity to connect with themselves, others, and the natural surroundings that exist in Colorado. Explores the relationship between being in the outdoors and effects it has on the dimensions of wellness. NOTE: Transportation required by student. Off campus hikes on Saturday.

PE 416. NUTRITION FOR WELLNESS (3). Examines the relationship between an individual’s nutritional habits and the effects on one’s overall health and well-being.

PE 418. WELLNESS: A PERSONAL COMMITMENT (3). Studies the seven dimensions of wellness: occupational, environmental, physical, social, emotional, intellectual and spiritual wellness, developing an information base from which to make effective decisions. Prerequisite(s): Junior standing. Cross listing: ED 418.

PE 420. OUTDOOR RECREATIONAL LEADERSHIP (3). Includes instruction and practice of outdoor recreational and survival skills
for the outdoor recreation enthusiast. Examines recreational facilities in terms of programming, management, and supervision.

PE 424. WILDERNESS FIRST RESPONDER (3). Training in decision-making and response to medical emergencies in remote settings.  Special wilderness topics include wound management, infection, fractures, dislocations, splinting, spine immobilization, patient assessment, monitoring and long-term management.

PE 425. PRINCIPLES OF COACHING (3). Develops basic principles and philosophies of coaching, which can be applied to all sports. Includes psychology of coaching, principles of conditioning, techniques for training, applied theory and practice.

PE 426. CARE AND PREVENTION OF ATHLETIC INJURIES (3). Includes anatomical analysis of the human body and the potential for athletic injury. Includes diagnosing injuries, prevention and preseason and in-season training techniques, treatment and rehabilitation processes. NOTE: Students may be responsible for additional course supplies.

PE 437. SPORT ETHICS (3). Challenges students to examine ethical issues in sport. Provides a historical and sociological perspective on the issues facing youth in interscholastic, intercollegiate, Olympic, and professional sports.

PE 438. SPORT ADMINISTRATION (3). Examines current trends and practices in management and administration. Explores areas in public relations, communication, law, and risk management.

PE 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN PHYSICAL EDUCATION (1-3). Provides an opportunity for independent explorations of areas of interest. Prerequisite(s): Approval of department chair.

PE 495E-W. SEMINAR IN PHYSICAL EDUCATION (1-3). Offers seminars on current topics in areas of physical education.

PE 496E-W. SEMINAR IN RECREATION (1-3). Offers seminars on current topics in areas of recreation.

PE 497E-W. SEMINAR IN COACHING (1-3). Offers seminars on current topics in areas of coaching.

PE 498E-W. INTERNSHIP IN PHYSICAL EDUCATION (3). Provides an opportunity for an internship in physical education under the supervision of a department member. Prerequisite(s): Approval of department chair and director of the Academic Internship Program. NOTE: Internships may be taken in physical education (E), recreation (F), coaching (G), athletic training (H) and outdoor education (I).

PHYSICS (PH)

PH 202A. GENERAL PHYSICS WITH TRIGONOMETRY I (3). Discusses fundamental concepts of motion, including Newton’s Laws and the conservation of energy, momentum, and angular momentum. Focuses on the development of quantitative and qualitative problem-solving skills. Co-requisite: PH 205A. Prerequisite(s): MT 260 or placement into MT 360A. NOTE: This course has been approved to satisfy the core Category II natural science with laboratory requirement when taken with PH 205A.

PH 202B. GENERAL PHYSICS WITH TRIGONOMETRY II (3). A
continuation of PH 202A, focusing on electricity, magnetism, and waves. Includes an introduction to quantum mechanics. Co- requisite: PH 205B. Prerequisite(s): PH 202A.

PH 203A. GENERAL PHYSICS WITH TRIGONOMETRY I RECITATION (1). Additional hour of Physics is designed as a recitation aimed to build problem-solving skills in both math and physics focusing on increasing problem-solving repetition, identification and organization. Utilizing dynamic, team-based learning students will learn to collaborate effectively and efficiently. Grading will be primarily completion credit with a
heavy weighting on participation in team-based problem-solving as well as credit for bravery in attempting problems before presenting them to colleagues.

PH 203B. GENERAL PHYSICS WITH TRIGONOMETRY II RECITATION (1). This additional hour of Physics is designed as a recitation aimed to build problem-solving skills in both math and physics focusing on increasing problem-solving repetition, identification and organization. Utilizing dynamic, team-based learning students will learn to collaborate effectively and efficiently. Grading will be primarily completion credit with a
heavy weighting on participation in team-based problem-solving as well as credit for bravery in attempting problems before presenting them to colleagues.

PH 205A. GENERAL PHYSICS WITH TRIGONOMETRY LABORATORY I (1). Complements PH 202A, providing practical, hands-on experience primarily with experiments related to mechanics. Co-requisite: PH 202A. NOTE: One three-hour laboratory each week required.

PH 205B. GENERAL PHYSICS WITH TRIGONOMETRY LABORATORY II (1). Complements PH 202B, providing practical, hands-on experience primarily with experiments related to electricity, magnetism, and introductory modern physics. Co- requisite: PH 202B. NOTE: One three-hour laboratory each week required.

PH 303A. GENERAL PHYSICS WITH CALCULUS I RECITATION (1). Additional hour of Physics is designed as a recitation aimed to build problem-solving skills in both math and physics focusing on increasing problem-solving repetition, identification and organization. Utilizing dynamic, team-based learning students will learn to collaborate effectively and efficiently. Grading will be primarily completion credit with a
heavy weighting on participation in team-based problem-solving as well as credit for bravery in attempting problems before presenting them to colleagues.

PH 303B. GENERAL PHYSICS WITH CALCULUS II RECITATION (1). This additional hour of Physics is designed as a recitation aimed to build problem-solving skills in both math and physics focusing on increasing problem-solving repetition, identification and organization. Utilizing dynamic, team-based learning students will learn to collaborate effectively and efficiently. Grading will be primarily completion credit with a
heavy weighting on participation in team-based problem-solving as well as credit for bravery in attempting problems before presenting them to colleagues.

PH 304A. GENERAL PHYSICS WITH CALCULUS I (3). Discusses fundamental concepts of motion, including Newton’s Laws and the conservation of energy, momentum, and angular momentum. Focuses on the development of quantitative and qualitative problem-solving skills. Co-requisite(s): PH 305A and MT 360A.
NOTE: This course has been approved to satisfy the core Category II natural science with laboratory requirement when taken with PH 305A.

PH 304B. GENERAL PHYSICS WITH CALCULUS II (3). A continuation of PH 304A, focusing on electricity, magnetism, and waves. Includes an introduction to quantum mechanics. Co- requisite: PH 305B. Prerequisite(s): PH 304A.

PH 305A. GENERAL PHYSICS WITH CALCULUS LABORATORY I (1). Compliments PH 304A, providing practical, hands-on experience primarily with experiments related to mechanics. Co-requisite: PH 304A.

PH 305B. GENERAL PHYSICS WITH CALCULUS LABORATORY II (1). Compliments PH 304B, providing practical, hands-on experience primarily with experiments related to mechanics. Co-requisite: PH 304B.

PH 408. ANALYTICAL MECHANICS AND SPECIAL RELATIVITY (3). Reviews Newtonian mechanics. Introduces calculus of variations and the Lagrangian and Hamiltonian formulations.  Describes collisions and oscillations, including normal modes of coupled systems. Introduces relativistic kinematics. Prerequisite(s): MT 463 and PH 304A.

PH 410. ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM (3). Studies Coulomb’s law through the electromagnetic field of moving charge. Develops electrostatic fields in vacuum and in dielectrics, magnetic fields associated with constant and variable currents in vacuum and in magnetic materials, Maxwell’s synthesis, and the propagation of electromagnetic waves in vacuum, in dielectrics and in good conductors. Prerequisite(s): MT 360C and PH 304B.

PH 420. ELECTRONICS (4). Discusses electronics and circuits. Includes AC and DC circuit analysis, physics of semiconductor devices, applications of transistors and operational amplifiers, and an introduction to digital logic and computer interfaces. Prerequisite(s); PH 202B or PH 304B, or permission of instructor. NOTE: One three-hour lab per week.

PH 425. OPTICS WITH LABORATORY (4). Reviews geometric optics and simple interference and diffraction phenomena. Introduces aberrations, Fresnel and Fraunhofer diffraction, the Michelson interferometer, circular and elliptical polarization, birefringence, and nonlinear crystals. Examines coherence; students build a laser cavity. Prerequisite(s): PH 304B. NOTE: One three hour laboratory each week.

PH 447. OPTICS, OBSERVATIONS, AND ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES. Reviews geometric optics and builds upon them explore the details of applied optical systems such as modern research telescopes. The course introduces the statistical techniques needed to model and analyze data arising from such systems, including techniques such as Bayesian inference and Monte Carlo sampling, which are explored via data analysis labs.

PH 451. MODERN PHYSICS LABORATORY AND SEMINAR (2). Exploration of quantum and relativistic phenomena, application of statistical methods to experimental data, and discussion of ethical considerations in physics research.  Prerequisite(s): PH 304B. NOTE: One hour of lecture/discussion and one three-hour laboratory session each week.

PH 460.  QUANTUM THEORY AND SPECTROSCOPY (3). Studies chemical kinetics, electrochemistry, kinetic molecular theory, photochemistry, atomic and molecular structure. Prerequisite(s): CH 230, PH 304B, and MT 360B. Cross-listing: CH 430B.

PH 465. STATISTICAL MECHANICS AND THERMODYNAMICS (3). Application of statistical methods to explain the laws of thermodynamics. Includes discussion of temperature, multiplicity of states, entropy, Boltzmann factors, and the partition function, applied to systems including ideal gases, quantum gases, and solids. Prerequisite(s): PH 304A.

PH 470. INTRODUCTION TO ASTROPHYSICS (3). Reviews the observational bases of astrophysics, radiative properties of stars, stellar spectra, binary and variable stars, stellar interiors and evolution, and galaxies and cosmology. Includes observational work. Prerequisite(s): PH 304B. Cross-Listing(s): AS 470. NOTE: Recommended as a physics elective or following completion of general physics and calculus.

PH 475. PHYSICS CAPSTONE SEMINAR 1). Review of and reflection on the physics curriculum, including extensions of selected assignments completed in previous courses. Discussion
of the ethical considerations faced by practicing scientists. NOTE: Majors only and senior class standing.

PH 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN PHYSICS (1-4). Offers an opportunity for advanced independent research.
Prerequisite(s): Approval of department chair. NOTE: Senior class standing and majors only

PH 498E-W. INTERNSHIP IN PHYSICS (3). Involves placement of advanced physics students in industry, government or other agencies.  Faculty approval, supervision, and evaluation of
students' work required. Prerequisite(s): PH 451 NOTE: Majors only and approval of department chair required

POLITICAL ECONOMY (PEC)

PEC 402. POLITCAL ECONOMY OF UNDERDEVELOPMENT (3). Explores the wealth and poverty of nations through the lens of political economy. The complex interactions between history, politics and economics that reproduce the conditions of poverty and underdevelopment are examined. Prerequisite(s): One 200- level politics course, or PJ 200. Cross listing: POL 402 and PJ
432S.

PEC 430. BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS (3). Examines
psychological phenomena affecting economic behavior via a survey of prominent studies in the fields of behavioral and neuro- economics.  Focuses on insights of human motivation and
bounded rationality and implications for economic theory and public policy. Prerequisite(s): EC 3300.

PEC 441. MEASURING WHAT MATTERS (3). Metrics matter for creating a more sustainable world because they influence social and economic institutions. This class will use case studies to explore measuring sustainability through the lens of businesses, cities, countries, and the globe. Prerequisite(s): EC 200 or EC
3200,

PEC 473. PUBLIC FINANCE AND PUBLIC POLICY (3).
Examines the basic principles of public finance. Considers the role of government in the economy and how government might approach solving social issues through a political economy lens. Topics include the moral economy, efficiency and equity aspects
of taxation and redistributive programs, private and public solutions to problems of externalities and public goods, government provision of health care and social insurance programs, budgeting and public debt. Prerequisite(s): EC200, or EC 3200 and EC 3300. Cross listing: BA 4173.

PEC 482E-W. TOPICS IN POLITICAL ECONOMY (3). Provides an in-depth analysis of a significant topic in Political Economy. Content varies year to year. NOTE: Junior standing or permission of instructor.

PEC 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN POLITICAL ECONOMY (3). Offers an opportunity for independent exploration of areas of interest under the direction of a department member. Prerequisite(s): Approval of department chair.

PEC 494. RESEARCH APPRENTICESHIP (1-3). Offers students the opportunity to develop and apply their political economy research skills by assisting a supervising faculty member with a research project as directed. NOTE: Senior standing or permission of instructor.

PEC 498E-W. INTERNSHIP IN POLITICAL ECONOMY (3). Provides practical experience in applied political economy. Students are placed according to their interests and learning goals at public, nonprofit or private organizations or institutions. Progress is guided and monitored by the site supervisor and the faculty sponsor.  See Regis College Academic Internship Program for important guidelines. Prerequisite(s): Approval of department chair and director of Academic Internship Program. NOTE: minimum of 120-hours required.

PEC 499A. CAPSTONE I: APPROACHES IN POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC ANALYSIS (3). The first of two capstone courses required of all Politics and Political Economy majors. Focuses on critical analysis of selected political and economic themes and theories, and facilitates preparation for the second capstone seminar in the sequence. The capstone may be team-taught by members of the Politics and Political Economy faculty. NOTE: Senior standing or permissions of instructor. Cross listing(s): POL
499A.

PEC 499B. CAPSTONE II: INTEGRATED EXPERIENCE (3). The second of two capstones, the course draws on historiography and theory from disciplines of History, Politics and Economics. Students meet collectively and work independently to complete a summative research project with advising from History, Politics and Political Economy faculty. NOTE: Senior standing or permission of instructor. Cross-listing(s): POL 499B.

POLITICS (POL)

POL 200. SUSTAINABILITY AND COLLAPSE (3). Takes an evidence-based, case study, theoretical and integrative approach to the challenge of sustainability across world history. Draws on disciplines of history, politics, and international studies. Cross- Listing(s): HS 200.

POL 201. ORIGINS AND CHALLENGES OF THE MODERN WORLD (3). Takes an evidence based, case study, theoretical, and integrative approach to underlying origins and present challenges of the modern world. Draws on disciplines of history, politics, and international studies. Cross listing: HS 201.

POL 202. FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS IN POLITICS (3). Explores basic questions in the study of politics, such as: what is the state? What does it mean for the people to govern? What makes identity political? Why are some countries poor and others rich?

POL 206. INTRODUCTION TO UNITED STATES POLITICS (3). A critical introduction to United States politics. Topics may
include democracy and power, the constitutional system; inequality, democracy and capitalism, immigration, membership and exclusion, party systems and realignment; ascriptive identities such as race, gender, and sexuality.

POL 231. INTRODUCTION TO INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (3). Wide-ranging introduction to understanding and analysis of contemporary International Relations. Focus on description, explanation and prediction of political, economic, and security interactions between nation-states and other important trans-national and sub-national actors.

POL 241. INTRODUCTION TO COMPARATIVE POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT (3). Wide-ranging introductory comparative description and evaluation of political, economic, and government performance in contemporary nation-states. Reviews and assesses issues of political culture, economic and governmental structure, and criteria of evaluation.

POL 255/255C. DEMOCRACY AND DEVELOPMENT IN TAIWAN: HISTORY AND POLITICS IN A GLOBAL POWERHOUSE (3). Explores the forces that have shaped contemporary Taiwan through an interdisciplinary approach that places Taiwan’s development in historical perspective as part of larger developments in East Asia and the world. Cross-listing: HS
255.

POL 281/POL 281C. INTRODUCTION TO POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY (3). Introduces a variety of philosophies and alternative visions of social organization, politics, government, economics, peace, and justice. Examines underlying assumptions, propositions, and potential implications of particular political attitudes, processes and policies.

POL 400. CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (3) Comparative analysis of the US Constitutional legal system to other systems, with a primary focus on the US system. Covers a standard undergraduate law text. Prerequisite(s): POL 281, POL 241, POL
231, or permission of instructor. NOTE: Junior or Senior standing or permission of instructor required.

POL 402. POLITCAL ECONOMY OF UNDERDEVELOPMENT (3). Explores the wealth and poverty of nations through the lens of political economy. The complex interactions between history, politics and economics that reproduce the conditions of poverty and underdevelopment are examined. Prerequisite(s): One 200-
level politics course, or PJ 200. Cross listing: PEC 402 and PJ 432S.

POL 403. COURTS AND THE JUDICIAL PROCESS (3). Explores administration of justice, emphasizing United States systems. Focuses on judicial decision-making and procedures in federal and state judicial systems. Prerequisite(s): Junior standing or permission of instructor required. Cross listing: CR 403.

POL 404. INTERNATIONAL LAW AND HUMAN RIGHTS (3). Examines how International Law has become a process of normative regime-building that secures the inherent Human
Rights of all people with the help of global monitoring, domestic education and law enforcement and international discourse through the UN system. Prerequisite(s): POL 231, POL 241, or POL 281. Cross listing: PJ 403.

POL 406. JUST AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT (3). Integrates knowledge of development practice and theory from the perspective of communities, states, and the global system. Builds on community-based models of just and sustainable development success. Interdisciplinary, drawing on health, environment, politics, business and law. Prerequisite(s): POL 231, POL 241, or POL 281. Cross listing: ENVS 416 NOTE: Junior standing or completion of Distributive Core required.

POL 410. UNITED STATES PUBLIC PLOICY (3). Analyzes the politics, institutions, norms and actors involved in the creation of United States public policy, including the policy making process and tools of policy analysis. Considers specific substantive policy areas. Cross listing(s): PJ 482N. Prerequisite(s): POL 231, POL
241 or POL 281.

POL 413. UNITED STATES ELECTIONS (3). Examines United States elections in historical and theoretical perspective. Emphasizes party systems and realignment, representation and political identity, state building, political economy and normative theories of democracy. Prerequisite(s): Junior standing or permission of instructor required.

POL 415. 20th CENTURY UNITED STATES POLITICS (3). Examines themes in US political development beginning in the
20th century, such as the role of class, political economy, race, gender, and sexuality in party systems, state and institution building, realignments, federalism, sectionalism and democratic inclusion and exclusion. Prerequisite(s): POL 206, HS 223, or HS
224.

POL 416. THE POLITICS OF MASS INCARCERATION (3). The United States make up almost 5% of the global population, and comprises 25% of the world’s prison population. This course investigates the reasons explaining this exceptional feature of American politics, and explores proposals for transforming it. Cross listing(s): HS 413 and PJ 411.

POL 420. ENVIRONMENTAL POLITICS (3). Uses four case studies of environmental progress to drive analysis of local, regional, national, and global levels of dealing with change and conservation.  Examines civil society, state and UN system approaches to building environmental norms that shape policy and legislation. Prerequisite(s): POL 231, POL 241, or POL 281.
Cross-listing ENVS 420. Junior standing or permission of instructor.

POL 432. INTERNATIONAL POLITICAL ECONOMY (3). Evaluates interdependencies of politics and economics at systemic/global level. Reviews alternative frameworks for the analysis of the nature, dynamics, relationships, and implications of political and economic interactions. Application to key contemporary issues, problems and controversies. Prerequisite(s): EC 200 or EC 3200 and junior class standing. Cross listing: EC
4232, ENVS 432 and PJ 454.

POL 439. UNITED STATES FOREIGN POLICY SINCE WORLD WAR II (3). Reviews and evaluates the nature and conduct of U.S. foreign policy since 1945. Considers policies adopted by the U.S. to deal with the perceived international system, including intended outputs and actual outcomes of policy, and contemporary challenges. Prerequisite(s): POL 231 or POL 241. Junior or senior standing or permission of instructor required. Cross listing: PJ
438.

POL 445. COMPARATIVE PUBLIC POLICY (3). Provides a comparative examination of public policy in western industrialized nation-states emphasizing the interaction and interdependency of politics and economics. Evaluates basic issues of public policy including distribution, extraction, and regulation focusing on identifying both the range of possible choices and the actual outcomes of adopted policies under a variety of circumstances. Prerequisite(s): EC 200 or EC 3200. Cross listing: EC 4245 or ENVS 445 or PJ 446. NOTE: Junior or senior standing required.

POL 455. STORIES FROM WARTIME (3). Encourages students to critically examine modern conflict and explore the variety of ways those affected by conflict have sought to find meaning in their experience. NOTE: Junior standing or permission of instructor. Cross-listing: HS 455 and PJ 451P.

POL 464. STAND UP AND FIGHT: COMMUNITY ORGANIZING (3). Presents history, theory and strategies of community organizing in the United States, and experience of community organizing techniques by developing and implementing a community organizing project on the Regis campus or working with the local community organizers. Cross listing: PJ 464 and SO
464.

POL 481. THEORIES OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (3). Explores primary theoretical approaches to understanding international relations, including individual, state, and systemic levels of analysis, analyzed from realist, idealist, and radical perspectives. Compares and analyses theories by their assumptions, major assertions, and empirical manifestations and implications for present and future international relations. Prerequisite(s): POL 231, POL 281, POL 241, or equivalent. NOTE: Junior or senior standing required.

POL 482E-W. TOPICS IN POLITICAL THEORY (3). Provides an intensive examination of the nature and aims of various forms of political theory, specific periods of political thought, major political thinkers, or significant topics in political theory. Cross listing: PJ 482E-W. NOTE: Junior or senior standing required.

POL 483. ABOLITION DEMOCRACY (3). Explores core themes in US political thought, such as freedom and slavery, republic and empire, race and citizenship, wage labor and self-determination, in
19th century abolitionism, and in contemporary debates around prison and border abolition. Cross Listing(s): PJ 482F. Prerequisite(s): POL 281, PJ 200, or permission of instructor.

POL 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN POLITICS (1-3). Offers an opportunity for independent exploration of areas of interest under the supervision of department member. Prerequisite(s): Approval of department chair.

POL 493E-W. SEMINAR IN INTERNATIONAL POLITICS (3). Provides an intensive study of selected issues and problems of international politics, emphasizing individual research interests. Includes preparation and presentation of a major research project. Prerequisite(s): POL 231 or POL 241. Junior standing.

POL 494E-W. SEMINAR IN COMPARATIVE POLITICS (3). Provides an intensive study of selected issues, problems, and
regions in comparative politics, emphasizing individual research interests. Includes preparation and presentation of a major research project. Prerequisite(s): POL 231 or POL 241. Junior standing.

POL 495E-W. SEMINAR IN POLITICS (3). Provides an intensive study of selected topics, issues, or problems in political science. Includes preparation and presentation of a major research project. Prerequisite(s): Junior standing.

POL 496E-W. SEMINAR IN UNITED STATES POLITICS (3). Provides an intensive study of selected issues of U.S. politics, emphasizing individual research projects. Includes preparation and presentation of a major research project. Prerequisite(s): Junior standing.

POL 497.VOCATION OF LAW (3). Provides students interested in a legal career the opportunity to study and consult with their professor, pre-law advisor, and legal practitioners in preparation for graduate studies and vocations related to law.

POL 498E-W. INTERNSHIP IN POLITICS AND LAW (3). Offers an opportunity for placement in a governmental organization or private institution involved in political processes. Progress is guided and monitored by the site supervisor and the faculty sponsor. Site selection emphasizes the best combination of prior academic learning and on-the-job experience. Prerequisite(s): Junior or senior standing. Approval of Departmental Chair and director of Academic Internship Program.

POL 499A. CAPSTONE I: APPROACHES TO POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC ANALYSIS (3). The first of two capstone courses required of all Politics and Political Economy majors. Focuses on critical analysis of selected political and economic themes and theories, and facilitates preparation for the second capstone seminar in the sequence. The capstone may be team-taught by members of the Politics and Political Economy faculty. NOTE: senior standing or permissions of instructor. Cross listing(s): PEC
499A.

POL 499B.  CAPSTONE II: INTEGRATED EXPERIENCE (3). The second of two capstones, the course draws on historiography and theory from disciplines of History, Politics and Economics. Students meet collectively and work independently to complete a summative research project with advising from History, Politics and Political Economy faculty. NOTE: Senior standing or permission of instructor. Cross-listing(s): PEC 499B.

PSYCHOLOGY (PSY)

PSY 250/PSY 250C/PSY 250H. GENERAL PSYCHOLOGY (3). Introduces the science of behavior and mental processes through a systematic study of representative areas of psychology. NOTE: PSY 250C is a course that carries a communication focus in the course assignments, and enrollment is limited to student who took the paired/linked RCC 200 course in the fall.

PSY 358 LIFESPAN HUMAN DEVELOPMENT (3). Studies biological, psychological and social factors in human development from conception to later adulthood. Prerequisite(s): PSY 250. NOTE: Recommended for Nursing majors. Does not meet Psychology major Group A requirements.

PSY 404. EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY (3). Explores the core principles and theories of learning and instruction which have evolved through research in the fields of education and psychology. Major topics include: current theories of neuroscience, learning and cognitive development, academic motivation, social and emotional development, and assessment. Prerequisite(s): PSY 250.

PSY 418. INDUSTRIAL AND ORGANIZATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY (3). Studies principles of psychology as applied to selected problems in the area of business and industry. Prerequisite(s): PSY 250.

PSY 422. RESEARCH METHODS AND BEHAVIORAL STATISTICS I (3). First of a two-semester sequence integrating statistics and research methods. Covers experimental design and statistics, and includes an individual research project. Prerequisite(s): PSY 250. NOTE: It is recommended students take this course in their Sophomore or Junior year. Must pass with a
C- or better to be eligible to take PSY 423 and PSY 424. PSY 423 and PSY 424 should be taken consecutively with this course.

PSY 423. RESEARCH METHODS & BEHAVIORAL STATISTICS II (3). Second of a two-semester sequence integrating statistics and research methods. Covers experimental design and statistics. Prerequisite(s): PSY 422. Co-requisite(s): PSY 424. NOTE: Must pass PSY 422 with a C- or better prior to enrolling. PSY 423 should be taken in a consecutive semester with PSY 422.

PSY 424. RESEARCH METHODS & BEHAVIORAL STATISTICS LABORATORY (1). Provides an opportunity for completion of individual research projects related to appropriate experimental and statistical design. Prerequisite(s): PSY 422. Co-requisite(s): PSY 423.

PSY 425. HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY (3). Examines the influence of psychological and social variables on health and activity participation. Focuses on stress management, motivation, adherence, access, barriers, and support systems across the lifespan. Prerequisite(s): PSY 250. NOTE: Permission of instructor required for all non-majors. Cross listing: HES 418.

PSY 434. BEHAVIORAL GENETICS (3). Focuses on how genetics can add to our understanding of complex human behaviors, including cognition, language, emotion, and personality. Topics
will include key behavioral genetic methodologies, evolutionary psychology, the psychology of individual differences including cognitive disabilities and psychological disorders, and the social and ethical implications of genetics research. Prerequisite(s): PSY
250.

PSY 438. SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY (3). Studies social behavior including the social self; attribution theory; attitude formation and change; attraction, love and intimacy; aggression and altruism; and conformity and obedience. Co-requisite(s): PSY 439. Prerequisite(s): PSY 250.

PSY 439. SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY LAB (1). Hands on laboratory teaching the foundational skills necessary to conduct social psychological science. Specific focus on social cognition and intergroup relations. Co-requisite(s): PSY 438. Prerequisite(s): PSY 250.

PSY 440. PSYCHOLOGY OF RACISM (3). Focuses on how individual-level psychological processes are structured and patterned to perpetuate and maintain systems of racist oppression. We will discuss the relationships between
participation in racially oppressive societal structures and numerous psychological and behavioral processes for both members of racially dominant/oppressive groups and for individuals from groups subjected to racial oppression.
Interventions that reduce prejudice in racially powerful groups will be explored alongside interventions that that target the well-
being, self-defense, and success of targets of racial oppression. Additionally, cultural, global, and historical perspectives are necessary to understand the modern racist system of oppression, and this course will ensure that these topics are examined. All students will leave this class with tools necessary to effect change to our systems of racist oppression; students will also gain experience actively reducing racism in our world. Cross listing(s): CIL 440.

PSY 442. LEARNING AND MEMORY (3). Introduces basic concepts, methods and results of experimental analysis of learning and memory in humans and nonhuman animals. Includes classical and operant conditioning, discrimination learning processes underlying encoding, storage, and retrieval of information in memory, and other cognitive processes. Prerequisite(s): PSY 250.

PSY 450. PSYCHOLOGY OF GENDER (3). Explores gender influences on individual and group behavior as well as the social, biological, cognitive, and behavioral bases of sex, gender, sexuality, and gender identity. Considers the role of intersecting identities and power, privilege and oppression, in the gendered experiences of people. Prerequisite(s): PSY 250 or WGS 400. Cross listing: WGS 450.

PSY 453. CLINICAL AND COUNSELING PSYCHOLOGY (3). Considers theory and application of basic therapeutic techniques to bring about behavioral change. Focuses on the science of therapy, ethical considerations and controversies, and the relationship between one’s own world view and the change process. Includes role-play of basic counseling skills. Prerequisite(s): PSY 250.

PSY 454. COGNITIVE PSYCHOLOGY (3). Focuses on psychological processes such as attention, memory, concept formation, problem solving, and language. Examines current research data, theories, and applications. Co-requisite(s): PSY 455. Prerequisite(s): PSY 250 and at least sophomore standing.

PSY 455. COGNITIVE PSYCHOLOGY LABORATORY (1). Experiments and hands-on activities that explore human cognitive processes, such as attention, memory, language, and problem solving. Co-Requisite(s): PSY 454. Prerequisite(s): PSY 250.

PSY 457. DEVELOPMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY I (3). The first of a two-semester sequence, this course focuses on the biological, psychological, and social factors that influence human development from conception to mid adolescence. Includes the theories and methodologies used to assess human development over time. Prerequisite(s): PSY 250.

PSY 458. DEVELOPMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY II (3). The second
of a two-semester sequence, this course focuses on the biological, psychological, and social factors that influence human
development from late adolescence through late adulthood. Includes the theories and methodologies used to assess human development over time. Prerequisite(s): PSY 250 and PSY 457.

PSY 462. DEVELOPMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY LAB (1). Experiments and hands-on activities that explore human development across the lifespan. Prerequisite(s): PSY 250, and
PSY 457. Prerequisite or corequisite: PSY 458.

PSY 465. CULTURAL PSYCHOLOGY (3). Emphasizes psychological research and theory used to understand difference and similarities in human behavior and mental processing across cultures and between groups.   Topics may include: motivation, emotion, cognition, communication, acculturation, self-identity, social and moral development. Prerequisite(s): PSY 250.

PSY 467. HUMAN SEXUALITY (3). Focuses on the physiological, behavioral, cognitive, and social aspects of human behavior as related to human sexuality using a multidisciplinary and life-span approach. Topics include physiology, communication, gender, development, orientation, violence, the marketplace, culture, religion, and health. Prerequisite(s): PSY 250 or WGS 400. Cross listing: WGS 467.

PSY 468. DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES (3). Covers a range of developmental differences and disorders in children. We discuss learning disabilities including Dyslexia, intellectual disabilities including Down Syndrome, and behavioral disorders such as ADHD. We will also learn about how psychological diagnoses
such as depression and bipolar disorder present in childhood.
Prerequisite(s): PSY 250.

PSY 470. PSYCHOLOGY OF PERSONALITY (3). Studies theories of development and organization of personality including representative examples of classical and modern theories. Prerequisite(s): PSY 250.

PSY 471. ABNORMAL PSYCHOLOGY (3). Uses the biopsychosocial model as the basis for explaining the cause, understanding, and treatment of mental disorders. Emphasizes common disorders encountered in clinical practice and specific criterion necessary for making a diagnosis. Prerequisite(s): PSY
250.

PSY 482. SENSATION AND PERCEPTION (3). Introduces the physiological and psychological processes underlying basic sensory and perceptual experience. Emphasizes psychophysical relationships established for the different sense modalities and theoretical interpretations of the sensory data. Co-requisite: PSY
483. Prerequisite(s): PSY 250.

PSY 483. SENSATION AND PERCEPTION LAB (1). Hands on activities that explore the concepts related to sensation and perception, including visual processing, auditory processing, and the chemical senses of taste and smell. NOTE: Majors and minors only. Co-requisite(s): PSY 482. Prerequisite(s): PSY 250.

PSY 484. FORENSIC PSYCHOLOGY (3). Provides a critical analysis of the law, focusing on the criminal justice system in our society. Emphasizes the psychological, social, and cultural factors that influence the criminal justice system, and the use of behavioral science techniques. Prerequisite(s): PSY 250 or SO
200. Cross listing: CJ 415.

PSY 487. NEUROPSYCHOLOGY (3). Studies the physiological and neuropsychological correlates of behavior. These include but are not limited to neural systems regulating motivation, emotion, learning, and the neuropsychological bases of cognitive processes. Physiological and psychological responses to brain injury are also examined.  Prerequisite(s): PSY 250.
PSY 488. NEUROPSYCHOLOGY LABORATORY (1). Emphasizes current research techniques and neuropsychological methods for assessing cognitive functions in humans, with an emphasis on assessment of the neurobehavioral impact of cerebral lesions. Co- requisite: PSY 487.

PSY 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN PSYCHOLOGY (1-3). Offers an opportunity for advanced study in psychology under the direction of a department faculty member. Prerequisite(s): PSY
250, permission of instructor, Junior standing, and approval of department chair required.

PSY 491E-W. RESEARCH IN PSYCHOLOGY (1-3). Offers an opportunity for collaborative research in psychology under faculty direction. Requires oral or poster presentation. Prerequisite(s): PSY 250. Approval of department chair required.

PSY 493. SENIOR CAPSTONE (3). Provides the culminating experience of the major, focusing on integration and application of theory. Must be completed as graded coursework at Regis University. Prerequisite(s): PSY 250, Majors only and Senior standing.

PSY 498E-W. INTERNSHIP IN PSYCHOLOGY (3). Involves a placement that draws on skills related to psychology, such as a clinical or research agency, for advanced psychology students. Prerequisite(s): Junior standing and minimum GPA of 2.80. Approval of department chair and director of the Academic Internship Program.

PSY 499. SENIOR THESIS (2). Students meet with the thesis advisor to prepare for the defense of the research before a panel of faculty, to present the research in a public forum, and to submit a final thesis that conforms to APA guidelines and is approved by the faculty examination committee. Prerequisite(s): PSY 491E-W and approval of department chair required.

RELIGION AND THEOLOGY

RT 201/RT 201C. RELIGION AND THE HUMAN QUEST (3). Considering human existence in relation to “the sacred” and drawing on Eastern and Western religious traditions, this course explores religious perspectives on human question about life, suffering, goodness, and ultimacy. NOTE: RT 201C is a course
that carries a communication focus in the course assignments, and enrollment is limited to student who took the paired/linked RCC
200 course in the fall.

RT 201H. HONORS RELIGION AND THE HUMAN QUEST (3). Cultivates curiosity about what it means to be human in the fact
of the sacred, the ultimate, the mystery of existence, and how different people historically have understood this. Develops and enhances ability to evaluate critically various approaches to existential and social questions about meaning, suffering, goodness, and ultimacy. NOTE: Honors students only.

RT 301. IN THE BEGINNING: BIBLE AND BELIEF (3). Introduces the study of the Old and New Testaments. Examines the
historical background of the texts and what its authors have to say to people today on important religious questions, such as the nature of God, human beings, and the world in which we live, and what it means to live a whole, purposeful life. Prerequisite(s): RT
201/RT 201C.


RT 302. FAITH AND JUSTICE IN WORLD CHRISTIANITY (3). Examines how the enculturation of Christianity in different times and places produces distinctive beliefs about Jesus and engages the pursuit of justice in the context of religious and cultural injustice. Prerequisite(s): RT 201/RT 201C.

RT 303. MYSTICS, SAINTS AND RADICALS (3). Explores questions about God, and such topics as suffering, justice, and salvation through the lenses of various traditions of spiritual discipline using examples from ancient to modern spiritual writers. Prerequisite(s): RT 201/RT 201C.

RT 304. FLOURISING AND CATHOLIC ETHICS (3). What does human flourishing and well-being look like? Who is the human person? These questions will be examined in light of 77reason informed by Catholic Christian faith with emphasis upon Jesus, the virtues, and their relevance for contemporary moral life. Prerequisite(s): RT 201/RT 201C.

RT 305. BELIEF AND UNBELIEF (3). Explores questions of belief and doubt from Christian and secular perspectives, for example, regarding science, philosophy, and the experience of suffering. Prerequisite(s): RT 201/RT 201C.

RT 306. JESUIT SPIRITUALITY (3). Study of the spirituality of Saint Ignatius Loyola (founder of the Jesuits) and its relevance for contemporary spirituality. Topics include prayer, discernment, meaning and vocation. Prerequisite(s): RT 201/RT 201C.

RT 307. CATHOLIC SOCIAL JUSTICE (3). Examines the living tradition of Catholic social thought with respect to social and economic justice, war and peace, and other major issues and themes. Prerequisite(s): RT 201. NOTE: Course includes a required service learning component.

RT 308. CATHOLIC CHRISTIANITY (3). An interdisciplinary investigation of the foundational sources of Catholic Christianity emphasizing historical development of the tradition and academic approaches to expressions of that development such as biblical literature, sacramental and liturgical practice, official church teachings (especially Vatican Council II), and Christian mission in the modern world. Prerequisite(s): RT 201/RT 201C. Cross Listing: CAS 308.

RT 309. WESTERN SPIRITUAL PATHS (3). Investigates some of the traditions, practices and ways of life that shape spiritual paths in Christianity, Judaism and Islam in the west. Areas of study will include monasticism, pilgrimage, law and mysticism. Prerequisite(s): RT 201.

RT 310. SCIENCE AND RELIGION (3). An investigation into the relationship between science and religion including its history as well as its different possibilities, e.g., conflict, independence and dialog.  Considers the implications of science for religious values and vice versa. Prerequisite(s): RT 201/RT 201C.

RT 311. PSYCHOLOGY AND RELIGION (3). Explores the relationships between psychology and religion with a particular emphasis on the psychological study of Christian traditions, beliefs and experiences. Prerequisite(s): RT 201/RT 201C.

RT 312. RELIGION IN POST MODERN AGE (3). Explores the collapse of the Modern age, the emergence of Postmodernism and the impact of these developments on religion in general and Christianity in particular. Prerequisite(s): RT 201/RT 201C.
RT 313. CHRISTIAN LOVE AND MARRIAGE (3). Investigates the nature of Christian love focusing on the Christian understanding
of marriage. Prerequisite(s): RT 201.

RT 314. FAITH AND HEALING (3). Explores the complex role faith plays in the healing process, including the ways that people rely on religious beliefs and practices to cope with illness and disability. Prerequisite(s): RT 201/RT 201C.

RT 315. LATINO/A CATHOLICISM (3). Explores Latino/a Christian experience in the United States, its culture, theology, and spirituality in the context of the Catholic Church. Includes
visits to local events and worship sites. Prerequisite(s): RT 201/RT
201C.

RT 316. THEOLOGY AND SEXUALITY (3). Explores historical and theological understandings of sexuality, intimacy, relationships, and the body. Prerequisite(s): RT 201/RT 201C.

RT 317. CHRISTIAN NONVIOLENCE (3). Examines the thought and practice of Christian nonviolence and its relevance for the contemporary world. Prerequisite(s): RT 201/RT 201C.

RT 318. THE GOSPELS (3). Investigates the early Christian
gospels (both canonical and non-canonical) with particular interest in a variety of views about who Jesus was/is and their implications for the understanding of the development of early Christianity. Prerequisite(s): RT 201/RT 201C.

RT 319. THEOLOGY OF VOCATION (3). Explores historical
and contemporary Christian understandings of calling and purpose in human life, with special attention to discipleship, discernment, and service to others. Prerequisite(s): RT 201,

RT 320. THEOLOGY, POLITICS, AND RELIGION IN A GLOBAL AGE (3). Examines the place of political theology within the Christian tradition, the role of religion in America, and the impact of the resurgence of religion within today’s global political context. Prerequisite(s): RT 201.

RT 321. SUFFERING AND CHRISTIAN LIFE (3). Life abounds with questions about why there is suffering, what meaning
suffering might have, and how to deal with the suffering around us. Explores biblical, traditional, and contemporary Christian responses to these questions. Prerequisite(s): RT 201 or RT
201C.

RT 322. CATHOLIC ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE (3). Examines the call to work for environmental justice, especially through the lens of Catholic Social Teaching and Pope Francis’ Laudato Si. Through required service learning, students will make an impact in the local community. Prerequisite(s): RT 201 or RT 201C.
NOTE: Course requires a service learning component.

RT 323. CATHOLIC IMAGINATION IN LITERATURE AND FILM (3). Explores characteristically Catholic ways of imagining
the world and wrestling with important human questions through literature and film. Prerequisite(s): RT 201. Cross-listing: CAS
323.

RT 324. INTERFAITH CASES IN AMERICAN RELIGION (3). Explores case studies in which religious, spiritual, and worldview differences affect public spaces, such as in health care, education, and business. Student gain skills and knowledge necessary to become interfaith leaders in their chosen profession. Prerequisite(s): RT 201.


RT 325. CHRISTIAN DYNAMICS OF LEADERSHIP (3). Exploration of Christian theories and theologies of service and leadership with attention to practical strategies. NOTE: Course is designed for students with meaningful experience in service, ministry, or leadership. Prerequisite(s): RT 201.

RT 326. MUSIC, ART, AND THEOLOGY (3). Explores the
power of music and art as vehicles of communion with the sacred and as forces for spiritual and social transformation; a case studies approach, with special attention to Ignatian theological perspectives. Prerequisite(s): RT 201.

RT 327. JESUS (3). Engaging both historical and theological questions, this course considers the meaning of the Christian faith in Jesus Christ and the implications of that faith for human life. Prerequisite(s): RT 201.

RT 393. THE PILGRIMAGE OF ST. IGNATIUS LOYOLA (3). Students will retrace Ignatius’ pilgrimage route from Loyola to Barcelona, studying distinctive characteristics of St. Ignatius’s spirituality as well as reasons for the prominence of pilgrimages in Christian spirituality since the Middle Ages. Prerequisite(s): RT
201 and permission of instructor. NOTE: Restricted to only those students participating in the travel learning.

RT 400E-W. RELIGION AND DIVERSITY (3). Explores the connections between religion and diversity, integrating different perspectives and/or disciplinary approaches. Prerequisite(s): RT
201/RT 201C and any 300-level religious studies course.

RT 401E-W. RELIGION AND THE ENVIRONMENT (3). Explores the connections between religion and the environment, integrating different perspectives and/or disciplinary approaches. Prerequisite(s): RT 201/RT 201C and any 300-level religious studies course.

RT 402E-W. RELIGION AND JUSTICE (3). Explores the connections between religion and justice, integrating different perspectives and/or disciplinary approaches. Prerequisite(s): RT
201/RT 201C and any 300-level religious studies course.

RT 403E-W. RELIGION AND MEANING (3). Explores the connections between religion and meaning, integrating different perspectives and/or disciplinary approaches. Prerequisite(s): RT
201/RT 201C and any 300-level religious studies course.

RT 410E-W. TOPICS IN BIBLICAL STUDIES (3). Investigates key themes in the Bible, using methods and resources of modern biblical scholarship. May focus on particular books or themes, as well as historical, social, theological, literary, cultural, and postcolonial approaches. Prerequisite(s): RT 201 and any 300-level religious studies course.

RT 412. GOSPELS (3). Investigates the four canonical gospels, as well as touching on some important non-canonical gospels. Prerequisite(s): RT 201 and any RT 300 level class.

RT 411H. HONORS RELIGIOUS STUDIES (3). Explores themes central to the study of religion, such as, classics of Christian thought, major thinkers, topics in Christianity, including church history, ethics, or spirituality; topics from Old and New Testament studies; intersections between various traditions, as well as between Religious Studies and other disciplines. Prerequisite(s): RT 201H or permission of instructor. NOTE: Honors students only.
RT 420E-W. TOPICS IN THEOLOGY (3). Explores central theological issues in Christianity in historical and contemporary contexts. Topics may include God, Christology, ecclesiology, sacramental theology, religious dialog, ecumenism, theological anthropology, and revelation. Prerequisite(s): RT 201 and any
300-level religious studies course.

RT 426. CLASSICS OF CHRISTIAN THOUGHT (3). Explores significant contributors to Catholic intellectual tradition as well as of the basic issues that have determined that tradition: the role of faith and reason, the place of culture in Christian evangelization, spirituality and autobiography. Emphasizes the study of primary texts. Prerequisite(s): RT 201 and any 300-level religious studies course. Cross listing: CAS 400E.

RT 430E-W. TOPICS IN HISTORY OF CHRISTIANITY (3). Explores selected topics in the history of Christianity, examining historical, social, cultural, and theological influences and developments.  May include early Christianity, medieval, Renaissance and Reformation, modern, colonial, and postcolonial eras. Prerequisite(s): RT 201 and any RT 300 level course.

RT 440E-W. TOPICS IN ETHICS AND MORAL THEOLOGY (3). Examines issues in method and/or particular topics of contemporary concern, such as method in Protestant and
Catholic moral thought, interreligious ethics, feminist ethics, medical ethics, economic justice, and war and peace. Prerequisite(s): RT 201 and any RT 300 level course.

RT 450E-W. TOPICS IN WORLD RELIGIONS (3). Exploration of specific world religions, including traditions, scriptures, key
historic figures, and contemporary issues. May cover Hinduism, Buddhism, Confucianism, Taoism, Islam, or Judaism in more depth.

RT 460E-W. TOPICS IN PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION (3). Examines significant philosophical issues within the context of religion, including the relationship between faith and reason, the problem of evil, the existence and nature of God, life after death, and, among others, religious language. Prerequisite(s): RT 201 and any RT 300 level course.

RT 465E-W. TOPICS IN RELIGION AND CULTURE (3). Investigates the dynamic relationship between human culture and religion.  Topics can include death and dying, love, art, literature, violence, politics, technology, and economics. Prerequisite(s): RT
201 and any RT 300 level course.

RT 469E-W. TOPICS IN RELIGION AND SOCIAL SCIENCES (3). Explores the study of religion using social science methods. Prerequisite(s): RT 201.RT 470E-W. TOPICS IN SPIRITUALITY (3). Investigates the dimensions of Christian spiritualties from historical and contemporary perspectives and challenges. Areas include spiritual leaders and saints, including Ignatius of Loyola, prayer, mysticism, social justice, and community life in Christian tradition. Prerequisite(s): RT 201 or any religious studies 300 level course.

RT 480E-W. TOPICS IN CHRISTIAN LIFE AND LEADERSHIP (3). Explores topics in Christian life and leadership including church life, lay ministry, vocations and community leadership. Addresses these topics from the standpoints of history, theology, spirituality, liturgical studies, practical theology and/or ministry studies. Prerequisite(s): RT 201/RT 201C and any 300-level religious studies course.


RT 481. LAY MINISTRY PRACTICUM (1-3). Practice of and critical reflection upon aspects of lay ministry, such as leading communal prayer, scripture study, liturgical ministry, catechesis, youth ministry, campus ministry, social justice work, or parish leadership. Prerequisite(s): RT 201 or any religious studies 300 level course.

RT 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN RELIGIOUS STUDIES
(1-3). Provides focused research on a topic in religious studies not covered in regular course offerings. NOTE: Specific assignments and meeting times are arranged with the instructor. Prerequisite(s): RT 201 and any 300-level religious studies course. NOTE: Requires approval of department chair.

RT 491E-W. DIRECTED RESEARCH IN RELIGIOUS STUDIES (1-
3). Provides individualized scholarly research in a topic in religious studies. Prerequisite(s): RT 201 and any 300-level religious studies course.

RT 492E-W. SERVICE LEARNING IN RELIGIOUS STUDIES (1). Prerequisite(s): RT 201 and any 300-level RT course.

RT 493E-W. TRAVEL LEARNING IN RELIGIOUS STUDIES (1). Prerequisite(s): RT 201 and any RT 300 level course.

RT 498E-W. INTERNSHIP IN RELIGIOUS STUDIES (3). Offers interested students an opportunity to explore religious studies in its practical application to various working areas or contemporary life and to reflect critically and constructively on their experience. Prerequisite(s): RT 201 and any 300-level religious studies course.

RT 499A. SENIOR PROJECT A (1). Student seeks out a
supervisor trained in the proposed area of research and approved by the department chair, as well as two outside readers. Student works with the supervisor to develop a project proposal, an annotated bibliography, or list of resources crucial to the project, and a short paper on a central theme of the research. Prerequisite(s): RT 201 and any RT 300 level course. Majors only. Approval of department chair required. NOTE: First part of a
two-semester research project required for all religious studies majors.

RT 499B. SENIOR PROJECT B (2). Continuation of RT 499A. Requires completion of the research project designed in RT 499A and a public presentation of research results. Prerequisite(s): RT
201 and any RT 300 level course. Majors only. Approval of department chair required. NOTE: Second part of a two- semester research project required for all religious studies majors.


AIRR 1010. HERITAGE AND VALUES 1 (1). This course provides an introduction to the Air Force, encourages students to pursue an AF career or seek additional information to be better informed about the role of the USAF. The course allows students to examine general aspects of the Department of the Air Force, AF Leadership, Air Force benefits, and opportunities for AF officers.
The course also lays the foundation for becoming an Airman by outlining our heritage and values.

AIRR 1020. HERITAGE AND VALUES II  (1). A continuation of AIRR1010.  This course provides a historical perspective including lessons on war and the US military, AF operations, principles of war, and airpower. This course also provides students with an understanding for the employment of air and space power, from an institutional, doctrinal, and historical perspective. The students
are introduced to the Air Force way of life and gain knowledge on what it means to be an Airman.

AIRR 1234. LEADERSHIP LABORATORY (0). All AFROTC cadets must attend leadership lab (two hours per week). The laboratory involves a study of Air Force customs and courtesies, drill and ceremonies, career opportunities and the life and work of an Air Force junior officer. Students (cadets) seeking a commission must take this lab in conjunction with their AIRR
lecture/course. "Special Students" NOT seeking a commission, are not required or allowed to attend LLAB (Leadership Lab).

AIRR 2010. TEAM AND LEADERSHIP FUNDAMENTALS 1 (1). This course is designed to provide a fundamental understanding of both leadership and team building. This course teaches students that there are many layers to leadership, including aspects that are not always obvious. Such things include listening, understanding themselves, being a good follower, and problem solving efficiently.

AIRR 2020. TEAM AND LEADERSHIP FUNDAMENTALS II (1). A continuation of AIRR 2010. This course is designed to discuss different leadership perspectives when completing team building activities and discussing things like conflict management. his
course also provides students with the ability of demonstrating their basic verbal and written communication skills. Active cadets will apply these lessons at Field Training, which follows the AS200 level.

AIRR 3010. LEADING PEOPLE/ EFFECTIVE COMMUNICATION
1 (3). This course is designed to build on the leadership fundamentals taught in the AS200 level. he cadets will have the opportunity to utilize their skills as they begin a broader leadership role in the detachment. The goal is for cadets and students to have a more in-depth understanding of how to effectively lead people and provide them with the tools to use throughout their detachment leadership roles.

AIRR 3020. LEADING PEOPLE/ EFFECTIVE COMMUNICATION II (3). A continuation of AIRR 3010. This course is designed to
help cadets hone their writing and briefing skills. The course continues into advanced skills and ethics training that will prepare them for becoming an officer and a supervisor.

AIRR 4010. NATIONAL SECURITY/ LEADERSHIP RESPONSIBILITIES/ COMMISSIONING PREPARATION 1 (3). This course is designed to address the basic elements of national security policy and process. The cadet will comprehend the air and space power operations as well as understand selected roles of the military in society and current domestic and international issues affecting the military profession.

AIRR 4020. NATIONAL SECURITY/ LEADERSHIP RESPONSIBILITIES/ COMMISSIONING PREPARATION II (3). A continuation of AIRR 4010. This course is designed to prepare cadets for life as a second lieutenant. Cadets should comprehend the responsibility, authority, and functions of an Air Force commander and selected provisions of the military justice system.


MILR 1011. ADVENTURES IN LEADERSHIP 1 (2). Introduces fundamentals of leadership and the United States Army. Examines its organization, customs, and history as well as its current relevance and purpose. Students also investigate basic leadership and management skills necessary to be successful in both military and civilian settings. Includes fundamentals of Army leadership doctrine, team-building concepts, time and stress management, an introduction to cartography and land navigation, marksmanship, briefing techniques, and some basic military tactics. Lab fee required.

MILR 1021. ADVENTURES IN LEADERSHIP 2 (2). Continues investigation of leadership in small organizations. Covers selected topics such as basic troop leading procedures, military first aid, and casualty concepts, creating ethical work climates, an
introduction to Army organizations and installations, and a further examination of basic military tactics. Introduces students to effective military styles. Lab fee required.

MILR 2031. METHODS OF LEADERSHIP AND MANAGEMENT
1 (2). Comprehensively reviews advanced leadership and management concepts including, motivation, attitudes, communication skills, problem solving, human needs and behavior, and leadership self-development. Students continue to refine effective written and oral communications skills and to explore topics such as the basic branches of the Army, and officer and NCO duties. Students conduct classroom and practical exercises in small unit light infantry tactics and are prepared to perform as midlevel leaders in the cadet organization. Lab fee required.

MILR 2041. METHODS OF LEADERSHIP AND MANAGEMENT II (2). Focuses on leadership and management functions in military and corporate environments. Studies various components of
Army leadership doctrine to include the four elements of leadership, leadership principles, risk management, and planning theory, the be-know-do framework, and the Army leadership evaluation program. Continues to refine communication skills. Lab fee required.

MILR 3052. MILITARY OPERATIONS AND TRAINING 1 (3). Further explores the theory of managing and leading small military units with an emphasis on practical applications at the squad and platoon levels. Students examine various leadership
styles and techniques as they relate to advanced small unit tactics. Familiarizes students with a variety of topics such as cartography, land navigation, field craft, and weapons systems. Involves multiple, evaluated leadership opportunities in field settings and hands-on experience with actual military equipment. Students are given
maximum leadership opportunities in weekly labs. Prerequisite(s): Approval of the Professor of Military Science. Lab fee required.

MILR 3062. MILITARY OPERATIONS AND TRAINING 2 (3). Studies theoretical and practical applications of small unit leadership principles. Focuses on managing personnel and resources, the military decision making process, the operations order, and oral communications. Exposes the student to tactical unit leadership in a variety of environments with a focus on preparation for the summer advance camp experience. Prerequisite(s): Approval of the Professor of Military Science. Lab fee required.

MILR 4072. ADAPTIVE LEADERSHIP (3). Examines management and leadership concepts and techniques associated with planning and executing military training and operations at company and higher echelons. Includes analyses of professional ethics and values, effective training principles and procedures, subordinate counseling, and effective staff officer briefing techniques. Also investigates other subjects such as counter terrorism, modern peacekeeping missions, and the impact of the information revolution on the art of land warfare. Conducted both in and out of classroom setting and with multiple practical leadership opportunities to organize cadet training and activities. Prerequisite(s): Approval of the Professor of Military Science. Lab fee required.

MILR 4082. LEADERSHIP IN A COMPLEX WORLD (3). Continues MILR 4072 study of management and leadership concepts and techniques, providing practical leadership experiences in the classroom and during multiple cadet-run activities. Also examines varied topics such as theory and practice of the military justice system, law of war, military-media relations, support mechanisms for soldiers and their families, operational security considerations, and historical case studies in military leadership in the context of 21st century land warfare. Prerequisite(s): Approval of the Professor of Military Science. Lab fee required.

NAVAL SCIENCE–U.S. NAVY (NAVR)

NAVR 1010. INTRODUCTION TO NAVAL SCIENCE (2). Introduces the structure, missions, and functions of the United States Navy and Marine Corps. Also covers military law, leadership, naval history, and concepts of sea power.

NAVR 2020. SEAPOWER AND MARITIME AFFAIRS (3). Studies the importance of seapower in history including naval, maritime, and other commercial uses of the sea. Emphasizes significant milestones in the history of the U.S. Navy and Marine Corps and their role in the national strategies and policies of the United States.

NAVR 4010. LEADERSHIP AND MANAGEMENT I (3). Comprehensively studies organization leadership. Emphasizes motivation, communication, empowerment, and needs of subordinates. Studies the role of professional and personal ethics in organizational leadership.

NAVR 4020. LEADERSHIP AND ETHICS (3). Studies the ethics and laws of armed conflict, analyzing the leadership responsibilities of officers in conflict. Studies the military justice system and Naval legal administrative procedures, comparing military law with
civilian criminal and civil law. Defines the responsibilities of junior officers with the military justice system.

SO 200/SO 200C. INTRODUCTION TO SOCIOLOGY (3). Studies sociological perspectives, focusing on social groups and social interaction. Presents basic sociological terms and concepts, and examines a variety of social institutions and social processes. NOTE: SO 200C is a course that carries a communication focus in the course assignments, and enrollment is limited to student who took the paired/linked RCC 200 course in the fall.

SO 203. SOCIAL PROBLEMS (3). Surveys selected social
problems from a national and international scope. Includes analysis of possible causes and consequences of these problems and of various proposals for solutions and reforms. Cross-listing: CJ 203.

SO 204. INTRODUCTION TO CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY (3). Introduces the methods and theory of cultural anthropology through a theoretical and comparative examination of the role of culture in human life. Includes the study of other cultures and field research on contemporary United States culture. Cross listing:
AN 204.

SO 206. INTRODUCTION TO SOCIOLOGY OF HEALTH (3). Introduces topics related to the social contexts of health, including; social conditions such as poverty, social isolation, and segregation as well as ascribed characteristics of gender and race as predictive of health outcomes.

SO 300. WRITING CULTURE (3). Learn to effectively use Anthropology/Sociology research databases and practice writing a variety of Anthropology/Sociology papers. Significant time is given to work-shopping, peer-reviewing, and revising/submitting original writing. Pre-requisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or
Anthropology course or permission of instructor. Cross Listing: AN 300.

SO 402. ETHNOGRAPHIC RESEARCH METHODS (3). The methods anthropologists and sociologists use to gain access, develop rapport, collect and analyze data, and interpret findings when studying culture and society. Prerequisite(s): One 200- level Sociology or Anthropology course. Cross listing(s): CJ 402.

SO 403. SOCIOLOGICAL THEORY (3). Surveys major analytic models used in sociology. Reviews classical foundations of social thought, including the works of Marx, Durkheim and Weber, and contemporary schools of thought, such as feminist and neo- Marxian theory. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course. Junior standing, or permission of instructor.

SO 404. SURVEYS FOR SOCIAL CHANGE (3). Learn to design and analyze your own surveys and explore how quantitative research can be used to facilitate social change. Pre-requisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course. Cross listing: AN 404, CIL 401, and CJ 404.

SO 407. PUBLIC ANTHROPOLOGY (3). Discusses anthropology’s insights on culture and research techniques as means to analyze social, political, and economic problems and develop solutions. Focuses on the ways in which applied anthropology can analyze, inform, and influence policy in the United States and abroad, demonstrating anthropology’s mainstream relevance. Prerequisite(s): SO 200 and SO 204 or AN
204, or permission of instructor. Cross listing: AN 407.
SO 408. GENDER AND CULTURE (3). Examines the cultural construction of sexuality and gender. Looks at a variation in ideas about sexuality, procreation and gender; how the individual learns gender roles; and how ideas about gender difference relate to kinship, economics, politics and religion. Prerequisite(s): One 200- level Sociology or Anthropology course. Cross-listing: AN 408.

SO 411. FOOD, GENDER, AND CULTURE (3). Explores ways in which preparing, eating, and thinking about food reflects culturally determined gender and power relations in societies around the world. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course, or any Women's and Gender Studies course. Cross
listing: AN 411 and WGS 411.

SO 412. FOOD JUSTICE (3). Explores our relationship with food through analysis of power, privilege, and culture. Learn ways to change the alienation, structural violence, and injustice experienced within dominant systems of food production and consumption. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course. Cross listing: AN 412 and PJ 426.

SO 414. EXPLORING CULTURE THROUGH FILM (3). Examines major anthropological concepts through an analysis of visual and written representations of societies throughout the world. Discussions will probe issues of identity, language, culture change, and power and resistance through a critical synthesis of ethnographic, theoretical, and popular films/videos and texts. Cross listing(s): AN 414 and COM 464K.

SO 416. DEVIANCE (3). Provides a historical and comparative study of social deviance, including definitions of and reactions to deviance, and deviance as collective behavior. Examines various sociological theories of deviance, and social groups and behaviors defined as deviant in the United States and other countries. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course required. Cross listing: CJ 416.

SO 419E-W. CULTURE AND CONSCIOUSNESS (3). Explores the social and cultural processes through which we construct our world. Includes the sociology of knowledge, symbolic interactionism, phenomenological sociology, ethnomethodology, cultural studies, and related topics. Prerequisite(s): SO 200 or permission of instructor.

SO 420. LATINX IN AMERICAN SOCIETY (3). A Sociological analysis of the lived experiences of Latinos and their role in reshaping the United States today. One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course required.

SO 421. COMMUNITY FOOD SYSTEMS (3). Seeks to elaborate and deepen the understanding of the Community Food System concept. Begins with an investigation of the current moment in
the global food system, its strengths and its inefficiencies. Explores issues as diverse as hunger, health and obesity, the limits of localism, food sovereignty to agroecological alternatives. Examines the use of Community Food Systems to better understand our alternatives to determine a different approach to growing food
and feeding people. This is the introduction course for the Community Food Systems minor. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course. Cross-listing: AN 421.

SO 422. DIVERSITY IN U.S. SOCIETY (3). Provides a critical and comparative analysis of race, ethnicity, and other diversity in the United States. Includes racism, creation, and maintenance of ethnic group status, political processes, and movements for self-determination. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course or permission of instructor required. Cross listing: CIL 422, CJ 422 and PJ 422.

SO 423. MEXICAN AMERICANS IN THE U.S. (3). Provides a general overview of Mexican Americans in the United States in contemporary society. Examines the history, culture, and past and present policies that have affected the community. Emphasizes racism, discrimination, prejudice, internal colonialism, split labor market theory, immigration, participation in social movements,
and experiences within the various social institutions such as the economy, politics, media, education, and the family. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course or permission of instructor. Cross listing: AN 423.

SO 424. SEX, GENDER AND SOCIETY (3). Examines the social construction of gender difference and stereotypes in the US and other cultures. Performs critical analysis of biological, sociological, anthropological, historical, and psychological explanations of masculinity and femininity. Includes intersections between gender and ethnicity, sexual orientation, social class, friendship, love, work, and disability. Pre-requisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course, or any Women’s and Gender Studies course. Cross listing: WGS 424.

SO 425. NATIVE AMERICANS (3). Provides a general overview of Native Americans of North America. Examines the history, past and present social policies and treaties, and the American Indian Movement. Explores concepts such as racism,
discrimination, prejudice, and internal colonialism. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course or permission
of instructor. Cross-listing: PJ 432N.

SO 427. REGIONAL FOODWAYS IN THE UNITED STATES (3). We seldom recognize the deeply rooted nature and meaning of foodways. We will use a wide array of media to illuminate those phenomena in our personal lives as well as in those of others. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level course in Anthropology or Sociology. Cross listing(s): AN 427.

SO 434. SPIRIT POSSESSION (3). Provides a cross-cultural lens for the analysis and understanding of beliefs and practices such as mediumship and trance. We will examine what questions these practices raise about gender, race, sexuality and
more.  Prerequisite(s): One 200-level course in Anthropology or
Sociology. Cross listing(s): AN 434.

SO 437. ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE: RACE AND CLASS (3). Explores how race and class intersect with natural disasters, toxic waste dumps, pollution, inadequate sanitation, pesticides, childhood lead poisoning and asthma epidemics, inequities in
public transportation, and a wide range of ongoing social movements and success stories. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course, or permission of instructor. Cross-listing: CJ 437, ENVS 437, and PJ 437.

SO 439. BLACK SOCIAL THOUGHT (3). Focuses on African- American social thought and the West African influence from historical, political, sociological and cultural perspectives from pre-1492 to present day. Includes intensive pre-departure
seminars, a two-week Ghanaian service-oriented field experience and service in Denver communities. Prerequisite(s): SO 200 or SO 204 or AN 204 or permission of instructor. Cross listing: PJ
439. NOTE: Acceptance into the Tinansa Program required.
SO 440. WOKE IN THE DEEP SOUTH (3). Travel to Georgia, Alabama, and Mississippi and take a deep dive into past and modern diversity and civil rights issues. Explore past and present systems of oppression and inspiring solutions to racial inequality. Visit museums and historic sites, and dialogue with experts, citizens, politicians, and activists. NOTE: Sophomore class standing or completion of Distributive Core required. Cross- listing: CJ 440 and PJ 468E.

SO 441. SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES (3). Explores social, environmental, and economic issues that prevent and encourage more sustainable communities. Topics include transportation, sprawl, poverty, urban/wildlife interface, housing, population, consumption, municipal/toxic waste, community resources and empowerment, and a variety of proposed solutions from around the world. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course or permission of instructor required. Cross listing: ENVS 441 and PJ 441.

SO 445. GENDER AND GLOBALIZATION (3). This class asks: what questions are raised by global flows of people, culture and capital, and how do these flows relate to the problems faced by men and women in different parts of the world? Prerequisite(s): One 200-level anthropology or sociology course. Cross listing(s): AN 445, PJ 445, and WGS 445.

SO 446. WOMEN AND GENDER IN THE MIDDLE EAST (3). Focuses on women's rights and LGBTQ rights in the Middle East. Often women and differing sexualities in the Middle East tend to be represented stereotypically without attention to context and historical background. Focuses on the everyday lives of Muslim women and men in the Middle East and their daily struggles. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Anthropology or Sociology course. Cross listing(s): AN 446, PJ 446, WGS 446.

SO 450. CRIMINOLOGY (3). Analyzes social, political, and economic dynamics of crime including corporate and government crime, racism and sexism in the criminal justice system, and imprisonment. Pre-requisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course. Cross listing: CJ 450.

SO 451. JUVENILE JUSTICE (3). Investigates juvenile justice in the context of social and political authority, the operations of the criminal justice system, youth culture and youth subcultures, and related social issues. Presents various sociological theories of juvenile deviance, youth justice, and assorted historical and contemporary manifestations of juvenile crime and deviance. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course or permission of instructor. Cross listing: CJ 451.

SO 452. PUNISHMENT AND CORRECTIONS (3). Provides historical, political, and economic analysis of the panel system in the United States. Pre-requisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course. Cross listing: CJ 452 and PJ 452.

SO 453. VIOLENCE AND POWER (3). Interdisciplinary course that explores the relationship between inequality, power, and violence. The course examines how power and violence are co- constructed in various contexts-including the family, culture, law and governmental institutions, medical institutions, and the mass media-and considers how people respond to and resist violence. Co-listing(s): AN 453 and PJ 453. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Anthropology or Sociology course.


SO 455. DRUGS, HEALTH, AND CULTURE (3). Rooted in medical anthropology and ethnography, analyzes the cultural meanings associated with health and illness: biomedicine and health care, medical knowledge production, and medical decision-
making. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Anthropology or Sociology course. Cross listing(s): AN 455, CJ 455, and PJ 455.

SO 458E-W. SPECIAL TOPICS IN ANTHROPOLOGY (3). Selected topics in Anthropology are explored.

SO 459E-W. TOPICS IN CRIME AND JUSTICE (3). Selected courses will focus on issues related to crime, police, the court system, punishment, social control, rehabilitation, etc. Prerequisite(s): SO 450 or CJ 450 recommended. Cross listing: CJ
459E-W.

SO 460. SOCIAL MOVEMENTS (3). Examines a variety of U.S. social movements from the 1950’s through the present. Explores theoretical questions of how movements emerge, who joins them, the effect of various tactics, and the factors that contribute to a movements’ success or demise. Pre-requisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course. Cross listing: PJ 460.

SO 464. STAND UP AND FIGHT: COMMUNITY ORGANIZING (3). Presents history, theory and strategies of community organizing in the United States, and experience of community organizing techniques by developing and implementing a community organizing project on the Regis campus or working with the local community organizers. Cross listing: PJ 464 and
POL 464. Pre-requisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or
Anthropology course.

SO 465. ANARCHY AND ANARCHISM (3). Relying on case studies and ethnographies, examines anarchism as a social, cultural, and political practice, one rooted largely in the left-wing critique of the liberal state and capitalism. Prerequisite(s): One
200-level Anthropology or Sociology course. Cross listing(s): AN
465, CJ 465, and PJ 465.

SO 468E-W. TOPICS IN CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY (3). Analysis of cultural, social and political changes and challenges in contemporary and ancient cultures. Prerequisite(s): One 200- level Sociology or Anthropology course or permission of instructor.

SO 469E-W. TOPICS IN CULTURE (3). Analysis of origins, development, and changes/challenges of ancient and/or modern cultures. Prerequisite(s): SO 200 or AN 204 or permission of instructor. Cross listing: AN 469E-W.

SO 470. SOCIAL INEQUALITY (3). Provides a comparative examination of theoretical and ethnographic patterns of inequality in the United States and other countries. Prerequisite(s): One
200-level Sociology or Anthropology course or permission of instructor required. Cross listing: PJ 427.

SO 471. ANIMALS, SOCIETY, AND CULTURE (3). Introduces students to the debate about the proper relationship between humans and our animal cousins. Utilizes ethnographic reading, philosophy and an examination of political economy to highlight the cultural, economic and social impacts of our treatment of animals on our ecosystems and ourselves. Prerequisite(s): One
200-level Anthropology or Sociology course. Cross Listing(s): AN
471, and PJ 471.
SO 472. WEALTH AND POWER (3). Provides a comparative examination of political and economic institutions, the groups that dominate these institutions, the means by which they exercise power and challenges to the exercise of power. Prerequisite(s):
EC 200 or EC 3200 or one 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course or permission of instructor.

SO 474. MODERN SLAVERY AND TRAFFICKING (3). Modern Slavery and human trafficking in global perspective. Covers sex trafficking, bonded labor, forced labor, child soldiers, chattel slavery, and domestic servant slavery. Explores the role of the state, organized crime, the media, culture, corruption, and debates about prostitution. Includes testimonies by survivors research reports, theoretical essays, policy statements, expert testimonies, and videos. Prerequisite(s): SO 200 or PJ 400 or permission of instructor. Cross listing: PJ 474 and CJ 474.

SO 485. ANTHROPOLOGY OF RELIGION (3). Cross-cultural debates and definitions of religion, ritual, symbolism, beliefs and practices. Critically examines how religion is shaped by social categories such as kinship, exchange, the human life cycle, and the environment. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course and RT 201. Cross listing: AN 485 and RT
469E.

SO 486. MASS COMMUNICATION AND SOCIETY (3). Investigates and analyzes economic, political, and ideological dimensions of mass communication, mass communication, and social control, and the development of mass media forms. Prerequisite(s): SO 200 or COM 380. Cross listing: COM 486.

SO 489. PRACTICUM IN CRIME AND JUSTICE (3). Explores readings and work in the community related to crime and justice issues. Prerequisite(s): SO 200. Cross-listing: CJ 489.

SO 487. TRANSNATIONAL FEMINISMS (3). Develops a gendered, historical, and contextual understanding of transnationalism, solidarity, social justice, feminist activism and globalization as specific processes. It will encourage acting on global issues in more ethically and politically conscious ways. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level course in Anthropology or Sociology. Cross listing(s): AN 487, PJ 487, and WGS 487.

SO 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN SOCIOLOGY (1-3). Offers an opportunity for individual study of an approved topic in sociology under the direction of a sociology faculty member. Permits faculty and students to explore together some subject of special or personal interest. Prerequisite(s): SO 200 and approval of department chair.

SO 491. COMMUNITY SOCIAL CHANGE SEMINAR I (3). Discussions, readings and assignments will take place at the intersection of three dimensions of learning; the Internship Experience (Action), Experiential Learning Pedagogy (Consciousness), and Theories and Practice of Social Change (Knowledge). Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course and Junior or Senior Standing.

SO 492. COMMUNITY SOCIAL CHANGE SEMINAR II (3). Readings on University/Community collaborations, Community Based research, and social change, as well as the implementation and completion of a community project in collaboration with community partners. Prerequisite(s): SO 491.


SO 495. PRACTICUM IN COMMUNITY FOOD SYSTEMS (1-3). Practicum course begins and ends in the garden. Students will
walk away with a more intimate understanding of the planning and implementation of a small one acre organic urban garden.
Explores biointensive and permaculture approaches to food production. Utilizing these skills, students will be able to produce food and will understand how the production of food is an important aspect of the community food system concept. Examines the relationships between food production, distribution, processing, and consumption. Cross-listing: AN 495.

SO 496. FOOD SYSTEMS SUMMER INTENSIVE (1-3). Practicum course in community food systems that begins and ends in the garden. Students will walk away from this course with a more intimate understanding of the planning and implementation of a small one acre organic urban garden. Cross listing: AN 496.

SO 496E-W. TOPICS IN SOCIOLOGY (3). Offers selected topics including sociology of medicine, community, and urban studies.
Pre-requisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course.

SO 497E-W. PRACTICUM IN SOCIOLOGY (3). Volunteer or work in the community to enhance both understanding of the nature of these agencies, organizations and community efforts and their analysis of social problems and issues. Related readings, written assignments and discussions accompany the experience. Pre-requisite(s): One of the following courses: AN 200, SO 200, CJ 203 or SO 203. NOTE: Junior or Senior Standing.

SO 498E-W. INTERNSHIP IN SOCIOLOGY (1-3). Provides an intensive work experience appropriate to the sociology discipline. Prerequisite(s): Junior or Senior Standing and Approval of Department Chair and Director of Academic Internship Program required.

SO 499. MAJORS SEMINAR (3). Capstone course provides Sociology majors with information on graduate school, employment opportunities and particular ways their knowledge can be used to contribute to the community. Students are encouraged to participate in the community during this course. Prerequisite(s): Majors and minors only and Senior standing. Cross-listing: AN 499.

UNDERGRADUATE RESEARCH (URC)

URC 250. INTERDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH METHODS AND ETHICS (3). Exposes students to interdisciplinary and evolving methods for discovery and knowledge construction in the sciences, arts, and humanities. The course will provide an opportunity for students to establish or advance their understanding of research through critical exploration of research language, ethics, and approaches. Students will use these theoretical underpinnings to begin to critically review literature relevant to their field of interest and develop their own research project in collaboration with a faculty mentor.

URC 491E-W. UNDERGRADUATE RESEARCH (1-3). Offers an opportunity for collaborative research under faculty mentorship.

URC 495. COMMUNICATION AND DISSEMINATION OF RESEARCH (3). Provides fundamental training in research communication and dissemination, focusing on presentation to both professional and lay audiences. Students will be expected to
analyze and understand best practices in research communication across a variety of modalities.

WOMEN’S AND GENDER STUDIES (WGS)

WGS 400. INTRODUCTION TO WOMEN’S AND GENDER STUDIES (3). Presents an interdisciplinary study of how gender and other categories of identity (e.g., sexuality, race, social class) interact with structures of inequality to shape human experience. Applies concepts and methods from the field of Women’s and Gender Studies to prepare students to be active citizens who promote equality, mutual understanding, and human flourishing. NOTE: Minimum of sophomore class standing required.

WGS 402. RESEARCH AND WRITING IN THE COMMUNITY (3). Practical introduction to community-based research methodologies and feminist epistemologies. Prerequisites: WGS
400. Note: This is a writing-intensive course and includes community-based learning. NOTE: Writing-intensive course that includes community-based learning. Prerequisite(s): WGS 400.

WGS 410E-W. WOMEN IN LITERATURE (3). Surveys women’s literary achievement, or focuses on a particular historical period or cultural milieu, ethnographic perspective or social theme. Examines literary and critical works focusing on women’s viewpoints in social, cultural, economic, and aesthetic contexts. Prerequisite(s): WGS 400 or RCC 200 or EN 210 and one 300- level English course. Cross listing: EN 410E-W.

WGS 411. FOOD, GENDER, AND CULTURE (3). Explores ways in which preparing, eating, and thinking about food reflects culturally determined gender and power relations in societies around the world. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Sociology or Anthropology course, or any Women's and Gender Studies course. Cross listing: AN 411 and SO 411.

WGS 424. SEX, GENDER AND SOCIETY (3). Examines the
social construction of gender difference and stereotypes in the US and other cultures. Performs critical analysis of biological, sociological, anthropological, historical, and psychological explanations of masculinity and femininity. Includes intersections between gender and ethnicity, sexual orientation, social class, friendship, love, work, and disability. Pre-requisite(s): One 200- level Sociology or Anthropology course, or any Women’s and Gender Studies course. Cross listing: SO 424.

WGS 430. MANHOOD AND MEANING (3). From athletes and politicians to coal miners and migrant workers, how do U.S. men make meaningful lives? This course explores the potential good of manhood, with the goal of building student resilience, connection, and purpose. Prerequisite(s): WGS 400.

WGS 435. IMAGES OF WOMEN IN ART AND THE POPULAR MEDIA (3). Examines the visual representation of women in both art and the popular media. Emphasizes the examination of the construction of gender utilizing various theoretical models of analysis.  Prerequisite(s): FAC 201E or FAC 211 or FAC 212. Cross listing: FAHS 435.

WGS 437. WRITING BY AND ABOUT HISPANIC WOMEN (3). Analyzes the creation and re-creation of the female persona in selected texts by and about Hispanic women writers from the middle ages to the present. Emphasizes critical analysis and the continued development of speaking, reading, writing, listening and cultural proficiency.

WGS 440. GENDER, SEXUALITY AND COMMUNICATION (3). Explores connections between communication, gender, and sexuality in close relationships, organizations and the media. Course involves readings, dialogues, films, field trips, and group projects. Prerequisite(s): COM 380 or WGS 400 or permission of instructor. Cross listing: COM 440.

WGS 441. PERFORMANCES OF SELF AND SOCIETY (3). Explores performance through sociological, anthropological and literary/artistic and experiential lenses. Engaging through readings, film, role-plays, immediate, live and online performances (and the analysis thereof), dialogue, writing and other production of texts, and critique, students come to understand this most pragmatic of human communicative behaviors. Cross listing(s): COM 411. Prerequisite(s): COM 250, and sophomore class standing.

WGS 445. GENDER AND GLOBALIZATION (3). This class asks: what questions are raised by global flows of people, culture and capital, and how do these flows relate to the problems faced by men and women in different parts of the world? Prerequisite(s): One 200-level anthropology or sociology course. Cross listing(s): AN 445, PJ 445, and SO 445.

WGS 446. WOMEN AND GENDER IN THE MIDDLE EAST (3). Focuses on women's rights and LGBTQ rights in the Middle East. Often women and differing sexualities in the Middle East tend to be represented stereotypically without attention to context and historical background. Focuses on the everyday lives of Muslim women and men in the Middle East and their daily struggles. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level Anthropology or Sociology course. Cross listing(s): AN 446, PJ 446, and SO 446.

WGS 449. 18TH CENTURY NOVEL (3). Studies representative novels of the period, reflecting the dominant genres such as Realistic, Sentimental, and Gothic. Prerequisite(s): RCC 200, EN
210 or EN 250 and one 300-level English course.

WGS 450. PSYCHOLOGY OF GENDER (3). Explores gender influences on individual and group behavior as well as the social, biological, cognitive, and behavioral bases of sex, gender, sexuality, and gender identity. Considers the role of intersecting identities and power, privilege and oppression, in the gendered experiences of people. Prerequisite(s): PSY 250 or WGS 400. Cross listing:
PSY 450.

WGS 460E-W. WOMEN AND RELIGION (3). Explores the role of women in various religious traditions, feminine images of the divine, feminist approaches to spirituality, and contemporary models of religious expression and worship. Prerequisite(s): RT
201 or WGS 400.

WGS 467. HUMAN SEXUALITY (3). Focuses on the physiological, behavioral, cognitive, and social aspects of human behavior as related to human sexuality using a multidisciplinary
and life-span approach. Topics include physiology, communication, gender, development, orientation, violence, the marketplace, culture, religion, and health. Prerequisite(s): PSY 250 or WGS
400. Cross listing: PSY 467.

WGS 470. FEMINIST THEORY (3). Focuses on the striking emergence of feminist philosophy in the last half of the twentieth century. Studies the development of this movement, its impact on
philosophy, and the changes it portends for future philosophizing. Emphasis may be on different approaches with feminist thinking (e.g., Anglo-American vs. French feminist writers) or on specific issues in feminist thought. Prerequisite(s): WGS 400 or one 200- level Philosophy course. Cross listing: PL 470.

WGS 480E-W (3). SPECIAL TOPICS IN GENDER AND SEXUALITY IN HISTORY. Selected topics in Women’s and Gender Studies from a historical perspective.

WGS 485E-W. SPECIAL TOPICS IN WOMEN’S AND GENDER STUDIES (3). Offers and discusses selected topics in Women’s and Gender Studies. Prerequisite(s): WGS 400.

WGS 486E-W. SPECIAL TOPICS IN GENDER, CULTURE, AND JUSTICE (3). Explores topics of culture and justice in Women's and Gender Studies.

WGS 487. TRANSNATIONAL FEMINISMS (3). Develops a gendered, historical, and contextual understanding of transnationalism, solidarity, social justice, feminist activism and globalization as specific processes. It will encourage acting on global issues in more ethically and politically conscious ways. Prerequisite(s): One 200-level course in Anthropology or Sociology. Cross listing(s): AN 487, PJ 487, and SO 487.

WGS 490E-W. SELECTED TOPICS IN FEMINIST THEORY (3). Discusses a variety of topics in feminist theory from eighteenth and nineteenth century writers such as Wollstonecraft and Mill to contemporary feminist thinkers. Among the possible topics to be considered are liberal reformism or radical transformation, the politics of difference, the challenges of postmodernism, feminism, and women of color, etc. Prerequisite(s): WGS 400.

WGS 495E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN WOMEN’S AND GENDER STUDIES (3). Provides an opportunity for independent study in an area of interest in women’s and gender studies. Prerequisite(s): WGS 400 and approval of program director. Majors and minors only.

WGS 498E-W. INTERNSHIP IN WOMEN’S AND GENDER STUDIES (3). Provides intensive and practical work experience related to Women’s and Gender Studies.

WGS 499. CAPSTONE PROJECT IN WOMEN’S AND GENDER STUDIES (3). Students will critically reflect on their Women's and Gender Studies experience, further read about women's and gender studies theory, and fulfill requirements for an internship or research thesis. Prerequisite(s): WGS 400 and Senior standing.

GRADUATE

BIOLOGY (BL)

BL 610A. BIOMEDICAL SCIENCES SEMINAR I: SKILLS DEVELOPMENT (1). Explores biomedical ethics and develops student skills to facilitate success in their biomedical education.

BL 610B. BIOMEDICAL SCIENCES SEMINAR II: COLLOQUIUM, PROJECT, AND EXTERNSHIP (2). Develops student familiarity with biological and biomedical literature and communication in
the context of research seminars. Increases familiarity with biomedical ethics. Begins work on the written master’s project and program externship. NOTE: Requires attendance at the Department of Biology seminar series.


BL 610C. BIOMEDICAL SCIENCES SEMINAR III: PROJECT, ETHICS, AND STATISTICS (1). Reviews prior program content and introduces ethical and statistical content in preparation for the next semester. Includes continuing work on the written master’s project. Prerequisites(s): BL 610B.

BL 610D. BIOMEDICAL SCIENCES SEMINAR IV: COLLOQUIUM AND PROJECT (1). Continues student work with biological and biomedical literature and communication in
the context of research seminars. Includes completion of the final written master’s project conforming to program requirements. Prerequisite(s): BL 610B. NOTE: Requires attendance at the Department of Biology seminar series.

BL 613A. BIOMEDICAL HUMAN ANATOMY LABORATORY AND SEMINAR I (2). Develops student knowledge of normal human gross anatomy via anatomical models, human skeletal materials, and cadaver examination.

BL 613B. BIOMEDICAL HUMAN ANATOMY LABORATORY AND SEMINAR II (2). Develops student knowledge of normal human gross anatomy via anatomical models, human skeletal materials, and histological slides. Prerequisite(s): BL 613A.

BL 614. BIOMEDICAL GENETICS (3). Develops student knowledge of molecular genetics and human genetics. Introduces biomedical ethical controversies with roots in genetics and molecular biology.

BL 616. BIOMEDICAL BIOCHEMISTRY (3). Develops student understanding of biochemical principles particularly as related to human metabolic processes. Focuses on protein structure and function and includes basic cell biology.

BL 618. BIOMEDICAL HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY (4). Develops student knowledge of normal human physiology at the cellular, tissue, organ, and system levels. Includes some pathophysiology.

BL 619. BIOMEDICAL HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY LABORATORY (1). Develops student knowledge of normal human physiology via electrophysiological measurement.

BL 620.  BIOMEDICAL MICROBIOLOGY (3). Develops student knowledge of microbiological principles, pathogenic microorganisms, infectious diseases, microbial metabolism, and classes and actions of antimicrobial drugs. Prerequisite(s): BL 614 and BL 616.

BL 621. BIOMEDICAL MICROBIOLOGY AND IMMUNOLOGY LABORATORY (1). Develops student knowledge of microbiological and immunological laboratory techniques commonly used in biomedical research and laboratory diagnosis.

BL 624. BIOMEDICAL IMMUNOLOGY (3). Develops student knowledge of immunological principles, immunopathology, immunization and classes and actions of immunologically active drugs.

BL 624. BIOMEDICAL IMMUNOLOGY (3). Develops student knowledge of immunological principles, immunopathology, immunization and classes and actions of immunologically active drugs. Prerequisite(s): BL 614, BL 616, and BL 618.

BL 628. BIOMEDICAL ETHICS AND EXTERNSHIP (2). Discusses biomedical ethics in the context of case studies. Places the students’ research or clinical externship experiences into
academic and ethical context. Prerequisite(s): BL 610B.
BL 630. BIOMEDICAL GENETICS AND GENOMICS SEMINAR (1). Reviews program pre-requisite background. Develops student skills in using online genetic and genomic resources and
introduces relevant bioethical consideration. Includes career advising.

BL 632. BIOMEDICAL GENOMICS (3). Develops student knowledge of human, bacterial, and viral genome organization, genome sequencing, comparative genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, and introductory genomic analysis. Introduces biomedical ethics in the context of genomics. Prerequisite(s): BL
614.

BL 634. CANCER GENETICS (3). Explores the genetics of cancer and student ability to translate rapid advances in genetics and genomics into cancer risk assessment. Introduces biomedical ethical controversies associated with cancer. Prerequisite(s): BL
614.

BL 636. TRANSLATIONAL GENETICS AND GENOMICS (3). Develops student knowledge of how molecular and populational understandings of genetics and genomics are translated into clinical diagnostic and treatment applications. Introduces biomedical ethical controversies associated with translational genetics and genomics. Prerequisite(s): BL 632.

BL 650A. ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY COLLOQUIUM AND GRANT WRITING (3). Introduces writing in the context of a grant proposal.  Fosters ethical consideration, scientific awareness, and analytical skills via the Biology Seminar Series and the environmental primary literature. Begins initial externship, research and Master's project work.

BL 650B. ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY COLLOQUIUM AND PROJECT (3). Develops student writing in the context of constructing a final Master's project. Fosters ethical consideration, scientific awareness, and analytical skills via the Biology Seminar Series and working with the environmental primary literature. Co-requisites: BL 662. Prerequisite(s): BL
650A.

BL 651A. INTRODUCTION TO ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY SKILLS (1). Prepares students for success in the Environmental Biology program by introducing students to fieldwork, data collection and analysis, analytical reading of primary literature and professional collaboration skills.

BL 651B. ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY FIELDWORK (1). Develops fieldwork and data-collection skills in an environment outside Colorado or in a non-alpine environment. Includes collection of data for use in later Environmental Biology courses. Prerequisite(s): BL 651A and BL 652.

BL 652. ENVIRONMENTAL BIOSTATISTICS AND RESEARCH DESIGN (3). Introduction to environmental study design and develops the ability to appropriately analyze data and interpret the results using examples taken from the environmental literature. Emphasizes statistical reasoning, assumptions, computer-based analysis, interpretation, and critical evaluation. NOTE: Prior undergraduate or graduate course in statistics required.

BL 654. ADVANCED ECOLOGICAL MODELING (3). Introduces students to modern ecological models used to analyze species distribution and abundance and describes the structure and dynamics of populations and communities. Prerequisite(s): BL 652.

BL 656 ADVANCED ECOLOGY (3). Advanced study of the ecological factors governing the structure and function of populations, communities, and ecosystems. Develops skills in applying foundational literature to conservation and management of ecological systems. Co-Requisite(s): BL 657.

BL 657. ADVANCED FIELD ECOLOGY LABORATORY (1). Develops student knowledge of data collection and ecological assessment techniques in a range of habitats. Co-requisite(s): BL
656.

BL 658. ADVANCED BEHAVIORAL ECOLOGY (3). Introduction to the mechanisms and functions of animal behavior with emphasis on the ecological and evolutionary bases of animal behavior. Develops the ability to assess animal behavior in ecological
context using behavioral assessment techniques.

BL 660. ECOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS OF GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEMS (4). Develops knowledge of the basic concepts, assumptions, theories, and structures of geographic information systems (GIS). Includes spatial analysis relevant to ecological issues.  Includes in-depth examination of GIS in the primary ecological literature. Prerequisite(s): BL 652.

BL 660P. GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEMS PROJECT (1). Involves use of geographic information systems (GIS) in the development of an ecologically focused GIS project. Includes in- depth examination of GIS in the primary ecological literature.

BL 662. AQUATIC ECOLOGY AND BIOASSESSMENT (3). Introduction to freshwater aquatic communities and develops the ability to use wetlands vegetation, aquatic invertebrates, and fishes in wetlands delimitation and bioassessment of aquatic environmental health. Prerequisite(s): BL 652.

BL 664A. WETLAND DELINEATION LABORATORY (1). Introduces wetland designation and delineation via data collection and review of regulatory documents and reports. Includes basic wetland delineation process.

BL 664B. ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION AND RESTORATION SEMINAR (1). Introduces wildlife conservation and ecological restoration via review of primary literature and reports. Includes a discussion of values in wildlife conservation and restoration effectiveness.

BL 668 ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY EXTERNSHIP (2) Provides faculty-directed study in a laboratory and/or field environment. Includes discussion of environmental ethics and pedagogy. Co- Requisite: BL 650B.

BL 690E-W. GRADUATE INDEPENDENT STUDY IN BIOLOGY (1-3). Offers an opportunity for graduate advanced study of independent topics in biology. Prerequisite(s): Permission of instructor.

BL 691. GRADUATE RESEARCH IN BIOLOGY (3). Provides faculty-directed study in a laboratory and/or field environment. Includes discussion of environmental ethics and pedagogy.

DEVELOPMENT PRACTICE (DP)

DP 600. INTRODUCTION TO INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT (3). History and theory of development, with introduction to different disciplinary entry points. Development models are integrated through several disciplines, including health,
engineering, anthropology, policy, business, and environment. NOTE: Technology fee required.

DP 606. GENDER AND DEVELOPMENT (3). How does gender factor into global development policy and paradigms? How do gender and the range of other culturally and demographically- based identifications play into development desires, strategies, and outcomes? This course will review key cases of gender-based oppression, empowerment and development efforts at the global level, as well as examining the complex ways that dimensions of identity intersect to create challenges and opportunities for community engagement in participatory development. NOTE: Technology fee required.

DP 608. MARKETS AND ENTERPRISE (3). Provides students with an overview of the state of practice in two modern approaches to micro-economic development: market systems development (MSD) and social enterprise promotion. Students will learn the opportunities for impact and the challenges presented by each approach in order to be able to critically apply aspects of each in their work. NOTE: Technology fee required.

DP 609. PARTICIPATORY PLANNING (3). Introduces students to theory, concepts, and practices for participatory planning and community engagement. Explores identifying stakeholders, incorporating local knowledge, capacity building and analyzing capacities, priorities, and needs. NOTE: Technology fee required.

DP 610. HEALTH AND DEVELOPMENT (3). Explores the combined social, physical, mental, ecological and climatic sciences affecting individual and collective health in development context. NOTE: Technology fee required.

DP 611. ECO-SYSTEMS SERVICES (3). Lays out the foundational idea that all development work is embedded in the environment, and that climate change is both cause and effect of how humans interact with the ecosystems around them. Course content offers a systems-thinking approach to understanding conflict
management around resource scarcity and degradation, as well as restoration, with a particular focus on eco-systems services. Taught in rotation with development practice electives; open to students in the 2nd and 3rd years of the program. NOTE: Technology fee required.

DP 612. GRASSROOTS AND INDIGENOUS ACTIVISM (3). Focuses on some of the many ways development has been driven by people working on their own behalf, rather than by outside development professionals. We will explore movements and practices from contexts across several regions, examining definitions and strategies for development, and asking "What motivates activism?" How does the development practitioner effectively interact (or not) with grassroots and indigenous movements?  What can the development sector learn from such movements? NOTE: Technology fee required.

DP 620. RESEARCH AND LEARNING FOR DEVELOPMENT PRACTICE (3). Examines methods for field and library research in the context of the entire development project management cycle. Students are introduced to the wider community of development researchers as an essential structure of continuous learning for
the practitioner and the sector as a whole. As a part of that goal, students also explore creation of the conditions for organizational learning. NOTE: Technology fee required. NOTE: Technology fee required.

DP 630. FOOD, WATER, ENERGY, AND CLIMATE NEXUS (3). Examines the inextricable linkages, trade-offs, and synergies among water, food and energy in context of a changing climate. Introduces a systems approach through nexus thinking to integrate what is typically addressed in isolation. Climate change as well as population growth, urbanization, dietary changes and resource degradation are considered at household, community, state and global levels. Taught in rotation with development practice electives; open to students in the 2nd and 3rd years of the program. NOTE: Technology fee required.

DP 660. COMMUNICATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT PRACTICE (3). Explores concepts and methods of communication as a critical dimension of all levels of all development projects; internal, for community engagement and behavior change; external, for partnership relationships, especially with government; and the wider public, for generating awareness and educating and
managing donors. NOTE: Technology fee required.

DP 661. HUMANITARIAN DEVELOPMENT NEXUS (3). Provides an in-depth view of the history, challenges and way forward for humanitarian emergency and disaster response. Utilizing interdisciplinary and multi-sectoral lenses, we examine international humanitarian coordination, integration with development practices, and intersections with current world affairs. Case studies from both local and global emergencies, US and international, will be regularly involved. Additionally, this course provides practice and knowledge in inter-sectoral guidelines, standards, and rubrics with which to enhance and embolden the future of humanitarian response worldwide. NOTE: Technology fee required.

DP 670. EDUCATION FOR SUSTAINABILITY (3). Explores formal, non-formal, and community-based educational systems that are essential to sustainable and just development. Examines how learner-based education foes beyond literacy, numeracy and critical thinking to reciprocity in learning, leading to employment, health, and individual well-being. NOTE: Technology fee required.

DP 680. SKILLS: PROGRAM DESIGN (1). Nonprofits/nongovernmental organizations (NP/GOs) live and thrive by the effectiveness in planning and execution of their mission-directed programs. Ideally, the better the design, implementation and evaluation, the better the attainment of mission. The goal of this course is to explore strategic approaches in program design, implementation, and evaluation through research-based best practices. The course will introduce
processes of needs assessment, data collection, and stakeholder participation and empowerment and explore program evaluability. It will also review Theory of Change and the logic model as strategies for program effectiveness. Class projects will include designing a plan for program evaluation. NOTE: Technology fee required.

DP 681. SKILLS: MONITORING AND EVALUATION I (1). Explores skills essential for developing monitoring and evaluation frameworks, including developing indicators and data collection design. This course emphasizes a set of skills that are directly applicable in a range of organizations, including government, non- government, and non-profit and charitable foundations. NOTE: Technology fee required.

DP 682. SKILLS: MONITORING AND EVALUATION II (1). Builds on lessons from Monitoring and Evaluation I, going more in
depth on effective theories of change and criteria for developing the appropriate indicators to measure them. Students will learn the technical aspects of quality indicators and the processes involved in their development. NOTE: Technology fee required.

DP 683. SKILLS: QUALITATIVE DATA COLLECTION (1). Introduction to the principles and techniques of qualitative data collection with a particular focus on the researcher as the instrument. Students will be able to customize class projects to their own context by completing either interviews or focus groups.  Course content will touch on topics such as positioning yourself as a learner and active listener, asking effective questions, and reading verbal and non-verbal cues. Participants will develop the personal mindset and self-presentation needed to cultivate relevant and nuanced interactions. The goal of this course is to teach the art of qualitative data collection to produce data filled with generative insights. NOTE: Technology fee required.

DP 684. SKILLS: QUALITATIVE DATA ASSESSMENT (1). This course is an introduction to the principles and process of qualitative data analysis. Participants will learn the art of iterative analysis that both addresses the research or evaluation goals and maintains the voice and perspective of participants. Class projects will include analysis of rich qualitative data (e.g. transcripts, documents) without requiring expensive software, and students will receive helpful feedback to inform future projects. Course content will touch on topics such as inductive and deductive analysis, formulating finding statements, and triangulating findings with quantitative data. The goal of this course is to teach the art
of qualitative data assessment to produce useful and rigorous finding statements. NOTE: Technology fee required.

DP 686. SKILLS: DATA VISUALIZATION (1). In an increasingly data-rich world, visualization is more important than ever for communicating trends in global development. This course will cover the basics of data visualization, including interpretation and best practices for designing graphs, maps, and other visualization approaches. Students will learn to evaluate the effectiveness of visualization designs, and think critically about each design decision. Students will create their own data visualizations, and learn to use Open Source data visualization tools and data sources. Students will learn to better interpret and improve on visualizations they encounter, and to create clear and informative visualizations for use in development practice.. NOTE: Technology fee required.

DP 687E.W. TOPICS IN INTEGRATIVE STUDIES (3). Special topics with opportunities for students to work with faculty on participatory research. NOTE: Technology fee required.

DP 692. INDEPENDENT STUDY FOR FIELD PLACEMENT (3). Culminating project of the second year of classroom study. Students apply concepts learned in a Field Placement at an overseas or domestic development organization. Intended for students whose field opportunity falls outside the regularly scheduled course. NOTE: Technology fee required.

DP 693. CAPSTONE PLANNING AND LITERATURE REVIEW (2). Preparatory work toward the capstone project, including topic development, culminating in submission of the Literature Review. Students must be in good academic standing. NOTE: Technology fee required.

DP 694. CAPSTONE PLANNING II (0). Development of the
Capstone project, including research and writing, culminating in submission of the Capstone Outline. Pass/fail. Enrollment restriction: Satisfactory completion of DP 693. NOTE: Technology fee required.

DP 695. CAPSTONE WRITING (3). Development of the Capstone project, including research and writing, culminating in submission of the complete Capstone draft. Enrollment restriction. Satisfactory completion of DP 694. NOTE: Technology fee required.

DP 695B. CAPSTONE WRTING (0). Development of the Capstone project, including research and writing, culminating in submission of the complete Capstone draft. Enrollment restriction: completion of DP 695. NOTE: Technology fee required.

DP 696. CAPSTONE SUBMISSION AND COMMUNITY FORUM (0). Final preparation and submission of the Capstone paper and presentation at the MDP Community Forum. Enrollment restriction: Program approval of Capstone work in DP 693, DP
694, and DP 695. NOTE: Technology fee required.

DP 696A. CAPSTONE EXTENSION (0). Provides additional time for students who require it in order to complete their Capstone project. NOTE: Technology fee required.

DP 699. FIELD PRACTICUM AND LEADERSHIP (3). Culminating project of the second year of classroom study. Students apply concepts learned in a Field Placement at an overseas or domestic development organization, note that students may fulfill the practicum requirement at their own organization. The course includes a focused exploration of leadership and what it means for us as individuals ad practitioners and how it can serve to frame
and organize our efforts within community-driven development
NOTE: Technology fee required.

EDUCATION (ED)

ED 601. TEACHING EXCEPTIONAL LEARNERS (3). Examines disabilities in schools and services, systems, and concepts associated as well as state and federal trends. Applies evidence based instructional strategies and planning to meet the needs of every student.  Examines current legislation and develops Universal Design planning. Cross listing(s): EDSP 620.

ED 602. PSYCHOLOGY FOR EDUCATORS (3). Applies principles of development and learning theory to classroom teaching within the context of Colorado Model Content Standards for Teachers. Key theory-to-practice topics include models of learning, achievement gap issues and instructional strategies, motivation, classroom management, fostering positive identity development for diverse students, and parent involvement. Includes a research component. Prerequisite(s): General Psychology or equivalent. NOTE: Fieldwork required in an assigned Metro Denver area school.

ED 603. ASSESSMENT FOR THE DIVERSE LEARNER (3). Explores the principles, purposes, and processes of assessment used for the evaluation of exceptional learners and English Language learners. Includes how assessment results can be used to develop appropriate education programs for diverse students.

ED 603A. ELEMENTARY READING AND WRITING: CONTENT, INSTRUCTION AND ASSESSMENT (3). Focuses on the significance of literacy and models teachers use to foster
literacy acquisition in contemporary elementary classrooms. Participants observe, demonstrate, and evaluate peers and their own literacy instruction within the context of comprehension, phonetic awareness, phonics, fluency, and vocabulary. Includes reading and writing instruction and integration of fiction and nonfiction literature that stimulates joyful reading and writing. Coursework includes readings, demonstrates, simulations, lectures, dialogue, group and individual presentations, and written analyses of fieldwork data. Includes a research component.
NOTE: Fieldwork required in an assigned Metro Denver area school.

ED 603B. DISCIPLINARY LITERACY (3). Participants build background knowledge and apply instructional strategies and assessments designed to promote student’s success as readers, writers, speakers, and listeners in middle school and high school classrooms. Coursework includes readings, demonstrations, discussions, and written analyses of fieldwork data. Includes a research component. NOTE: Fieldwork required in an assigned Metro Denver area school.

ED 604. FOUNDATIONS OF EDUCATION IN AMERICAN SCHOOLS (2). Surveys theory and practice in American education, including historical contributions, philosophical approaches, and sociological functions. Provides an introduction to standards-based, assessment-driven education from both national and state perspectives. Includes a research component.

ED 606. ASSESSMENT OF LEARNING (2). Provides an overview of assessment and instruction on the construction of reliable and valid instruments, including selected response and constructed response formats. Examines performance assessment and the construction of a body of evidence necessitated by Standards- Based Education. Includes a research component. NOTE: Fieldwork required in an assigned Metro Denver area school.

ED 610. LANGUAGE, LITERACY AND LINGUISTICS FOR EDUCATORS (3). Applies scientific research to classroom practices of language study including phonetics, phonology, morphology, orthography, semantics, and syntax. Particular emphasis upon spelling, grammar, handwriting, and designing instruction according to students assessed needs.

ED 615. EXPLORING IDENTITY AND DIVERSITY IN YOUNG ADULT LITERATURE (3). Examines themes of identity and diversity in a range of multicultural literature for young adults,
with emphases on interpretation and pedagogy. Relates structural and thematic elements to the personal and academic development of adolescents, and explores ways to weave this literary genre
into the fabric of secondary content area classes. Students will construct thematic units and lessons in a standards-based assessment driven environment. Includes a research component.

ED 617. ELEMENTARY STUDENT TEACHING (2-4). In collaboration with the Cooperating Teacher, the student teacher will gradually assume the responsibilities of a teacher in the classroom and school. A minimum of 640 hours of student teaching must be completed over the semester experience.

ED 618A. ELEMENTARY SCIENCE: CONTENT, INSTRUCTION AND ASSESSMENT (3). Surveys methods, materials and concepts related to the teaching of the various sciences. Combines the knowledge of content areas with the skills and approaches pertinent to the field. Includes a research component. Co-requisite(s): ED 618D. NOTE: Fieldwork required in an assigned
Metro Denver area school.

ED 618B. ELEMENTARY MATHEMATICS: CONTENT, INSTRUCTION AND ASSESSMENT (2). Surveys methods and materials appropriate to teaching mathematics. Combines the knowledge of content area with the skills and approaches pertinent to the field. Includes a research component. Co- requisite(s): ED 618C. NOTE: Fieldwork required in an assigned Metro Denver area school.

ED 618C. ELEMENTARY LANGUAGE ARTS: CONTENT, INSTRUCTION AND ASSESSMENT (2). Using the Colorado Model Content Standards, participants examine links between writing, reading comprehension, oral language, listening, and speaking. Focuses on writing instruction and assessment in establishing a writing community, becoming writers as teachers, and providing writing instruction based on assessment of student’s needs. Coursework includes readings, demonstrations,
simulations, discussion, and written analyses of fieldwork data. Includes a research component. Co-requisite(s): ED 618B. NOTE: Fieldwork required in an assigned Metro Denver area school.

ED 618D. ELEMENTARY SOCIAL STUDIES: CONTENT, INSTRUCTION AND ASSESSMENT (3). Surveys methods, materials and concepts related to teaching social studies. Combines the knowledge of content area with the skills and approaches pertinent to the field. Includes a research component. Co-requisite(s): ED 618A. NOTE: Fieldwork required in an assigned Metro Denver area school.

ED 619. INTEGRATED ELEMENTARY METHODS (6). Surveys methods, materials, and concepts related to teaching mathematics, science and social studies. Combines the knowledge of content area and integrates the skills and approaches pertinent to elementary instruction. NOTE: Fieldwork is required in an
assigned Metro Denver area school.

ED 621. SECONDARY ENGLISH: CONTENT, INSTRUCTION AND ASSESSMENT (3). Examines materials, methods and assessment practices used in teaching English at the middle and high school levels. Analyzes grammar, composition, the short story, the novel, drama, poetry and communications. Emphasizes whole class, small group and individualized instruction and new curricular approaches. Includes a research component. NOTE: Fieldwork required in an assigned Metro Denver area school.

ED 625. SECONDARY WORLD LANGUAGE: CONTENT, INSTRUCTION AND ASSESSMENT (2). Examines materials, methods and assessment practices used in teaching world language (French, German, or Spanish) at the middle and high school levels. Analyzes grammar, composition, the short story, the novel, drama, poetry and communications. Emphasizes whole
class, small group and individualized instruction and new curricular approaches. Includes a research component. NOTE: Fieldwork required in an assigned Metro Denver area school.

ED 627. SECONDARY MATHEMATICS: CONTENT, INSTRUCTION AND ASSESSMENT (3). Examines materials, methods and assessment practices used in teaching mathematics
at the middle and high school levels. Emphasizes whole class, small group and individualized instruction and new curricular approaches. Includes a research component. NOTE: Fieldwork required in an assigned Metro Denver area school.
ED 628. SECONDARY BUSINESS: CONTENT, INSTRUCTION AND ASSESSMENT (3). Examines methods, materials, and assessment practices appropriate for teaching middle school and high school accounting, bookkeeping, consumer law and economics. Emphasizes specific classroom applications related to non-clerical business courses. Includes a research component. NOTE: Fieldwork required in an assigned Metro Denver area school.

ED 629. SECONDARY SCIENCE: CONTENT, INSTRUCTION AND ASSESSMENT (3). Examines materials, methods, and assessment practices used for teaching science at the middle and high school levels. Attention given to whole class, laboratory, small group and individualized instruction and new curricular approaches. Includes a research component. NOTE: Fieldwork required in an assigned Metro Denver area school.

ED 631. SECONDARY SOCIAL STUDIES: CONTENT, INSTRUCTION AND ASSESSMENT (3). Examines materials, methods, and assessment practices used in teaching social studies at the middle and high school levels. Adapts history, political science, economics, sociology, cultural geography, social psychology and cultural anthropology to meaningfulness within the secondary Curriculum. Attention given to integrating current events for curricular relevance. Includes a research component. NOTE: Fieldwork required in an assigned Metro Denver area school.

ED 633. K-12 ART: CONTENT, INSTRUCTION AND ASSESSMENT (3). Explores and applies theoretical and practical issues in designing and implementing a K-12 art education program. Emphasizes current trends in art education; materials and methods of teaching and assessing various art media; and curriculum development. Includes a research component. NOTE: Fieldwork required in an assigned Metro Denver area school.

ED 634. SECONDARY STUDENT TEACHING (2-4). SECONDARY STUDENT TEACHING. In collaboration with the Cooperating Teacher, the student teacher will gradually assume the responsibilities of a teacher in the classroom and school. A minimum of 640 hours of student teaching must be completed over the semester experience.

ED 635. SECONDARY CURRICULUM PLANNING AND CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT (3). Provides students with knowledge and skills needed for effective classroom management and planning in a Standards-Based environment. Students will demonstrate mastery of short and long term planning, time management, and research-driven methods to improve and report student achievement, and develop instructional and behavioral expectations for the successful classroom. Includes a research component. NOTE: Fieldwork required in an assigned Metro Denver area school.

ED 647. MULTICULTURAL LITERATURE AND LITERACY ACROSS THE ELEMENTARY CURRICULUM (3). Explores historical and contemporary literature for children and adolescents in America. Examines literature representing various
genres that teachers use in elementary and secondary classrooms. Coursework includes readings, demonstrations, discussions, field trips, and written analyses of fieldwork data. Includes a research component. NOTE: Fieldwork required in an assigned Metro Denver area school.

ED 651. MULTICULTURAL PERSPECTIVES (2). Explores and reflects on multicultural societal structures which impact the success of students in today's schools. Prepares students to address issues of discrimination in schools, the curriculum, and within the classroom and will ask students to examine their own beliefs and how these will impact their future role as an educator. Students reflect on the questions, 'How ought we to teach and live as teachers?' 'How ought education to progress in a diverse society?' Includes a research component. Prerequisite(s): Must be admitted to Master of Arts in Education: Graduate Teacher Licensure Program. NOTE: Service work in diverse schools is required. This course meets the state requirements for the ESL endorsement. This course is also required for the Master of Arts in Education degree but not for the teaching license. Students can select to take this course or MAE 605M to satisfy this degree requirement.

ED 680E-H. FIELDWORK IN SCHOOLS (2). Students will complete a minimum of 800 fieldwork hours as a teaching intern in a school classroom under the direction of a cooperating teacher as part of the Graduate Teacher Licensure Program. Work with children/adolescents is designed to connect coursework with classroom experience. School placement will be arranged by the Education Department. Fee required. NOTE: Students should register for one section of fieldwork in any given term. Pass/No Pass grading only.

ED 685. THEORIES, STRATEGIES, AND ASSESSMENT FOR CLD K-12 (3). Provides research-based methods and strategies for teaching English as a Second Language to speakers of other languages. Explores curriculum materials appropriate to the development of English as a Second Language. Examines process learning as it applies to ESL in content areas. Discusses and demonstrates specific teaching methodology including natural learning and sheltered approaches to develop academic English. Includes a research component. This course meets the state requirements for the ESL endorsement. NOTE: Fieldwork required in an assigned Metro Denver area school.

ED/MAE 690E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN EDUCATION (1-
3). Pursues independent exploration of areas of interest under the supervision of a department member. Prerequisite(s): Approval of Program Coordinator required.

ED 695. SEMINAR: TEACHING AND LEARNING IN DIVERSE SCHOOLS (1). Examines current educational issues especially related to equity-oriented practices and context of student teaching in urban schools. Provides support for completion of Teacher Work Sample and Portfolio. Prerequisite(s): Good standing in program. Approval of program director required. NOTE: Fieldwork required in an assigned Metro Denver area school.

ED 699. CAPSTONE LICENSURE PRESENTATION AND REVIEW (0). Candidates are required to register for the
Capstone Licensure Presentation and Review during the final May term of the program. Candidates must have completed all other program requirements prior to the Review semester. The purpose of the Capstone Licensure Presentation and Review is to provide a forum for prospective graduates to actively and creatively demonstrate their progress towards state licensure standards and their growth as learners and educators, as demonstrated in the Teacher Work Sample and Portfolio and elsewhere. The Capstone Licensure Presentation and Review
serves as a “comprehensive examination.” Prerequisite(s): Approval of program director required. NOTE: Pass/No Pass grading only.

EDUCATION: EDUCATIONAL LEADERSHIP (EDLS)

EDLS 614. EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH FOR LEADERS (3). Essential for educational leaders to have the knowledge of effective research practices to lead a variety of school improvement initiatives. Learners will evaluate current research on effective leadership practices in educational settings. Learners will gain knowledge about the validity and reliability of effective educational research.

EDLS 643. CAPSTONE: EDUCATIONAL LEADERSHIP (1). Students prepare an applied project examining a school program or problem that aligns to the learning outcomes of the program. Pass/No Pass grading only.

EDLS 660. FISCAL LEADERSHIP (3). The development and management of a school budget is predicated on fiscally sound practices and leadership. Learners will gain knowledge and understandings of these practices, and other fiscal management tools needed to lead in an education setting. Gains an understanding of fiscal transparency and collaborative discussions and development when applicable.

EDLS 661. HUMAN RESOURCES/PERSONNEL FOR EDUCATIONAL LEADERS (3). The recruiting, hiring and supervision of staff is the most important responsibility of the school leader. Examines the nature and challenge of personnel management including recruiting, hiring, retention, onboarding, and corrective action. Provides a framework for evaluating teachers and supervising personnel for the benefit of student achievement.

EDLS 662. INSTRUCTIONAL LEADERSHIP AND DATA ANALYSIS (3). Explores and applies elements of data literacy and instructional leadership that provide powerful shifts and sustainability in a building. Students will engage in readings, discussions, and direct teaching of data processes, state reporting, state and district systems, learning communities, and key elements in teams and relationships among staff and administration that move the school towards the highest priority goals.

EDLS 665. CULTURALLY AND LINGUISTICALLY DIVERSE FOUNDATIONS FOR EDUCATIONAL LEADERS (3). Provides an overview of the social, political, and historical contexts related to CLD learners in American schools and how school leaders develop systems to meet the needs for CLD learners. Philosophical and theoretical assumptions informing policy, programs and instructional practice for the CLD learner will be discussed. Strategies for collaboration with and advocacy for diverse students and their families will be explored. How leaders develop systems of accountability to ensure CLD best practice strategies are implemented throughout the school setting will be an outcome.

EDLS 685. PEER MENTORING (3). Designed to provide strategies to support and enhance the growth of licensed and classified staff in an educational setting. Includes building foundational knowledge in the area of group dynamics, the stages of group development and strategies to move groups through the change process. In addition students will gain coaching skills to support both cognitive and technical coaching situations. Understanding how to effectively communicate when providing feedback and support will be an important component of this course. Understanding how to effectively deal with diverse individuals and groups will support the aspiring school leader toward increased student achievement.

EDLS 689. SCHOOL LAW (3). School Law is intended to provide the administrator with the foundational knowledge that is necessary to ensure that school practices and policies are within the requirements of federal, state, and local legal frameworks. Moreover, as decisions are made regarding student discipline, teacher freedoms, and employment the knowledgeable leader can ensure that the rights of individuals are maintained as well as the safety of the school.

EDLS 690. SCHOOL STRATEGY AND SUSTAINABILITY (3). Learners will analyze the forces shaping the education environment and the fundamental strategic choices leaders make that influence school performance including processes for the development and articulation of vision and mission. Learners will gain a greater understanding of self and leadership style to have a greater impact on sustaining a strong organizational culture in an educational setting.

EDLS 692. COMMUNITY AND COMMUNICATIONS LEADERSHIP (3). Focuses on communicating with clarity and skills that influence respectful relationships with all members of the school community. Students explore counseling strategies, conflict management, negotiations, leadership styles, and group dynamics.

EDLS 694. EDUCATION POLICY AND ORGANIZATION LEADERSHIP (3). Examines educational policy debates, reform efforts at both the federal and state levels, and issues such as teacher policy and leadership, teacher unions, and historical and recent reform efforts in schools across the nation.

EDLS 696. EQUITY LEADERSHIP (3). Examines ethical dilemmas in education leadership and the decision making processes involved. Topics are analyzed to develop competence in moral reflection and ethical decision making considering professional and societal values.

EDLS 699. INTERNSHIP: EDUCATIONAL LEADERSHIP (1-2). Students complete project-based Internships to provide relevant and engaging experiences for students to apply the theoretical understandings of leadership from the seven core courses. All students are to complete 300 hours of internship experiences as part of the Principal Licensure requirement for the state of Colorado. Pass/No Pass grading only.

EDUCATION: ELEMENTARY (EDEL) EDEL 650. ASSESSMENT OF LEARNING (3). Provides information and means for future classroom teachers to assess student learning. Appropriate, practical and relevant assessment techniques and evaluation guidelines will be provided. Cross listing: EDSC 650. Prerequisite(s): EDFD 601.

EDEL 660. TEACHING LANGUAGE ARTS AND SOCIAL STUDIES (3).  Explores theories of teaching literacy, social studies and expressive arts. Develops skill in research-based instructional
techniques, strategies, and activities. Develops skills in planning integrated instruction and assessing student outcomes for diverse learners.  Field hours required.

EDEL 661. ELEMENTARY METHODS II (3). Studies the theories of teaching math, science, health, and physical education. Provides opportunity for observing, helping, preparing and teaching lessons as well as for assessing learning. Includes working with students individually, in small groups, and with the whole classroom. Requires a practicum component.

EDEL 662. TEACHING SCIENCE AND HEALTH (3). Explores theories of learning, conceptual knowledge, and instructional strategies for teaching and learning science, health and physical education.  Develops skills in planning, implementing, and assessing student outcomes for diverse learners. Field hours required.

EDEL 663. TEACHING MATH AND SCIENCE (3). Explores theories of learning, conceptual knowledge, and instructional strategies relevant to teaching and learning mathematics and science.  Additional emphasis on planning, implementing, assessing and reflecting on emerging practice. Field experience required.

EDEL 670. CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT (3). Explores the classroom management and the development of an effective classroom. Emphasizes classroom setup, establishing rapport, setting routines and procedures, management techniques, and conditions of learning in the K-12 environment. Cross listing EDSC 670. Prerequisite(s): EDFD 601.

EDEL 690. STUDENT TEACHING: ELEMENTARY (2-8). Requires working in a classroom full time (300-600 student contact hours) under the supervision of a licensed teacher of the same endorsement in an accredited school. Provides opportunity to observe, develop lessons, assess learning, and teach large and small groups as well as individualized lessons. Attends appropriate in-services or faculty meetings and becomes a part of the school community.

EDUCATION: FOUNDATIONAL COURSES (EDFD)

EDFD 600. PHILOSOPHICAL FOUNDATIONS OF EDUCATION (3). Traces the history of the development of educational theory. Investigates leading contemporary and classical philosophical perspectives and implications towards practical educational goals. Analyzes educational values and practices and strategies for educational change. Cross listing: MLS 654E.

EDFD 601. FOUNDATIONS OF EDUCATION (3). Addresses the foundations of public education within the state of Colorado and United States more broadly to answer the questions, (1) What is the purpose of public education? (2) What are the primary influences on public education?

EDFD 603. DIVERSITY, EQUITY, AND SOCIAL JUSTICE (3). Teacher candidates will explore and reflect on multicultural perspectives, issues of social justice, and societal structures that impact the success of individual students and programs. Issues of discrimination in schools, the curriculum, and within the classroom will be addressed, as well as your own beliefs and how these impact your roles as educators. Prerequisite: EDFD 601.


EDFD 604. DIVERSITY ISSUES IN EDUCATION (3). Examines
the broad range of cultural changes taking place in K-12 education and the workplace. Focuses on implications for instruction training, including topics such as ethnicity, socioeconomic level, and gender.

EDFD 610. CURRENT AND INTERDISCIPLINARY PERSPECTIVES IN EDUCATION (3). Provides in-depth study of the role and social context of schooling from an interdisciplinary perspective. Focuses on current issues, research and implications for learning. Cross listing: MLS 654F.

EDFD 615. TRENDS AND ISSUES IN EDUCATION (3). Focuses on current issues, research, and implications for learning in K-12 education. NOTE: Non-licensure students only.

EDFD 631. STUDENT DEVELOPMENT AND LEARNING (3). Study of student development and learning, emphasizing applications to curriculum and methods in the classroom.

EDFD 641. CHILDREN’S AND ADOLESCENT LITERATURE (3). Studies the various genres of early childhood, children's and adolescent literature. Emphasizes the history of this literature, the analysis and evaluation of its literary elements and the discussion
of the value issues raised in various literary pieces. Includes the
integration of early childhood, children's and adolescent literature in instruction.

EDFD 670. THE EFFECTIVE CLASSROOM (3). Explores the classroom management and the development of an effective classroom. Emphasizes classroom setup, establishing rapport, setting routines and procedures, management techniques, and conditions of learning in the K-12 environment.

EDFD 675. TEACHER LEADERSHIP (3). Examines the dispositions, roles and challenges of teacher leadership. Candidates explore topics such as characteristics and styles of leadership, functions of leadership, and the influence of teacher leadership on school culture and student outcomes.

EDFD 679. IMPROVEMENT SCIENCE FOR PRACTITIONERS (3). Explores the methods and dispositions of continual quality improvement in schools at the classroom and team levels to include change theory, organizational skills, problem analysis, improvement cycles, data use, and implementational sustainability.

EDFD 682A/ B. FIELD PRACTICUM I-II (0). Students will complete 100 hours of field experience in a school/classroom. Work with children/adolescents is designed to connect coursework with classroom experience. School placement will be arranged by the Education Department. NOTE: Students should only register for one section of fieldwork in any given term. Pass/No Pass grading only.

EDFD 682 C-F. FIELD PRACTICUM III-VI (0). Students will complete 50 hours of field experience in a school/classroom. Work with children/adolescents is designed to connect coursework with classroom experience. School placement will be arranged by the Education Department. NOTE: Students should only register for one section of fieldwork in any given term. Pass/No Pass grading only.

EDFD 697. PROFESSIONALISM IN EDUCATION I (2). Seminar that accompanies Student Teaching. Focuses on topics that are critical for the effective teacher with a global perspective: planning for instruction, ethical practices, creating a supportive classroom,
leadership, and collaboration. NOTE: Initial licensure students only.

EDUCATION: LINGUISTICALLY DIVERSE EDUCATION (EDLD)

EDLD 675. LINGUISTICS FOR TEACHERS OF CLD STUDENTS (2). Provides the learner with information concerning first and second language acquisition theory. Explores the structure and function of the English language including linguistics, applied linguistics, psycholinguistics, and sociolinguistics. Instructional practices for teaching English to speakers of other languages will
be reviewed. Process learning as it applies to the acquisition of the
English language will be explored and modeled. Prerequisite(s): ED
685.
EDLD 676. LINGUISTICS AND LANGUAGE ACQUISITION (3). Provides the learner with information concerning first and second language acquisition theory. Explores the structure and function of the English language including linguistics, applied linguistics, psycholinguistics, and sociolinguistics. Instructional practices for diverse learners will be reviewed. Process learning as it applies to the acquisition of the English language will be explored and modeled.
EDLD 677. STRATEGIES FOR DIVERSE POPULATIONS (3). Provides research-based methods and strategies for teaching English as a second language to speakers of other languages. Explores curriculum material appropriate to the development of English as a second language. Examines process learning as it applies to ESL in content areas. Discusses and demonstrates specific teaching methodology including natural learning and sheltered approaches to develop academic English. Prerequisite(s): EDLD 676 and a course in Assessment.

EDUCATION: LITERACY (EDLT)

EDLT 613. TEACHING LITERACY TO ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS (3). Designed for teachers who desire to increase their knowledge of the development of reading literacy skills for all students, with a focus on ELLs. Examines specific research- based strategies to teaching reading based on Colorado State Standards, while adhering to constructive principles. Considers the similarities and differences of teaching reading to native and non-native speakers of English emphasizing the importance of
family literacy in teaching reading to ELLs. Prerequisite(s): ED 685.

EDLT 615. EXPLORING IDENTITY AND DIVERSITY IN YOUNG ADULT LITERATURE (3). Examines a range of literature for young adults, with emphasis on interpretation and pedagogy. Relates structural and thematic elements to the personal and academic development of adolescent ad explores ways to weave the literacy genre into the fabric of secondary content area classes. Student will construct thematic units and lessons in standards-based, assessment driven environment.

EDUCATION: READING (EDRG)

EDRG 602. READING AND WRITING CONNECTIONS (3). Focuses on evidence-based writing instruction, to include using writing to support text comprehension. Includes a service learning component. NOTE: Field experience component included.

EDRG 603. EMERGENT LITERACY (3). Investigates the foundational aspects of reading for young learners. Emphasizes evidence-based emergent reading strategies and developmental skills. NOTE: Field experience component included.

EDRG 604. LITERACY FOR THE DIVERSE LEARNER (3). Examines current research and strategies for teaching diverse learners who are multi-lingual, multi-cultural, or come from a disadvantaged environment. Also includes information on strategies for students with special needs. NOTE: Field experience included. NOTE: Field experience included.

EDRG 606. READING ASSESSMENT AND INTERVENTION (3). Literacy assessment and diagnostic tools will be utilized and strategies for remediation implemented. Students will create clinical reports based on assessment experiences. Explores affective factors and current issues. Prerequisites: EDRG 603, EDRG 604 and EDRG 644 NOTE: Field experience included.

EDRG 608. EVIDENCE-BASED READING TECHNIQUES FOR DYSLEXIA (3). Presents information on evidence-based, advanced techniques in reading instruction, assessment, and remediation. Topics such as state policies, specific disabilities, and program evaluation will also be addressed. Prerequisites: EDRG 603,
EDRG 604, EDRG 606 and EDRG 644 or permission of instructor.  NOTE: Field experience required.

EDRG 635. READING STRATEGIES FOR SECONDARY STUDENTS (3). Reviews basic literacy instructional practices to help all secondary learners in their content areas as well as age appropriate remediation strategies for struggling readers. Prerequisites: EDRG 602, EDRG 603 and EDRG 644. NOTE: Field experience included.

EDRG 640. ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT OF SCHOOL LITERACY PROGRAMS (3). Prepares teachers, coaches, and reading specialists in the organization and management of school reading programs. Includes information on coaching roles and embedded staff development. Culminates in a capstone project. Prerequisite(s) EDRG 602, EDRG 603, EDRG
604, EDRG 606, EDRG 608, EDRG 635 and EDRG 644. NOTE: Field experience required.

EDRG 644. TEACHING READING AND WRITING (3) Provides students with scientifically-based methods for teaching reading and writing.  Emphasizes current methodologies, research-based instructional practices, and ongoing assessment. Includes application of the essential components of reading instruction. NOTE: Field experience required.

EDRG 653. LITERACY FOR STUDENTS WITH SPECIAL NEEDS (3). Focuses on research-based methods and curricula for teaching reading and writing to students with special learning needs. Emphasizes instructional assessment strategies, examines
materials and modifications that are effective with special populations. NOTE: Field experience required.

EDRG 694. PRACTICUM: READING TEACHER (3). Immerses students in literacy leadership scenarios. Experiential involvement, reflection, and application of skills and concepts gleaned from previous classes will be emphasized. Prerequisites: EDRG 602,
EDRG 603, EDRG 604, EDRG 606, EDRG 608, EDRG 635, EDRG
640, EDRG 644, EDRG 653. NOTE: Field Experience required.

EDRG 695. PRACTICUM: READING SPECIALIST (3). Provides a venue for experiential involvement in literacy instruction, issues, and programs. Reflection, evaluation, and application of skills and concepts gleaned from previous classes will be emphasized. Prerequisites: EDRG 602, EDRG 603, EDRG 604, EDRG 606, EDRG 608, EDRG 635, EDRG 640, EDRG 644, EDRG 653. NOTE: Field Experience required.

EDRG 697. RESEARCH CAPSTONE IN LITERACY AND SPECIAL EDUCATION (3). Students will review current research in the field of literacy to help them develop an applied project that improves teaching, intervention practices, curriculum, or the professional community. Prerequisite(s): EDRG 602, EDRG 603, EDRG 604, EDRG 606, EDRG, 608, EDRG 635, EDRG 640,
EDRG 644, and EDRG 653.

EDUCATION: EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH (EDRS)

EDRS 600. EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH (3). Introduces fundamental concepts related to quantitative and qualitative educational research emphasizing teacher generated action research. Covers evaluation and engagement in educational research. Critical reflection as action research will be explored as well. Prerequisite(s): EDFD 601.

EDUCATION: SECONDARY (EDSC)

EDSC 650. ASSESSMENT OF LEARNING (3). Provides information and means for future classroom teachers to assess student learning. Appropriate, practical and relevant assessment techniques and evaluation guidelines will be provided. Cross listing: EDEL 650. Prerequisite(s): EDFD 601.

EDSC 652. READING AND WRITING IN THE CONTENT AREA (3). Introduces general information about the reading process and the methodologies used in the teaching of reading and writing at the secondary level. Focuses on the concept of content reading and on the writing process. Familiarizes student with how teachers teach their students to effectively learn from expository text. Provides knowledge about some of the newer
theories in content reading and writing as well as those proven to be effective. Meets the state requirement for reading for secondary and middle school teachers. Field experience required.

EDSC 661. SECONDARY METHODS IN BUSINESS (3). Studies the curriculum and methods of teaching secondary business. Provides opportunity to design lessons, both daily and unit, and have experience teaching them in the classroom. Requires student to be responsible for researching and analyzing new theories in
the field of business and vocational education. Contains a practicum component.

EDSC 662. SECONDARY METHODS IN DRAMA (3). Studies methods and strategies for teaching drama. Familiarizes student with new and traditional methods of teaching drama. Examines the curriculum and standards for drama as well as for planning lessons based upon the curriculum and standards. Contains a practicum component.


EDSC 663. SECONDARY METHODS IN ENGLISH (3). Studies methods and strategies for teaching English. Familiarizes student with new and traditional methods such as lecturing, individualization, cooperative grouping, Socratic seminars, journaling, and others. Examines the curriculum and standards for English as well as for planning lessons based upon the curriculum and standards. Contains a practicum component.

EDSC 664. SECONDARY METHODS IN ART (3). Studies the curriculum and methods of teaching secondary art. Provides opportunity to design lessons, both daily and unit, and have experience teaching them in the classroom. Requires student to be responsible for researching and analyzing new theories in the field of business and vocational education. Contains a practicum component.

EDSC 665. SECONDARY METHODS IN FOREIGN LANGUAGE (3). Studies methods and strategies for teaching a foreign language. Familiarizes student with new and traditional methods such as lecturing, individualization, cooperative grouping, Socratic
seminars, journaling, and others. Examines the curriculum and standards for a foreign language as well as for planning lessons based upon the curriculum and standards. Contains a practicum component.

EDSC 666. SECONDARY METHODS IN MATH (3). Studies the curriculum and methods of teaching secondary mathematics. Provides opportunity to design lessons, both daily and unit, and have experience teaching them in the classroom. Includes researching and analyzing new theories in the field of mathematics. Contains a practicum component.

EDSC 667. SECONDARY METHODS IN SCIENCE (3). Studies methods and strategies for teaching science. Familiarizes student with new and traditional methods such as lecturing, individualization, cooperative grouping, Socratic seminars, journaling, and others. Examines the curriculum and standards for science as well as for planning lessons based upon the curriculum and standards. Contains a practicum component.

EDSC 668. SECONDARY METHODS IN SOCIAL STUDIES (3). Studies methods and strategies for teaching social studies. Familiarizes student with new and traditional methods such as lecturing, individualization, cooperative grouping, Socratic seminars, journaling, and others. Examines the curriculum and standards for social studies as well as for planning lessons based upon the curriculum and standards. Contains a practicum component.

EDSC 669. SECONDARY METHODS IN SPEECH (3). Studies methods and strategies for teaching speech. Familiarizes student with new and traditional methods such as lecturing, individualization, cooperative grouping, Socratic seminars, journaling, and others. Examines the curriculum and standards for speech as well as for planning lessons based upon the curriculum and standards. Contains a practicum component.

EDSC 690. STUDENT TEACHING: SECONDARY (2-8). Requires working in a classroom full time (300-600 student contact hours) under the supervision of a licensed teacher of the same endorsement in an accredited school. Provides opportunity to observe, develop lessons, assess learning, and teach large and small groups as well as individualized lessons. Attends appropriate in-services or faculty meetings and becomes a part of the school community.
EDSC 670. CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT (3). Explores the classroom management and the development of an effective classroom. Emphasizes classroom setup, establishing rapport, setting routines and procedures, management techniques, and conditions of learning in the K-12 environment. Cross listing EDEL 670. Prerequisite(s): EDFD 601.

EDUCATION: SPECIAL EDUCATION (EDSP)

EDSP 610. TRANSITION, CONSULTATION, AND COLLABORATION (3). Prepares educators to work with students with disabilities to be successful in education, employment, and independent living after completion of high school.

EDSP 620. TEACHING EXCEPTIONAL LEARNERS (3). Examines disabilities in schools and services, systems, and concepts associated as well as state and federal trends. Applies evidence based instructional strategies and planning to meet the needs of every student.  Examines current legislation and develops
Universal Design planning. Cross listing(s): ED 601.

EDSP 644. MATH FOR SPECIAL EDUCATORS (3). Focuses on remediation and additional mathematic instruction for struggling students. Examines why children struggle with math concepts and how classroom climate, student learning style, and teacher activities all impact the struggling learner.

EDSP 663. ASSESSMENT OF THE DIVERSE LEARNER (3). Facilitates the diagnostic practices needed to identify educational and behavioral needs, write measurable goals, develop appropriate interventions, and monitor student growth. Emphasizes IEP development from determining disability to documenting service delivery.

EDSP 664. BEHAVIOR MANAGEMENT AND INTERVENTION (3). Focuses on analyzing student behavior and intervention strategies for disruptive actions. Addresses normal behaviors as well as those that cause problems in the classroom. Focuses on students with moderate needs.

EDSP 670. METHODS AND STRATEGIES IN SPECIAL EDUCATION (3). Focuses on the evaluation and use of evidence/research-based strategies in special education with an emphasis on data collection, interventions, and progress monitoring of a student within a practicum experience.

EDSP 692. STUDENT TEACHING SPECIAL EDUCATION GENERALIST (2-8). Participation in a student teaching experience assessing, teaching, and program planning for students with special needs. NOTE: Students must have experience with students with
a variety of needs.

ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE (ENVS)

ENVS 650 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION AND IMPACT ASSESSMENT (3). Introduces the theory and methods of writing environmental impact assessment reports. Discusses NEPA, ESA, the Clean Water Act, and other environmental regulatory acts. Explores ethical, judicial, scientific, economic, and political perspectives regarding assessing the environment.

MAE 605M. DIVERSITY, EQUITY, AND SOCIAL JUSTICE (3). Participants will explore and reflect on multicultural perspectives, issues of social justice, and societal structures which impact the success of individual students and programs. This class prepares participants to address issues of discrimination in schools, the curriculum, and within the classroom and asks participants to examine their own beliefs and how these impact their roles as educators, This class asks participants to reflect on the questions, "How ought we to teach and live as teachers?" "How ought education to progress in a diverse society?" This class meets the state requirements for the CLD endorsement.

MAE 610. CONNECTING BELIEFS, THEORY, AND PRACTICE (3). By synthesizing the content from throughout the program, participants develop personal beliefs, explore how these beliefs are supported by educational theorists and published research, and demonstrate how their beliefs manifest in classroom practice. This course culminates with a Culminating Academic Program (CAP) Review which serves as a summative assessment to a Master of Education, CLDE. NOTE: All program requirements must be completed prior to taking this course.

MAE 614. ACTION RESEARCH: FOUNDATIONS (3). Action research, an intentional research method of self-reflective and systematic inquiry, offers the opportunity to empower educators as knowing problem solvers, reflective learners and producers of valuable, practice-centered knowledge. In this introductory course, learners will develop skills to investigate a significant
question, concern, or issue of practice and formulate an evidenced informed action-plan to address it.

MAE 618. COMPARATIVE EDUCATION (3). Explores a diverse range of educational approaches and systems in an international context and develops skills to analyze educational development policies and ideologies that impact student learning. Focuses on preparing students to work within broader systems of education, particularly with students from immigrant and refugee populations.

MAE 621. CURRICULUM EVALUATION THEORY AND APPLICATION (3). Students engage in the inquiry process to study and apply how concept-based curriculum, especially inquiry and constructivism, is developed in student-centered classrooms. Distinctions between adopting, adapting and creating curricula around the Colorado Academic Standard are examined. A variety of assessment and evaluation procedures are studied and applied as an integral part of curriculum design and instructional practice. Students design a concept-based, backward designed unit and a balanced assessment/evaluation plan for their classroom. As a central component of this course, students reflect upon the effect
on student learning as the learning in this course is applied in their classrooms.

MAE 640F. LEADING INSTRUCTION AND REFLECTIVE PRACTICE (3). Provides a deeper understanding of instructional practices, and extends knowledge in order to lead work around student learning.  Covers how to develop academic rigor, increase student achievement and ways to differentiate. Common Core Standards are unpacked. Includes topics related to current
reform measures.
MAE 640I. LEADING PROFESSIONAL LEARNING (3). Discusses how to effectively plan and facilitate quality professional learning in schools/districts. Through research and adult learning theory application, covers how to advance and support critical reflection to improve student learning. Emphasizes professional learning that is team-based, job-embedded and aligns with Colorado Teacher Quality Standards.

MAE 640J. LEADING COLLABORATIVE CULTURES (3). Provides educators with the skills needed to help foster an environment of collaboration within a larger setting. Analyzes the components necessary for establishing a culture of collective responsibility, advocacy, problem solving and decision making that benefit students, parents and colleagues.

MAE 640K. LEADERSHIP FOR INCLUSION AND EQUITY (3). Provides skills needed to create equitable and inclusive learning and working environments that emphasize respect for diverse backgrounds and perspectives. Identifies, promotes and facilitates differentiated professional learning, as well as fosters reflection upon culturally responsive teaching. Covers modeling, teaching, and advocating for equitable and ethical practices at all levels within the educational system: classroom, grade-level, school, district and state.

MAE 640L. LEADING WITH DATA IN MIND (3). Covers how to teach and support colleagues in the collection, analysis, and communication of student data to improve student learning, facilitate school improvement, and promote change. Through inquiry and collaboration, explores how to engage in trust- building, negotiation, and teamwork to advocate for professional learning and become effective change agents.

MAE 640M. TEACHER LEADERSHIP PRACTICUM (3). Covers how to teach and support colleagues in the collection, analysis, and communication of student data to improve student learning, facilitate school improvement, and promote change. Through inquiry and collaboration, explores how to engage in trust- building, negotiation, and teamwork to advocate for professional learning and become effective change agents. Includes training on the new teacher effectiveness evaluation process as well as how to promote meaningful change, provide effective feedback and influence educational policy.

MAE 665E. TEACHING STRATEGIES FOR CULTURALLY AND LINGUISTICALLY DIVERSE EDUCATORS (3). Participants will be instructed in research-based methods and examine effective content-based instructional strategies for teaching English to
culturally and linguistically diverse (CLD) learners. Participants will adapt curriculum materials and learn differentiation techniques. Sheltered teaching methodologies to develop academic English will be discussed and demonstrated.

MAE 665F. BILITERACY DEVELOPMENT IN THE SPANISH/ENGLISH DUAL LANGUAGE CLASSROOM (3). Provides current and emerging philosophies and research-based methods of teaching for biliteracy, with a focus on the metalinguistic awareness needed for cross-language transfer. Students will explore the various components of teaching reading in Spanish. Includes a framework for teaching reading, writing, and oracy through strategic use of two languages. NOTE: Course is taught in Spanish and English and is designed for the bilingual educator.


MAE 665G. LINGUISTICS I: LANGUAGE ACQUISITION (3). Provides the participant with information concerning first and second language acquisition theory. Explores the structure and function of the English language including linguistics, applied linguistics, psycholinguistics, and sociolinguistics. Process learning will be explored and modeled.

MAE 665H.  FOUNDATIONS FOR CULTURALLY AND LINGUISTICALLY DIVERSE EDUCATORS (3). Provides an overview of the social, political, and historical contexts related to CLD learners in American schools. Philosophical and theoretical assumptions informing policy, programs and instructional practice for the CLD learner will be discussed. Strategies for collaboration with and advocacy for diverse students and their families will be explored.

MAE 665I. ASSESSMENT FOR CULTURALLY AND LINGUISTICALLY DIVERSE EDUCATION (3).  Develops skills for design, evaluation and critique of a variety of formative and summative assessments for CLD learners. Participants will apply this learning through a case study and design of a differentiated assessment based on language proficiency level. Standards for English Language Proficiency will serve as a resource for this work. An overview of historical and legal implications as they apply to linguistically diverse learners will also be presented.

MAE 665L. PRACTICUM FOR CULTURALLY AND LINGUISTICALLY DIVERSE EDUCATION (1-5). This course and the support seminar are designed to support candidates in linking the theories learned in other coursework to actual practices. Under the direction of a mentor, candidates demonstrate their skills and knowledge to teaching linguistically diverse learners. Additional attributes which contribute to the success of linguistically diverse learners will be documented through professional development and community involvement activities. NOTE: Course is waived for practicing teachers, Pass/No Pass Grading only (60-300 hours).

MAE 665P. LITERACY FOR CULTURALLY AND LINGUISTICALLY DIVERSE EDUCATION (3). Teachers will develop reading literacy skills with a focus on differentiation for CLDE learners and will apply research-based reading strategies in their course of study. A plan for instruction and academic language supports will be developed using the teaching and learning cycle and process learning principles.

MAE 665R. LINGUISTICS II: FORM AND FUNCTION (3). Develops teachers' pedagogical language knowledge through close study of advanced grammar topics and the exploration of the five components of language: Pragmatics, Phonology. Orthography, Morphology and Syntax. Emphasis will be on synthesizing linguistic theory and on making connections to English Language Development and appropriate instruction.

MASTER OF FINE ARTS (MFA)

MFA 601. RESIDENCY I (3). Students will attend a morning writing workshop, an advisement session with a co-director, afternoon seminars, and evening readings by program faculty, visiting writers, and graduating students.

MFA 602. RESIDENCY II (3). In addition to morning writing workshops and advisement sessions, afternoon seminars, and evening readings, the second residency will feature meetings with
second semester mentors and meetings with the program directors. Prerequisite(s): MFA 601.

MFA 602D. DUAL-GENRE RESIDENCY (3). Third residency for dual-genre students only. Prerequisite(s): MFA 601 and MFA 602, or permission of instructor.

MFA 603. RESIDENCY III (3). The third residency will feature meetings with third semester mentors, and meetings with the program directors, as well as, seminars on Writing in the World Action Plan. Prerequisite(s): MFA 602.

MFA 604. RESIDENCY IV (3). The fourth residency will feature meetings with fourth semester mentors, and meetings with the program directors. Prerequisite(s): MFA 603.

MFA 605. RESIDENCY V (3). The fifth residency will feature formal submissions of the MFA Thesis, the Thesis Defense, and public readings. Prerequisite(s): MFA 604.

MFA 651. WRITING SEMESTER I (9). In their first semester of study, students will continue to generate original work while also revising work completed during the first semester.

MFA 652. WRITING SEMESTER II (9). In their second semester of study, students will continue to generate original work while also revising work completed during the first semester.

MFA 652D. WRITING SEMESTER II: DUAL GENRE (9). In their second semester of study, students will continue to generate original work while also revising work completed during the first semester. This course is reserved for dual-genre students only (Intensive study of a secondary genre).

MFA 653. WRITING SEMESTER III (9). In their third semester of study, students will, in consultation with their faculty mentors, begin preliminary work on the book-length project that will become their MFA thesis. Prerequisite(s): MFA 652.

MFA 654. WRITING SEMINAR IV (9). In their fourth and final semester of study, students will, in concert with their faculty mentors/thesis advisors and thesis readers, write, revise, and perfect the book-length manuscripts that will be presented as their MFA thesis. Prerequisite(s): MFA 653.

MFA 655. RESIDENCY V: THESIS CONTINUATION (9). The fifth semester of study is available for students to continue revising their MFA Thesis Manuscript for approval by their thesis advisor.

MFA 670. WRTING IN THE WORLD ACTION PLAN (0). Maps out how students will make use of their writing talents to engage and serve their communities, whether through volunteerism or employment.

MFA 680. CRITICAL ESSAY (1). MFA students must submit a twenty-page critical essay on a topic in their genre.

MFA 690. MFA THESIS (2). The MFA Thesis, a book-length manuscript written, revised, and approved by the fourth-semester faculty mentor who serves as the student's thesis advisor, is the culmination of the student's work during the four residencies and semesters. Prerequisite(s): MFA 604 and MFA 654.

MFA 698. MFA INDEPENDENT STUDY (3-9). Focuses on aiding students in completion of program residency, writing semester,



ACCOUNTING (AC)

AC 3200. PRINCIPLES OF ACCOUNTING I (3). Introduces basic accounting principles and procedures for sole proprietorship, partnerships, and corporations.

AC 3210. PRINCIPLES OF ACCOUNTING II (3). A continuation of AC 3200 introducing basic financial accounting and managerial accounting and managerial accounting principles and procedures for sole proprietorships, partnerships, and corporations. Prerequisite(s): AC 3200.

AC 3300. ACCOUNTING FOR MANAGERS (3). Introduces basic terminology and concepts embodied in accounting that are utilized by business organizations to facilitate sound decision making. The primary focus of this course is aimed at non accounting students who are interested in better understanding how managers assess overall economic
performance of their companies when applying accounting tools and techniques that help measure that performance. NOTE: Non-majors only. This course may not be substituted for AC
3200 and AC 3210, although students may elect to take AC
3200 and AC 3210 in place of AC 3300.

AC 4100. INTERMEDIATE ACCOUNTING I (3). Provides an
in-depth study of the history and current regulations of financial accounting.  Introduces accounting theory and industry standards as well as details the functions of the accounting
cycle, resulting in the preparation and analysis of financial statements. Prerequisite(s): AC 3210.

AC 4110. INTERMEDIATE ACCOUNTING II (3). Provides an in-depth study of financial accounting. Accounting theory and standards for inventory, fixed assets, investments and liabilities are examined and practiced. Prerequisite(s): AC 4100.

AC 4120. INTERMEDIATE ACCOUNTING III (3). Provides an in-depth study of financial accounting. Accounting theory and practice for leases, pensions, shareholder wealth are examined and practiced.  Preparation and analysis of the Statement of Cash Flows.  Prerequisite(s): AC 4110.

AC 4310. ACCOUNTING INFORMATION SYSTEMS (3). Examines information systems and their role in business processes. Focuses on the use of technology and technology related tools and their value within accounting and the organization. Prerequisite(s): AC 3210.

AC 4400. COST ACCOUNTING (3). Provides an in-depth study of cost and management accounting procedures and techniques. Emphasize current topics from CPA examinations. Prerequisite(s): AC 3210.

AC 4500. INCOME TAX ACCOUNTING I (3). Studies income tax laws and regulations as they pertain to individuals, partnerships, corporations, estates and trusts. Prerequisite(s): AC 3210.

AC 4510. INCOME TAX ACCOUNTING II (3). A continuation of AC 4500, the study of income tax laws and regulations as they pertain to individuals, partnerships, corporations, estates and trusts. Prerequisite(s): AC 4500.

AC 4600. GOVERNMENTAL AND NOT-FOR-PROFIT ACCOUNTING (3). Accounting principles and procedures as applied to governmental and nonprofit organizations, including hospitals, colleges and universities, and health and welfare organizations. Prerequisite(s): AC 3210.

AC 4700. ACCOUNTING THEORY (3). Examines the conceptual, institutional and policy elements of accounting and major components of generally accepted accounting principles, conventions and practices. Integrates accounting theory, institutional dimensions of accounting, and their relationships with the financial reporting environment. Prerequisite(s): AC
4110.

AC 4750. ADVANCED ACCOUNTING (3). Accounting principles and procedures as applied to special areas including partnerships, corporate liquidations, estates and trusts, foreign currency accounting, segment accounting, installment sales and consignments and home office and branch operations. Prerequisite(s): AC 4120.

AC 4800. AUDITING PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES (3). Studies auditing principles and objectives in relationship to auditing standards and procedures. Prerequisite(s): AC 4120.

AC 4830. FORENSIC AND FRAUD AUDIT (3). The study of accounting fraud and the examination of issues surrounding the prevention, detection, and investigation of fraud. The course analyzes the accountant's/auditor's roles related to fraud, as well as, the audit committee and management. NOTE: Majors only. Prerequisite(s): AC 4800.

AC 4850. ADVANCED AUDITING (3). Examines cases of failed audits to assess audit risk; identify relevant assertions, inherent risks, and control risks; formulate audit objectives; and evaluate appropriateness of audit evidence. Examines earnings, management incentives, and devices; and threats to auditor’s independence. Prerequisite(s): AC 4800.

AC 4900E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN ACCOUNTING (1-
6). Offers opportunity for independent study in special topics of interest not covered in regularly offered courses under the direction of a faculty member. Prerequisite(s): Junior standing and approval of department chair.

AC 4910. ACCOUNTING ETHICS (3). Examines the ethical responsibilities of accountants in the business environment, both individually and within an organization. Focuses on various frameworks for ethical decision making, accounting codes of conduct, accountants' responsibilities for ethical behavior, and the current state of the accounting profession based on past and current ethical dilemmas faced by the profession. Prerequisite(s): AC 4120 and AC 4800.

AC 4985. SENIOR CAPSTONE (3). Provides the culminating experience of the major, focusing on integration and application
of theory through research. Must be completed as graded course work at Regis University. Prerequisite(s): AC 4800 and AC 4120.  NOTE: Majors only and Senior standing. Successful completion of eighteen (18) upper division Accounting semester hours required.

AC 4994. INTERMEDIATE ACCOUNTING APPRENTICESHIP I (3). The Intermediate Academic Apprenticeship connects vocation with academic learning. Goals of the internship are threefold: 1) to gain experience in a chosen professional setting integrating coursework knowledge in a work context, 2) to engage students in a process of discerning one's professional aspirations upon graduation, 3) develop professional behavior within a work culture. The academic portion of the internship requires face to face meeting times, to be scheduled individually at the first meeting, to discuss progress with assignments.

AC 4995. INTERMEDIATE ACCOUNTING APPRENTICESHIP II (3). The Intermediate Academic Apprenticeship connects vocation with academic learning. Goals of the internship are threefold: 1) to gain experience in a chosen professional setting integrating coursework knowledge in a work context, 2) to engage students in a process of discerning one's professional aspirations upon graduation, 3) develop professional behavior within a work culture. The academic portion of the internship requires face to face meeting times, to be scheduled individually at the first meeting, to discuss progress with assignments.

AC 4996. ADVANCED ACCOUNTING APPRENTICESHIP I (3). The Advanced Academic Apprenticeship connects vocation with academic learning. Goals of the internship are threefold: 1) to gain experience in a chosen professional setting integrating coursework knowledge in a work context, 2) to engage
students in a process of discerning one's professional aspirations upon graduation, 3) develop professional behavior within a work culture. The academic portion of the internship requires face to face meeting times, to be scheduled individually at the first meeting, to discuss progress with assignments.

AC 4997. ADVANCED ACCOUNTING APPRENTICESHIP II (3). The Advanced Academic Apprenticeship connects vocation with academic learning. Goals of the internship are threefold: 1) to gain experience in a chosen professional setting integrating coursework knowledge in a work context, 2) to engage
students in a process of discerning one's professional aspirations upon graduation, 3) develop professional behavior within a work culture. The academic portion of the internship requires face to face meeting times, to be scheduled individually at the first meeting, to discuss progress with assignments.

BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION (BA)

BA 2900. INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS (3). Explores the contemporary business environment by introducing fundamental business concepts and models through business simulation. Provides a solid foundation for future business courses in the functional areas of business and emphasizes how these functional areas interact to encourage profitable, sustainable and socially-responsible business practices.

BA 3366. MANAGEMENT ESSENTIALS (3). Examines managerial principles, theory, practices, and problems applicable to a variety of modern organizations through a study of the fundamental functions of management. Specific trends, techniques, principles, and skills for life-long learning, critical thinking, ethics and awareness of organizational and social issues are explored. Prerequisite(s): BA 2900 and sophomore class standing.

BA 3400. MARKETING PRINCIPLES (3). Determines how marketing decisions centered on customer needs impact the strategic success of an organization.   Effective integration of the marketing mix (4P’s) and the ethical role of marketing decisions are analyzed. Prerequisite(s): BA 2900, and sophomore class standing.

BA 3906. BUSINESS SYSTEMS IN A SUSTAINABLE SOCIETY (3). Applies individual skills in a systems approach to business, probes individual and organizational functional dependencies, and responsibility to internal and external stakeholders in the context of social responsibility, sustainable growth, and the Jesuit world view questioning “How ought we to live?”

BA 3911. BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION (3). Introduction to basic skills, principles and contexts of communication in business and professional settings.  Focuses on organization, adaptation and delivery of presentations for many types of business and professional settings.  Prerequisite(s): RCC 200, or EN 203 and COM
210/COM 250.

BA 4100. BUSINESS FINANCE (3). Introduces major topics in managerial finance essential for understanding how financial managers acquire and manage a firm’s assets and how they finance these assets through debt and equity sources. Prerequisite(s):  AC 3210

BA 4104. DERIVATIVE SECURITIES AND MARKETS (3). Introduces derivative related financial instruments (forwards, futures, and options) and their use in investment and corporate financial management. Provides insight into the use of hedging and risk mitigation through the use of financial instruments. Prerequisite(s): BA 4100.

BA 4106. ADVANCED CORPORATE FINANCE (3). Comprehensive study of how corporations make investment decisions, raise capital to finance their investments and manage their financial affairs to create shareholder value. Topics include capital budgeting and the cost of capital, dividend policy, capital structure and financial distress. Emphasizes developing analytical tools and problem solving. Prerequisite: BA 4100.

BA 4115. PERSONAL FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT (3). Examines the field of personal financial management and planning. Includes setting financial goals and planning for education, retirement, estates and insurance, and the tax effects of different financial choices. Explores the role of the professional financial planner in helping individuals to make financial decisions. Prerequisite(s): BA 2900.

BA 4120. FINANCIAL ANALYSIS, FORECASTING, AND PLANNING (3). Financial statements provide information for managers, investors, and creditors. Introduces the skills necessary to understand and analyze financial statements and apply these skills in order to determine the value of a firm and its underlying securities. Prerequisite(s): BA 4100 and Junior standing.
BA 4124. CORPORATE CAPITAL BUDGETING (3). Reviews cost of capital with an emphasis on risk analysis and management. Examines sources of capital, including money markets and capital markets, lease financing, venture capital, and foreign markets. Prerequisite(s): BA 4106.

BA 4132. ENTERPRISE/FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT (3). Explores the concepts of adding value to the firm through financial risk management. Enterprise risk management includes the identification, analysis and management of various risk factors that affect the organization.  The course combines the study of both types of risk management to add value to organizations through risk management techniques. Prerequisite(s): BA 4100.

BA 4140. FUNDAMENTALS OF INVESTMENTS (3). Studies the relationship between risk and return in the management of investment portfolios, including the analysis of stocks, bonds and other securities. Prerequisite(s): BA 4100, and AC 3210. Cross listing: EC 4140.

BA 4144. ECONOMICS OF POVERTY AND INEQUALITY (3). Examines poverty, inequality, and discrimination in an economic context and explores the effectiveness of
government policies designed to address associated inequalities. Consideration is given to the wealth gap, wage disparities, and capital access both within countries and between countries. Prerequisite(s): EC 3200 and EC 3300 or permission of instructor. Cross listing: EC 4144.

BA 4149. BUSINESS CYCLES AND FINANCIAL CRISES (3). Examines theoretical explanations of economics growth in advanced industrial economic systems and the causes of financial crises and of other deviations from the growth trend. Prerequisite(s): EC 3200 and EC 3300. Cross listing: EC 4149.

BA 4158. MONEY AND BANKING (3). Studies the nature and functions of money and credit, including an understanding of
the variety and growth of banking functions and the influence on banks of Federal Reserve operations. Examines the relationships among money, interest rates, business investment needs, government borrowing, and the gross national product. Prerequisite(s): EC 3200, EC 3300 and BA 4100. Cross listing: EC 4158.

BA 4163. INTERNATIONAL FINANCE (3). Presents the economic issues of international finance, including the history in International Finance, fixed and flexible exchange rates, and international agencies that help stabilize international financial markets.  Examines issues faced by financial managers of multinational firms. Prerequisite(s):  EC 3200, EC 3300, BA
4100, MT 330 or MT 360A and junior standing. Cross listing: EC 4163.

BA 4170. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (3). Studies various models/theories of economic development that traces a history of underdevelopment. Investigates the various barriers and problem areas in developing countries. Assesses possibilities, prospects, and policies for the future. Prerequisite(s): EC 3200. Cross listing: EC 4170, ENVS 470, and PJ 470.

BA 4173. PUBLIC FINANCE AND PUBLIC POLICY (3). Examines the basic principles of public finance. Considers the role of government in the economy and how government might approach solving social issues through a political economy lens. Topics include the moral economy, efficiency and equity aspects of taxation and redistributive programs, private and public solutions to problems of externalities and public goods, government provision of health care and social insurance programs, budgeting and public debt. Prerequisite(s): EC200,
or EC 3200 and EC 3300. Cross listing: PEC 473.

BA 4177. INTERNATIONAL ECONOMICS (3). Examines the theoretical underpinnings of international economics. Emphasizes international trade theory, trade policy, exchange rate determination, factor movements, underdevelopment, balance of payments, national income, the international financial system and institutions and regional trading blocks. Prerequisite(s): EC 3200, EC 3300 and either EC 4100 or EC
4110. Cross listing: EC 4177.

BA 4226. LEADING INCLUSIVE AND DIVERSE ORGANIZATIONS (3). Provides an in-depth exploration of diversity influences in organizations, includes stereotypes and other blocks to equal treatment, and the impact of increasing diversity on organizational objectives and career expectations. Prerequisite(s): BA 3366.

BA 4260. EMPLOYMENT LAW AND COMPLIANCE (3). Identifies the federal and state laws and regulations that affect the employment relationship. Focuses on developing programs that help the organization meet its workforce needs in support of business requirements, while preventing lawsuits from employees and federal agencies. Topics include Discrimination Law, Wage and Hour Law, Labor Law, Benefits Law, and other federal laws and regulations.

BA 4270. STRATEGIES IN COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS (3). Analyzes the theories, concepts and practices related to managing strategic compensation and benefits programs. Focuses on the role of human resources in managing competitive rewards and pay plans. Specific topics include compensation administration, job evaluation and pay structures, base and incentive pay, executive compensation, and employee benefits plans including required, voluntary, and retirement options.

BA 4280. TALENT AND PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT
(3). Identifies a framework for acquiring and maintaining diverse and talented employees in alignment with business
requirements of the organization. Focuses on the recruitment, selection, and development systems that are part of the human resources function. Discusses approaches and practices to manage employee performance. Explores workforce diversity and its impact on talent management in the organization. Topics include recruitment, selection, and orienting new employees; training and development; performance management and workforce diversity.

BA 4290. LABOR/EMPLOYEE RELATIONS AND WORKPLACE SAFETY (3). Identifies processes used to maintain effective relationships between employees and management, as well as managing employee discipline to meet the requirements of the organization. Focuses on the role of human resources in the mediation and negotiation of labor/employee relations matters, settlement of employee disputes and grievances, and identifying practices and processes to maintain a safe workplace. Topics include collective bargaining, negotiations, alternative dispute resolution,
progressive discipline, workplace investigations and workplace safety.

BA 4308. DEVELOPING YOUR LEADERSHIP POTENTIAL (3). Leadership is the ability to influence a group of people and rally them behind a goal. This course is designed to provide the student with opportunities to develop and improve competencies that are fundamental to the practice of leadership in business, and to provide a place to reflect on one's leadership potential. Prerequisite(s): BA 3366 and junior class standing.

BA 4327. INTRODUCTION TO ENTREPRENEURSHIP (3). Introduces entrepreneurship and the entrepreneurial process. Explores how the functional areas of business are applied to new ventures. Examines the role entrepreneurship plays in fulfilling their professional aspirations.   Prerequisite(s): BA
3366 and junior class standing.

BA 4314. DIVERSITY IN THE WORKFORCE (3). Examines changing roles of African Americans, Latinos, Asian Americans, physically disabled, and elderly. Focuses on the internationalization of the workforce with respect to peace and justice. Provides an extended case application of theories of organizational behavior and change with an eye on globalization. Cross listing: PJ 414. Prerequisite(s): BA 3366 and junior class standing.

BA 4331. ENTREPRENEURSHIP STORIES (3). Examines the stories of entrepreneurs and their approach to business. Begins with a review of the iconic captains of industry, such as Henry Ford and J.P. Morgan. Current corporate success stories and their prosperous managers will be examined. Explores the contributions made by small to mid-size businesses and lessons learned from business failures. NOTE: Junior standing required.

BA 4333. WOMEN IN BUSINESS (3). Explores challenges for women in business from a historical perspective. Discusses the sociological and psychological barriers to women's success. Examines being champions for women. Cross listing(s): WGS
485S. Prerequisite(s): Sophomore class standing.

BA 4354. ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR (3). Emphasizes organizational environment and behavior concepts. Focuses on human resources and system ideas, motivating employees, job satisfaction, leadership, managing change, communication and group processes, employee counseling and interpersonal and group dynamics. Prerequisite(s): BA 3366 and sophomore class standing.

BA 4368. INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS (3). Examines scopes and challenges of doing business and marketing goods and services to foreign markets. Addresses cultural, legal, political, geographic, management, organizational, and marketing practices. Reviews establishing markets, research, distribution channels, and export processes. Prerequisite(s): BA 3366 and junior class standing.

BA 4369. INTERNATIONAL MANAGEMENT (3). Studies the history and evolution of international business, the international environment, and the development, organization, and structure of the international organization. Includes cultural differences and business-governmental relations. Prerequisite(s): BA 3366 and junior class standing.


BA 4380E-W. ISSUES IN MANAGEMENT (3). Focuses on various aspects of management. Provides perspective on
current issues and practices in both for-profit and not-for-profit organizations. Explores legal and ethical behavior, technology’s impact on management and operations, changing cultures and organizational structure, demographic shifts, and international competitive forces.

BA 4382. VALUES-CENTERED MANAGEMENT (3). Examines the nature and meaning of work from a historical perspective and traces work traditions through industrial past. Focuses on current work environments, including issues of work/life balance, spirituality and global developments. Cross listing: CAS
460H. Prerequisite(s): BA 3366 and junior class standing.

BA 4384. VALUES-FOCUSED PUBLIC POLICY (3). Examines the policies and procedures utilized by government to improve economic performance. Explores the role that individual and community worldviews and commitments to justice have in defining appropriate state and federal regulatory action, with particular attention to the Catholic worldview and Catholic Social Thought. Areas of study include anti-trust, consumer protection, employment law, and environmental law. Prerequisite(s): EC 200 or EC 3200. Cross listing: EC 4384, PJ
484, and CAS 460G.

BA 4410. CONSUMER BEHAVIOR (3). Explores how individuals, groups, and organizations make purchasing decisions. Students identify opportunities for positive interaction in the buying process through customer analysis. Students examine social responsibility topics associated with buying and selling.

BA 4412. ADVERTISING AND PROMOTION (3). Introduces the concept of Integrated Marketing Communications (IMC), a promotions/communications approach integrating all elements of the promotional mix. Through the creation of an Integrated Marketing Communications plan, students learn the importance of identifying the target customer, the developing unique selling proposition, developing unified messaging, and the creation target-market driven media tools to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of marketing communications. Prerequisite(s): BA
2900.

BA 4423. MARKETING RESEARCH (3). Familiarizes student with the basic objectives, techniques, and applications of market research used in a modern business environment. Develops proficiency in the research process, building upon and applying knowledge of statistics to modern market research problems. Prerequisite(s): BA 2900, BA 3400, and MT 270.

BA 4428. INTERNATIONAL MARKETING (3). Examines the scope and challenge of marketing goods and services in foreign countries; and the cultural, legal, political, geographic, technological and economic influences on international marketing. Includes establishing markets, market research, distribution channels, export processes and marketing strategies.

BA 4429. STRATEGIC WEB DESIGN (3). Covers the full process of creating a WordPress website with images, multimedia, and content. Course includes securing a domain and site host, selecting a WordPress theme, and integrating social media. Will also cover site security, client relationship management, and basic search engine optimization.
BA 4434. PROFESSIONAL SELLING AND SALES MANAGEMENT (3). Designed to prepare students to enter a sales force equipped with the knowledge and skills necessary to supports students’ career interest in becoming successful sales professionals. Student learn the intricacies of sales strategies/techniques but also learn key sales skills, such as written, verbal, and non-verbal communication; presentation skills; emotional intelligence and relationship building. Students will practice negotiation and closing tactics, as well as after sale customer management.

BA 4443. DIGITAL MARKETING, MEDIA TACTICS, AND TOOLS (3).  Explores the ever-changing, dynamic world of digital marketing, including topics such as website development, social media, marketing automation, mobile marketing, client relationship management databases, and search engine marketing. Takes a hands-on approach, so students will experience the process of engaging in their own digital marketing tactics and preparing a digital marketing plan.

BA 4454. NEUROMARKETING AND BUYER BIOLOGY (3). Explores the human search for meaning from the perspective of neuromarketing, neuroeconomics, and consumer behavior. Drawing on the fields of biology, neuroscience, psychology, economics, and marketing.

BA 4465. VALUE CHAIN MANAGEMENT (3). Focuses on the chain of distribution from the supply of materials for product production, the innovation and product development process, the manufacturing of product, and the distribution chain from the manufacturer to the end consumer. Examines the development of integrated distribution systems as a means of adding value to the product, and for creating supply systems as a means of sustainable competitive advantage for an organization. Explores functions required of the supply chain, complications and issues facing the members of the supply chain, and creative alternatives to traditional supply chain management. Prerequisite(s): BA 2900 and sophomore class standing.

BA 4483. VALUES-CENTERED MARKETING (3). Provides an interdisciplinary framework for examining morals, values, and ethics in a marketing context. After critically evaluating philosophical, religious, and psychological perspectives on morality, students will analyze substantive marketing issues including, but not limited to, labor rights and sustainability, in light of the moral theories. Cross listing: CAS 460I.

BA 4486. RESEARCH PRACTICUM IN MARKETING (3). Provides students with the opportunity to design and conduct an original and independent/group research project. Entails comprehensive consumer study including problem statement, literature review, hypotheses, data collection, data analysis, and reporting. Develops conceptual and analytical skills with goal of publishing. Prerequisite(s): BA 2900, BA 3400, BA 4410, BA
4423, and BA 4434.

BA 4488. MARKETING FOR SOCIAL CHANGE IN UGANDA (3).  Experiential immersion course, exploring multiple disciplinary perspectives (e.g., business, economics, gender, history, geography, political science) on extreme poverty and economic development in Uganda. In the middle of the semester-long course, students will travel to Uganda. Cross-listing: ENVS 451, PJ 451W, WGS 485W. NOTE: Junior standing required. Travel to Uganda is required.

BA 4657. PROCESS MAPPING AND IMPROVEMENT (3). Emphasizes process mapping and examines the elements of process improvement. It identifies the methods and tools utilized in the identification, examination and improvement of processes within an organization. Its focus is on the involvement of various elements of an organization to: identify customer requirements, evaluate current processes against those requirements and lead the effort to make changes to processes that will both satisfy the customer and improve
organizational performance in an ethical and socially responsible manner. Prerequisite(s): BA 3366 and sophomore class
standing.

BA 4658. PROJECT MANAGEMENT (3). Identifies tools and processes of project management with emphasis on organizational structures and resources for successful management. Includes tools and techniques for project planning, staffing, and budgeting. Prerequisite(s): BA 3366 and
sophomore class standing.

BA 4810. CONSCIOUS CAPITALISM (3). Examines principles of conscious capitalism and applies those principles to a real- world business by conducting a conscious business audit, with recommendations for advancing conscious practices, and by developing a plan to address a specific business problem, challenge, or initiative in a conscious manner. Students work in teams.

BA 4820. FUNDAMENTALS OF INNOVATION ENGINEERING (3). Students use tools and disciplined systems to create, communicate, and advance or commercialize ideas in any field.  These concepts help students with product development, social innovation, or simply making work more meaningful and effective. Students completing this course will receive an Innovation Engineering Blue Belt designation.

BA 4900E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN BUSINESS (3). Enables students to pursue special topics of interest not covered in regularly offered courses. Developed under the direction of a faculty member.

BA 4950. ETHICAL DECISION MAKING IN BUSINESS (3). Focuses on ethical problems in the business environment including whistleblowing, employee rights, privacy, hiring, compensation, as well as corporate social responsibility and governance. Covers the fundamental philosophical theories that can be used to address these dilemmas. Individually, students investigate specific dilemmas inherent in their chosen
profession and analyze how those problems could be resolved by value-driven ethical standards. Prerequisite(s): BA 3366 and sophomore class standing.

BA 4981. BUSINESS LAW (3). Introduces the American legal system and provides essential background information on civil dispute resolution and the constitutional basis of law. Focus is on the fundamentals of contract law and legal issues that arise in business dealings with employees, consumers and governments. Prerequisite(s): BA 3366 (Business Administration students) or AC 3200 (Accounting students) and sophomore class standing.
BA 4985. BUSINESS POLICY AND STRATEGY (3). This capstone course for Business Administration majors addresses the business firm in its totality as a functioning entity in its environment, both global and local. Analyzes actual policies and strategies of existing firms. Prerequisite(s): Must have completed lower and upper division core courses prior to registering for this course. Senior class standing required.

BA 4986. CAPSTONE APPLIED PROJECT (3). Culminating experience for the major, requiring students to utilize integrated program concepts and theories to investigate and address a complex business problem, need or opportunity. Prerequisite(s): Must have completed lower and upper division core courses prior to registering for this course. Senior class standing required.

BA 4987. SENIOR CAPSTONE (3-6). Provides culminating experience of the major, focusing on integrating theory with application and implementation of research to a complex business problem, need, or opportunity. Prerequisite(s): Senior standing.

BUSINESS – GENERAL (CBE)

CBE 4890. MARKETPLACE ETHICS; CULTURE AND PRACTICE (3). Designed to allow students to collect data relating to the culture, operations, and organizational dynamics of an assigned small business or non-profit organization. Students will design and write an application for the BBB Torch Award for Marketplace Trust (See Torch Award explanation at https://www.bbb.org/denver/denverboulder-torch-awards) sponsored by the Better Business Bureau.

CBE 4990. INTERMEDIATE INTERNSHIP I (1-3). The Business Academic Internship connects student vocational goals with academic learning. Goals of the internship are threefold: 1) to gain professional experience in a chosen field, for integrating coursework knowledge in a work context, 2) to engage students in a process of discerning career direction upon graduation, and 3) develop professional behavior within a work culture.  The academic portion of the internship is similar to an independent study with scheduled face to face meeting times, scheduled individually, to discuss progress with assignments.

CBE 4991. INTERMEDIATE INTERNSHIP II (1-3). The Business Academic Internship connects student vocational goals with academic learning. Goals of the internship are threefold: 1) to gain professional experience in a chosen field, for integrating coursework knowledge in a work context, 2) to engage
students in a process of discerning career direction upon graduation, and 3) develop professional behavior within a work culture.  The academic portion of the internship is similar to an independent study with scheduled face to face meeting times, scheduled individually, to discuss progress with assignments.

CBE 4992. ADVANCED INTERNSHIP I (1-3). The Advanced Academic Internship is an opportunity to apply upper division academic learning in a business context. Goals of the internship are threefold: 1) to gain experience in a business setting, for integrating coursework knowledge in a work context, 2) to engage students in a process of refining future career direction, and 3) cultivate professional behavior within a work culture. The academic portion of the internship is similar to an independent study with scheduled face to face meeting times, scheduled individually, to discuss progress with assignments.

CBE 4993. ADVANCED INTERNSHIP II (1-3). The Advanced Academic Internship is an opportunity to apply upper division academic learning in a business context. Goals of the internship are threefold: 1) to gain experience in a business setting, for integrating coursework knowledge in a work context, 2) to engage students in a process of refining future career direction, and 3) cultivate professional behavior within a work culture. The academic portion of the internship is similar to an independent study with scheduled face to face meeting times, scheduled individually, to discuss progress with assignments.

CBE 4999. INTERNSHIP – GENERAL BUSINESS (0). The non- credit business internship is a work-based class that focuses on the acquisition of employability skills through a real-world work environment.  Students will focus on maintaining a professional demeanor in the work environment, the development of a professional communication style, and the acquisition of the knowledge and skills necessary when performing the internship role.

CBE 6999. INTERNSHIP – GENERAL BUSINESS (0). The non- credit business internship is a work-based class that focuses on the acquisition of employability skills through a real-world work environment.  Students will focus on maintaining a professional demeanor in the work environment, the development of a professional communication style, and the acquisition of the knowledge and skills necessary when performing the internship role.

COMPUTER INFORMATION SYSTEMS (CIS)

CIS 275. FOUNDATIONS OF PROGRAMMING (3). Entry- level course in which students use an object-oriented programming language called Xojo to learn basic programming concepts such as If-then-else, looping, strings, lists, arrays, in a visual programming environment. Students will also be introduced to the Java programming environment.

CIS 300. FOUNDATIONS OF INFORMATION SYSTEMS (3). Introduces contemporary information systems concepts. Focuses on business processes, software, hardware, data, and communication technologies, and how these components can be integrated and managed to create business competitive advantage.  Hands-on experience with SAP ERP software.

CIS 318. ETHICS FOR THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY PROFESSIONAL (3). Focuses on ethical problems that arise in the Information Technology world. Explores the areas of IT crime, privacy, intellectual property, software development, and employer/employee issues. Introduces the codes of ethics for various IT professional associations and organizations.

CIS 325. SYSTEMS ANALYSIS AND DESIGN (3). Studies the analysis and design of computer-based information systems. Considers transformation processes and comprehensive design. Includes advanced technology, emphasizing expert and knowledge-based systems. Considers human resources, communications and computers in a systems framework. Prerequisite(s): CIS 300.
CIS 375. JAVA PROGRAMMING (3). Entry-level Java programming course in which students use the Java object- oriented programming language to solve real-world problems. This course builds on the skills gained by students in CIS 275 and helps to advance Java programming skills. Students will create Java programs using hands-on, engaging activities. Prerequisite: CIS 275

CIS 445. DATABASE MANAGEMENT (3). Introduces core concepts in data management. Students identify organizational information requirements, convert conceptual data models into relational data models, apply normalization techniques, and utilize an Oracle relational database management system in a virtual lab environment. Prerequisite(s): CIS 275 or CIS 300.

CIS 448. AGILE PROJECT MANAGEMENT (3). Provides a foundational and practical knowledge of project management principles. Identifies tools and processes for managing projects using Agile methodologies.

CIS 458. BUSINESS PROCESS MANAGEMENT (3). Introduces key concepts and approaches to business process management and improvement. Examines how to identify, document, model, assess, and improve core business processes. Hands-on experience with SAP ERP software. Prerequisite(s): CIS 325

CIS 461 BUSINESS ANALYTICS (3). Introduces business intelligence techniques for transforming structured/unstructured data into meaningful information in order to gain competitive advantage. Explores the managerial, strategic and technical issues associated with developing/deploying business intelligence and analytics solutions. Prerequisite(s): MT 270 or MT 274.

CIS 462. SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT (3). Introduces students to this growing discipline through the use of case studies and simulations. Students will gain an understanding of how organizations build integrated relationships with customers and suppliers which often include information sharing, joint planning, and integrated information systems. Prerequisite(s):
CIS 458 or CS 461.

CIS 464. ENTERPRISE SYSTEMS (3). Provides an understanding of the managerial/technical issues in planning, designing, and implementing enterprise systems. Demonstrates the
integration of information and business processes across functional areas into a unified system. Hands-on experience with SAP ERP software. Prerequisite(s): CIS 458 or CIS 462.

CIS 465. IS STRATEGY AND MANAGEMENT (3). Explores how IT is changing and will continue to change organizations as we now know them by introducing the complex decisions facing real organizations through a number of mini cases and a
cyber security simulator. These provide an opportunity to apply the models/theories/frameworks presented, giving students the confidence and ability to tackle the tough issues regarding IT management and strategy, and a clear understanding of their importance in delivering business value. Prerequisite(s): BA
2900, or CIS 462, or CIS 464.

CIS 471. VISUAL DATA STORY TELLING (3). Using Tableau and SAP Cloud Analytics tools, students will learn how to present data in ways that help management better interpret, analyze, and act on it for maximum impact. Prerequisite(s): CIS
462.


CIS 493. SENIOR CAPSTONE (3). Provides the culminating experience of the major, focusing on integration and application of theory. Must be completed as graded course work at Regis University. Prerequisite(s): Senior standing and successful completion of eighteen (18) upper division CIS semester hours.

COMPUTER SCIENCE (CS)

CS 202. COMPUTATIONAL FOUNDATIONS (3). Entry-level course introducing the foundational concepts of computer science, as the study of algorithms and data structures with respect to their formal properties, linguistic realizations, hardware realizations, and applications.

CS 210, INTRODUCTION TO PROGRAMMING (3). Entry- level course in which students practice software development using elementary selection, looping, method, string, array, and object constructs implemented in a modern programming language.

CS 310. DATA STRUCTURES (3). Studies structures for representing data and continued practice with software development. Uses algorithms to process these structures, including linked list, stack, queue, hash table, and tree data structures, along with various searching and sorting algorithms. Prerequisite(s): CS 210.

CS 324. ALGORITHS AND ANALYSIS (3). Continues practice with software development focusing on algorithm design, analysis, and efficiency. Includes the study of advanced data structures (graphs, heaps, advanced trees: AVL, B, red-black, tries), advanced algorithms, and complexity (P vs. NP). Prerequisite(s):  CS 310 and MT 320, or MT 360A.

CS 336. WEB AND DATABASE APPLICATIONS (3). Introduces web-based multi-tiered distributed application development. Topics include using markup and scripting languages in the Presentation tier, services  (web and business) in the Logic tier, and a relational database in the Data tier. Prerequisite(s): CS 310. NOTE: Credit can be awarded for CS
336 or CS 482, but not more than one.

CS 338. MOBILE ENTERPRISE COMPUTING (3). Introduces platform-based software development for tablets, smart phones, and servers. Students learn to solve contemporary software engineering problems by creating Graphical User Interface apps that communicate over a network with an Enterprise Server and Database. Prerequisite(s): CS 310.

CS 346. INTRODUCTION TO GAME DEVELOPMENT (3). Students learn the fundamentals of game design and develop a computer game using a 3D game engine. Prerequisite(s): CS
310.

CS 370. ASSEMBLY LANGUAGE (3). Describes the elements and techniques of assembly language programming for microprocessors used in the IBM compatible family of microcomputers. Introduces computer architectures, and discusses the concepts of data representations, processing instructions, addressing modes, macros, functions and procedures, and file I/O. Prerequisite(s): CS 310.

CS 390.  PRINCIPLES OF PROGRAMMING LANGUAGES (3). Introduces the constructs upon which contemporary programming languages are based. Students investigate
programs written in declarative and imperative programming languages including functional, logic, structured, and object- based approaches. Prerequisite(s): CS 310 Prerequisite or co- requisite: MT 320.

CS 421. DATA SCIENCE (3). Introduces topics of data science including data manipulation, data analysis using statistics and machine learning, techniques for working with big data, communication of analysis using information visualization, and ethical use of data analyses. Prerequisite(s): CS 310 and MT
270.

CS 431. OPERATING SYSTEMS DESIGN AND ANALYSIS (3). Includes processor scheduling, multiprocessor scheduling, deadlock detection and prevention, memory management, hashing, performance directed cache design, multilevel cache hierarchies, virtual memory, demand paging, thrashing and locality, disk scheduling, distributed systems, networked environments, and performance analysis based on mathematical modeling techniques. Prerequisite(s): CS 324 and CS 390.
Cyber Security students prerequisites are CS 310 and CSEC
250.

CS 433. COMPUTER SYSTEMS SECURITY (3). Introduces the concept of security in computing. Topics include cryptography, program security, operating systems protection, database security, and network security. Explores current security models, internal and external security threats, risk analysis, privacy issues and security laws and regulations. Prerequisite(s): CS 324 and CS 390.

CS 434. OBJECT-ORIENTED PROGRAMMING USING JAVA (3). Introduces the Java programming language and application of object-oriented programming principles to the solution of contemporary software engineering problems, including Graphical User interfaces, Design Patterns, and Platform-Based
Development (tablets, smart phones, and servers). NOTE: Not to be taken by students who complete CS 310.

CS 440. COMPUTER ORGANIZATION AND ARCHITECTURE (3). Introduces Machine Architecture with coverage of digital logic, machine level data and instruction representation, ALU design, and organization of the processor datapath and control. Examines performance analysis, memory system hierarchy, pipelining, and communication. Prerequisite(s): CS 324 and CS 390. Cyber Security students’ prerequisites are CS 310 and CSEC 250.

CS 442. DATABASE PROGRAMMING (3). Introduces the ANSI standard structured query language (SQL/PL). Includes various extensions to the language, design and implementation of a relational database, data manipulation, joining tables, creating and using views, use subqueries, data security and integrity. Prerequisite(s): CS 445 or CIS 445. Cross listing: CIS
442.

CS 444. SOFTWARE ENGINEERING (3). Studies modern software engineering techniques that ensures development of well-designed, reliable, flexible, modular, and verified software and software systems. Topics include software development lifecycle, requirements, maintenance, UML, traditional, model- based, agile development, and teamwork. Prerequisite(s): CS
336 or CS 338.


CS 445. DATABASE MANAGEMENT (3). Introduces the theory of database design. Discusses techniques of database systems implementation, physical file organization, data integrity, security techniques, and management of the database environment. Explores data structures used in databases, database management, and data communications. Prerequisite(s): CS 310.

CS 449. ALGORITHMS AND COMPLEXITY (3). Concentrates on NP-complete problems and the algorithms that solve NP- complete problems. Involves designing and analyzing algorithms from an efficiency point of view. Prerequisite(s): CS 390 and MT
360B. NOTE: Credit may be awarded for CS 324 or CS 371 or
CS 449, but not more than one.

CS 450. DATA NETWORKS (3). Provides the concepts and terminology of data communications and network design. Includes transmission techniques, network topologies,
protocols, security network control and network architectures. Prerequisite(s): CS 336 or CS 338.

CS 461. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE SYMBOLIC
REASONING (3). Artificial Intelligence studies computer-based agents that perceive and act rationally within an environment. Introduction to the technologies used to construct agents that represent knowledge, search spaces, perform inference and learn.

CS 462. COMPUTER SYSTEMS PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS (3). Covers mathematical models based on queuing theory, stochastic processes, Markov chains and mean value analysis. Discusses applications to computer systems for the purpose of optimizing performance. Includes problems and a project requiring the modeling contemporary disk technologies and system balancing techniques. Prerequisite(s): CS 324, CS 390, and MT 360A.

CS 464. MACHINE LEARNING (3). An in-depth study of machine learning. Topics include regression, classification, neural networks, and deep learning. Includes programming machine learning algorithms. Prerequisite(s): CS 473.

CS 465. UNIX OPERATING SYSTEMS (3). Explores the architecture of the UNIX operating system. Provides hands-on experience in file management, the UNIX shell, using filters, using and developing pipes, security, software development tools, text processing tools and in-depth knowledge of how these aspects are incorporated into the UNIX system. Discusses how UNIX meets its design objectives, its relative merits in comparison with other operating systems, and interoperability issues. Prerequisite(s): CS 310.

CS 468. ADVANCED UNIX (3). Expands upon knowledge of UNIX systems. Introduces systems administration tasks, including software installation, system configuration, and managing user accounts. Studies risks faced by computer systems and UNIX security mechanisms. Explores UNIX system programming including signal and interprocess communication. Prerequisite(s): CS 310 and CS 465.

CS 469. DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS (3). Explores theoretical foundations and fundamental design tradeoffs in distributed computing systems, Topics include: distributed architectures, processes and interprocess communication, synchronization,
replication and consistency, fault tolerance, and security. Prerequisite(s): CS 431.

CS 473. INTRODUCTION TO ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (3). Studies computer based agents that perceive and act rationally within an environment. Introduction to the technologies used to construct agents that represent knowledge, search spaces, reason with uncertainty, perform inference, and learn. Prerequisites(s): CS 324, CS 390, and MT
472.

CS 475. COMPUTATION THEORY (3). Introduces computational formalisms, including Automata, Lamda Calculus, Turning Machines, Recursive Functions, and emerging theories. Explores the relation of formal languages and computation. Studies theoretical and pragmatic limits on computation including halting, NP-Completeness, P-Space, and reducibility. Prerequisite(s); CS 324 and CS 390.

CS 476. INTRODUCTION TO QUANTUM COMPUTING
(3). Introduces quantum computation from a Computer Science perspective, including basic Quantum Mechanics and Quantum: Circuits, Algorithms, Complexity, and Programming with comparisons to their Classical computing counterparts. Implications of quantum computing on society are also examined. Prerequisite(s); CS 324 and MT 415.

CS 479. ETHICAL LEADERSHIP IN COMPUTER SCIENCE (3). A capstone-style course exploring the cultural, social, legal, and ethical issues inherent in Computer Science and software development with an emphasis on the role that computer scientists play, as leaders in service to others. Prerequisite(s): CS 336 or CS 338. Cyber Security students prerequisites are CS 310 and CSEC 250.

CS 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN COMPUTER SCIENCE (1-3). Explores areas of interest. Content to be arranged. Concludes with a written report. Prerequisite(s): Approval of department chair.

CS 492E-W. SPECIAL TOPICS IN COMPUTER SCIENCE (3). Explores selected topics of interest in Computer Science through lecture presentation, laboratory work, and research projects. Content varies from term to term. Prerequisite(s): CS
324, CS 390, and  permission of department.

CS 493. SENIOR CAPSTONE (3). A culminating experience requiring a major project that integrates and applies knowledge and skills acquired in earlier Computer Science courses. Prerequisite(s): CS 444, CS 479, and eighteen credits of 400- level Computer Science courses.

CS 498E-W. INTERNSHIP IN COMPUTER SCIENCE (3). Involves placement of advanced computer science students in industry, government or other agencies. Faculty approval, supervision, and evaluation of students’ work required. Majors only. Approval of department chair and director of the Academic Internship Program. NOTE: 3.00 cumulative grade point average required.

CYBERSECURITY (CSEC)

CSEC 210. INFORMATION ASSURANCE AND CRYPTOGRAPHY BASICS (3). Introduces the fundamental concepts of information assurance and cyber defense covering the threats and adversaries associated with cyber defense, the concepts of vulnerabilities and risks, security life cycles, role of IDS and IPS in securing a system, data security, the CIA model, and basic security mechanisms.

CSEC 230. SOFTWARE SECURITY AND DESIGN (3). Considers typical software vulnerabilities that can happen as a result of insecure programming practices. This course also examines software security from a design standpoint and examines secure software practices for both large-scale environments and in small-scale environments such as individual systems. Topics include design, development, testing, integration, and finally deployment of software. Prerequisite(s): CSEC 210.

CSEC 250. NETWORK CONCEPTS, TECHNOLOGY, PROTOCOLS, AND DEFENSE (3). Provides an understanding of the components in a networking environment, their roles and communication associated with the components. Students will understand techniques which can be used to protect a network from cyber threats. Topics covered in this class include the difference between IPv4 and IPv6, NAT and subnetting, network analysis and troubleshooting, how to implement a DNS, Firewall, and analyze network traffic. Prerequisite(s): CSEC 230.

CSEC 320. CYBER THREATS AND DEFENSE (3). Examines options available to mitigate threats within a system and an understanding of threats which exist in a networking environment.  This would include such topics as access and flow controls, cryptography and its application in computer
defense, recognizing and understanding how to protect systems from malicious activity. Prerequisite(s): CSEC 250.

CSEC 336. DATABASE MANAGEMENT SECURITY (3). Focuses on the security of database systems and how the design of database systems can affect the security of such systems.  Topics covered include how to protect
confidentiality, integrity and availability in a DBMS environment, how inference, aggregation and polyinstantiation can be used to exploit a system, and how to protect your system against known vulnerabilities. Prerequisite(s): CSEC 230.

CSEC 350. POLICY, ETHICS, AND COMPLIANCE (3). Provides an understanding of information assurance and computer security in context with the rules and guidelines which control them. The course looks at laws such as HIPAA,
FISMA, SOX and Gramm-Leach-Bililey, and discusses the ethical component associated with these outcomes. Prerequisite(s): CSEC 210.

CSEC 360. SECURITY DESIGN PRINCIPLES AND SECURE OPERATING SYSTEM CONCEPTS (3). Explores the role of an operating system, its basic function and services provided by
the operating in terms of a secure operating systems. It covers such topics as privileged and non-privileged states, process and threats, access control models and access controls lists. The course discusses fundamental security design principles as they relate to an OS and how an OS can protect itself from attack. Prerequisite(s): CSEC 230.

CSEC 370. COMPUTER/HOST FORENSICS (3). Provides students with the ability to apply forensic techniques to investigate and analyze a host in a network. This course will cover files systems and associated forensics, registry analysis,
steganography and live system investigation. Prerequisite(s): CSEC 250.

CSEC 375. NETWORK FORENSICS (3). Examines the ability to apply forensics techniques to investigate and analyze network traffic.  Specific topics include packet capture/analysis, network intrusion detection and prevention, interlacing of device and network forensics, forensic imaging and analysis, log file analysis. Prerequisite(s): CSEC 250.

CSEC 380. ADVANCED DIGITAL FORENSICS (3). Provides the ability to apply forensics techniques to investigate and analyze a particular media in context. In addition to the technical topics of hashes, sparse/full imaging, slack space,
hidden files/clusters/partitions, this class will also cover the legal aspects associated with forensics analysis including acquisition and authentication of evidence, verification and validation of the systems and associated laws. Focuses primarily on mobile systems (tablets, smart phones, GPS, etc.). Prerequisite(s):
CSEC 370 and CSEC 375.

CSEC 410. HISTORY AND ETHICS OF COMPUTERS (3). Reviews the history of computers from earliest times and studies the ethical decisions which faced society following each major computing advance. Topics include ethical decision- making models and frameworks, ethical self-reflection, and the role of ethics in the development of computers from the earliest times. Prerequisite(s): CSEC 210.

CSEC 420. IA ARCHITECTURES/ COMPLIANCE, CERTIFICATION AND ACCREDITATION (3). Provides an advanced analysis of common security architectures for the protection of computer systems and data and an understanding of the rules/issues related to compliances of associated laws
and regulations. This course will also cover processes and regulations associated with the analysis and evaluation of operation systems, DoD policies and components of the DoD certification process. Prerequisite(s): CSEC 230.

CSEC 430. INTRUSION DETECTION AND RESPONSE (3). Provides students with knowledge and skills related to detecting and analyzing vulnerabilities and threats and taking steps to mitigate the associated risks. This course will cover deep packet analysis, log file aggregation, cross log comparison, anomaly detection, signature detection, host based intrusion detection and analysis, network based intrusion detection and analysis, distributed intrusion detection and hierarchical IDS. Prerequisite(s): CSEC 380.

CSEC 493. SENIOR CAPSTONE/ INTERNSHIP (3). Culminating experience of the major, focusing on integration and application of theory. Must be completed as graded course work at Regis University.

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (CIT)

CIT 311.ENTERPRISE SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE (3). Presents design, management and administration of simple to complex network topologies. Introduces Internet connectivity and protocols supporting networked applications over a distributed network and their relationship with end-users. Examines the concepts of user content, applications, services, and infrastructure.


CIT 316. NETWORK INFRASTRUCTURE (3). Introduces the foundations of network infrastructures and emerging network technologies. Covers OSI model in depth, including TCP/IP. Investigates the standards, design, architecture, and operation of LAN, WAN and telecommunications services. Introduces basic switching and routing concepts.

CIT 330. FOUNDATIONS OF CYBER SECURITY (3). Introduces the principles and practices of information security including security models, internal and external security threats, and attacks. Topics include cryptography, network, mobile,
host, applications, data, access control, and operational security. Prerequisite(s): CIT 311.

CIT 331. FUNDAMENTALS OF SECURITY MANAGEMENT (3). Examines security management, risk analysis, disaster recovery, business continuity planning, and information security legal issues. Topics include planning for security, security technologies, risk mitigation, vulnerability assessment, and security laws and regulations. Prerequisite(s): CIT 330.

CIT 380. INTRODUCTION TO WEB APPLICATION DEVELOPMENT (3). Introduces the design, implementation, and testing of web applications including related web app frameworks, databases, and interfaces. Covers frontend responsive UI design, hybrid app design, app tools, backend services design, integration and deployment. Prerequisite(s): CIS 375.

CIT 411. HUMAN COMPUTER INTERACTION (3). Investigates and analyzes user-centered methodologies in the development, evaluation, and deployment of IT applications and systems. Emphasizes HCI areas such as user and task analysis, human factors, ergonomics, accessibility standards, and
cognitive psychology. Prerequisite(s): CIS 325.

CIT 435. CYBER FORENSICS (3). Introduces the principles and practices of digital forensics including digital investigations, data and file recovery methods, and digital forensics analysis and invalidation. Topics include data acquisition, digital forensics tools, virtual machines, network, mobile device, and cloud forensics. Prerequisite(s): CIT 331.

CIT 444. WIRELESS NETWORKS (3). This course examines wireless technologies used in infrared, spread spectrum, microwave, and cellular systems. Discuss integration of WLANs, satellite communications and cellular systems in an organization. Includes protocols, security practices and applications used on wireless technologies. Prerequisite(s): CIT
316.

CIT 452. SYSTEMS ADMINISTRATION (3). Introduces operating systems concepts and system administration tasks, including software installation, system configuration, and managing user accounts. Emphasizes server administration and management, user and group management, backup, security, resource, and automation management. Prerequisite(s): CIT
316 and CIT 380 (for Cyber Security undergrads only: CSEC
250 and CS 310).

CIT 462. ETHICAL HACKING AND DEFENSE (3). Explores security threats and vulnerabilities that face computer network engineers by using penetration testing techniques. Examines requirements for a formal hacking lab and discusses ethical
boundaries between white and black hat hacking. Prerequisite(s): CIT 331.

CIT 463. CYBER CRIME AND IT COMPLIANCE (3). Examines societal, ethical, and legal issues involved in information assurance as implemented through ethics and laws. Analysis of compliance themes that affect IT environment for financial, publicly traded, and healthcare organizations as well as industry regulations Prerequisite(s): CIT 331.

CIT 466. IT AUDIT AND RISK MANAGEMENT (3). Investigates the principles of information systems audit, IT audit tools, audit procedures to help in detection and prevention of security breaches and fraud. Examines the solutions that can be used to prevent information loss or costly business interruptions, the role of information technology governance in business organizations, reporting requirements, and industry standards for IT Governance. Prerequisite(s): CIT 331.

CIT 478. MANAGEMENT OF ENTERPRISE NETWORKS (3). Explores datacenter support and management requiring the integration of servers, applications and data storage with business operations and goals. Examines the impact of ethical, governance and legal concerns on business operations. Prerequisite(s): CIT 452.

CIT 480. WEB SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT (3). Introduces web page development using HTML/HTML5, CSS/CSS3, and JavaScript. Students learn to design and develop a website, structure and style its content, and navigate/update the document object model (DOM).

CIT 481. WEB FRAMEWORKS (3). Covers the most popular JavaScript frameworks, including jQuery, Angular JS, and Google Maps. Students learn how to use the frameworks to do DOM manipulation, AJAX, single page applications, and the display/manipulation of maps. Prerequisite(s): CIT 480.

CIT 482. WEB VISUALIZATION FRAMEWORKS (3). Covers popular visualization frameworks that facilitate the presentation of pertinent information to the end user. Student learn various techniques that transform raw data into information that is relevant to end users. Prerequisite(s): CIT 481.

CIT 483. WEB MOBILE FRAMEWORKS (3). Covers popular mobile frameworks that enable the creation of mobile web
page apps using HTML, CSS, and JavaScript. Students learn how to build rich, interactive web applications that run on virtually all devices (e.g. Android, IOS, Windows). Prerequisite(s): CIT
480.

CIT 484. SOFTWARE ENGINEERING RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT (4). Introduction to research and development in Software Engineering. Student will propose,
prepare, implement and complete a case-study research project which focuses on a specific architecture, design pattern, UI/UX, and security framework. Prerequisite(s): CIT 483.

CIT 493. SENIOR CAPSTONE (3). Provides the culminating experience of the major, focusing on integration and application of theory. Must be completed as graded course work at Regis University. Prerequisite(s): CIT 478 and senior standing and successful completion of eighteen (18) upper division IT semester hours.


DATA SCIENCE (DS)

DS 212. PYTHON PROGRAMMING (3). Introduces computer programming using the Python programming language. It presents structured algorithmic programming by means of concepts like variables, conditional code execution, looping, and functions.  The course also covers Python libraries that extend the capabilities of Python for doing data science and other activities.

DS 300. THE WORLD OF DATA SCIENCE (3). The use of data to understand our world is pervasive in our society, its businesses, organizations, and communities. This course surveys current ds and technologies such as: visualization techniques, machine learning and artificial intelligence, geographic information systems, and other analytic techniques.

DS 400. INTRODUCTION TO DATA SCIENCE (3). Introduces foundational topics of data science including programming, data curation, statistics, machine learning, and data communication. Examines the end to end life cycle of data science projects. Topical discussions of methods and applications pertaining to health informatics, business intelligence, and natural and social sciences and the ethical considerations of data science. Prerequisite(s): MT 270 and DS
212.

DS 410. COMPUTATIONAL STATISTICS (3). Introduces and examines the applications of data science library packages for descriptive and probabilistic statistics including regression and correlation of univariant and multivariant analysis. Course content will include examples applied to health informatics, business intelligence, and natural and social sciences. Encompasses discussions of ethical communication and presentation of statistics. Prerequisite(s): DS 400.

DS 420. DATA CURATION (3). Introduces storage and retrieval of data from data structures. Examines the collection of data from variety of sources, merging data from multiple sources, and cleaning data for analysis. Students will learn how to apply exploratory data analysis for important feature determination. Prerequisite(s): DS 400.

DS 430. VISULATION (3).Examines the effective communication of information through the creation and visual representation data using a variety of applications and programming languages. Encompasses design theory, visual cognition and perception, and ethical considerations of figures. Prerequisite(s): DS 400.

ECONOMICS (EC)

EC 3200. PRINCIPLES OF MACROECONOMICS (3). Introduces macroeconomics, emphasizing the forces that determine the level of national product and national income, and the fiscal and monetary policies that are designed to
influence their level. Explores the areas of public finance, money and the banking system, economic growth and international trade.

EC 3300. PRINCIPLES OF MICROECONOMICS (3). Analyzes economic models of consumer and producer decision-making, demand, supply, equilibrium in markets. Examines the causes of different market structures and their influence on market
conduct and performance. Explores microeconomic issues related to market outcomes, such as market power, market failure, efficiency, equity, and international economic interdependence.

EC 4100. MICROECONOMIC THEORY (3). Analyzes consumer behavior and market demand. Includes production and cost functions and their relationship to market supply. Evaluates various types of market structures and their impact on the economic well-being of our society. Prerequisite(s): EC
3300 and MT 360A.

EC 4103. SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT AND CHANGE (3). introduces global poverty, inequality, and other global ills and invites students to explore ways to be involved in sustainable development and change efforts. About 1 out of every 3 people (2 billion of the world’s population) lived in extreme poverty as of the end of 2019. Fast-changing climate conditions and the COVID-19 pandemic continue to condemn more people into further poverty. Additionally, growth in income and wealth inequality are worrying. There is, however, enthusiasm for the possibilities of addressing many of the global needs through concerted human development efforts like the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).

EC 4108. CONSUMPTION, CONTENTMENT, AND CLIMATE CHANGE (3). Explores the relationship between consumption, happiness, and climate change, probing the assumption that economic growth promotes happiness and considers alternatives to mainstream economics. Prerequisite(s): Junior class standing or completion of distributive core required.

EC 4110. MACROECONOMIC THEORY (3). Emphasizes the determination of national income. Studies economic growth and the effects of various monetary policies and fiscal policies on general economic activity. Prerequisite(s): EC 3200 and MT
360A or permission of instructor.

EC 4120. ECONOMETRICS (3). Studies the mathematical models used to analyze economic variables for purposes of testing economic theory, formulating policy, and making economic forecasts. The primary method covered is ordinary least squares regression analysis. Prerequisite(s): MT 270, EC
4100 and EC 4110.

EC 4140. FUNDAMENTALS OF INVESTMENTS (3). Studies the relationship between risk and return in the management of investment portfolios, including the analysis of stocks, bonds and other securities. Prerequisite(s): BA 4100, AC 3200 and AC 3210.  Cross listing: BA 4140.

EC 4144. ECONOMICS OF POVERTY AND INEQUALITY (3). Examines poverty, inequality, and discrimination in an economic context and explores the effectiveness of government policies designed to address associated inequalities. Consideration is given to the wealth gap, wage disparities, and capital access
both within countries and between countries. Prerequisite(s): EC 3200 and EC 3300 or permission of instructor. Cross listing: BA 4144.

EC 4149. BUSINESS CYCLES AND FINANCIAL CRISES (3). Examines theoretical explanations of economic growth in advanced industrial economic systems and the causes of financial crises and of other deviations from the growth trend. Prerequisite(s): EC 3200 and EC 3300. Cross listing: BA 4149.

EC 4158. MONEY AND BANKING (3). Studies the nature and functions of money and credit, including an understanding of
the variety and growth of banking functions, and the influence on banks of Federal Reserve operations. Examines the relationships among money, interest rates, business investment needs, government borrowing, and the gross national product. Prerequisite(s): EC 3200, EC 3300 and either BA 4100 or EC
4100. Cross listing: BA 4158.

EC 4163. INTERNATIONAL FINANCE (3). Presents the economic issues of international finance, including the history in International Finance, fixed and flexible exchange rates, and international agencies that help stabilize international financial markets.  Examines issues faced by financial managers of multinational firms. Prerequisite(s): EC 3200, EC 3300, BA
4100, MT 330 or MT 360A and junior standing; Cross listing: BA 4163.

EC 4170. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (3). Studies various models/theories of economic development that traces a history of underdevelopment. Investigates the various barriers and problem areas in developing countries. Assesses possibilities, prospects, and policies for the future. Prerequisite(s): EC 3200. Cross listing: BA 4170, ENVS 470, and PJ 470.

EC 4177. INTERNATIONAL ECONOMICS (3). Examines the theoretical underpinnings of international economics. Emphasizes international trade theory, trade policy, exchange rate determination, factor movements, underdevelopment, balance of payments, national income, the international financial system and institutions, and regional trading blocks. Prerequisite(s): EC 3200, EC 3300 and either EC 4100 or EC
4110. Cross listing: BA 4177.

EC 4200. COMPARATIVE ECONOMIC SYSTEMS (3). Compares and contrasts capitalism, socialism, and communism. Surveys the economic systems of various countries to discover strengths, weaknesses and departures from the theoretical ideal. Includes the historical backgrounds of these various economic systems.

EC 4212. UNITED STATES PUBLIC POLICY (3). Examines selected national public policies and their impact on U.S. political and social institutions.

EC 4218. ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS AND LAW (3). Examines the economic, legal, and political systems that affect and regulate the use and conversation of the environment. Examines topics such as sustainable development and environmental regulation. Prerequisite(s): EC 200 or EC 3200. Cross listing: ENVS 418.

EC 4232. INTERNATIONAL POLITICAL ECONOMY (3). Evaluates interdependencies of politics and economics at systemic/global level. Reviews alternative frameworks for the analysis of the nature, dynamics, relationships, and implications of political and economic interactions. Application to key contemporary issues, problems and controversies. Prerequisite(s): EC 200 or EC 3200 and junior class standing. Cross listing: ENVS 432, POL 432 and PJ 454.
EC 4243.  ECONOMIC POLICY, JUSTICE AND THE COMMON GOOD (3). Uses readings in economics, philosophy and Catholic social teaching to evaluate economic theory and economic policies that address social ills (e.g., poverty, unequal income distribution, unequal access to health care.)  Prerequisite(s): EC 200 or EC 3200 or EC 3300. Cross listing: CAS 443, PJ 478 and RCC 420J. NOTE: Junior standing or completion of Distributive Core required.

EC 4245. COMPARATIVE PUBLIC POLICY (3). Provides a comparative examination of public policy in western industrialized nation-states emphasizing the interaction and interdependency of politics and economics. Evaluates basic issues of public policy including distribution, extraction, and regulation focusing on identifying both the range of possible choices and the actual outcomes of adopted policies under a variety of circumstances. Prerequisite(s): EC 200 or EC 3200. Cross listing: ENVS 445 or POL 445 or PJ 446.

EC 4384. VALUES-FOCUSED PUBLIC POLICY (3). Examines the policies and procedures utilized by government to improve economic performance. Explores the role that individual and community worldviews and commitments to justice have in defining appropriate state and federal regulatory action, with particular attention to the Catholic worldview and Catholic Social Thought. Areas of study include anti-trust, consumer protection, employment law, and environmental law. Prerequisite(s): EC 200 or EC 3200. Cross listing: BA 4384, PJ
484, and CAS 460G.

EC 4900E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN ECONOMICS (1-6). Includes topics of interest not covered in regularly offered courses. Develops content under the direction of a faculty member. Prerequisite(s): Junior standing and approval of department chair.

EC 4980A. INTERNSHIP IN ECONOMICS I (3). Provides faculty-directed fieldwork opportunity. Prerequisite(s): Approval of department chair and director of Academic Internship Program. NOTE: Division of Business Regulations include relevant internship policy information for majors.

EC 4980B. INTERNSHIP IN ECONOMICS II (3). Provides faculty-directed fieldwork opportunity. Prerequisite(s): Approval of department chair and director of Academic Internship Program. NOTE: Division of Business Regulations include relevant internship policy information for majors.

EC 4985. CAPSTONE PROJECT IN ECONOMICS (3). Applies various economic concepts (macroeconomic or
microeconomic theory, econometrics, etc.) in order to answer a research question posed by the student. Students will pose a testable economic hypothesis, research views and conclusions of other researchers, assemble appropriate data, use econometric software or other methodology to test the hypothesis, and summarize the results of the study. The final deliverable will be a research paper that will be attractive to either graduate school programs or future employers. Prerequisite(s): EC 4100 and EC 4120, or permission of instructor.


HEALTH INFORMATION MANAGEMENT (HIM)

HIM 313. INTRODUCTION TO HEALTH INFORMATION MANAGEMENT (3). Emphasizes form, content and regulations impacting the health care record in the acute care setting. Explores legal reimbursement and computerized aspects of the health record as well as the functions and responsibilities of Health Information Services. Examines various health care delivery systems and health care practitioners.

HIM 320. HUMAN DISEASE AND PHARMACOLOGY (3). Provides an overview of disease processes, symptoms and etiology organized by body systems. Includes basic diagnostic tests, treatments and medications for common diseases along with basic pharmacologic principles.

HIM 350. DISEASE CLASSIFICATION SYSTEMS (3). Introduces the development and use of various disease classification systems and reimbursement regulations. Emphasizes ICD
coding and the diagnosis related groups (DRG) systems for inpatient reimbursement. Explores coding management issues. Discusses medications in conjunction with each body system and disease. Prerequisite(s): BL 244, BL 246 and HSC 310.

HIM 385. DIRECTED PRACTICE (3). Virtual clinical/internship experience allowing hands-on practice with various clinical and health care applications such as abstracting software, Release of Information and coding software and other administrative systems used by health information professionals. Includes planning for the management practicum and identifying a volunteer/service activity to be completed at the end of HIM
485.

HIM 415. HEALTH INFORMATION MANAGEMENT: DATA SYSTEMS AND STRUCTURES (3). Introduces health care data sets, data sources, and the roles and functions of Health Information Management in all health care delivery systems: acute care, home health, long term care, hospice, ambulatory care and consulting practices. Focuses on the electronic health record and data standards such as SGML, XML and HL7. Prerequisite(s): HIM 313 or permission of instructor required.

HIM 430. HEALTH LAW FOR INFORMATICS AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT (3). Examines legal concepts in informatics and health information management settings for compliance with laws, standards and regulations protecting the use, privacy, security and confidentiality of health information across various enterprises. Managing access and disclosure of health information and protected health information as well as e-health information is also covered. Graduate level includes completion of a project focused on the role of Risk
Management and Quality Improvement programs in health care organization in responding to and preventive adverse events.

HIM 440 HEALTH CARE DATA ANALYTICS (3). Examines current and emerging practices in the application of data analytics. Topics include clinical, financial, operations, quality analytics, and trends in practices, customer expectations, and regulations that impact analytics. It will also address ethical issues in gathering, analyzing and reporting healthcare data. Including, roles and applications of descriptive, retrospective and prescriptive analytics in various settings through the use of
case studies, practice tools and techniques to analyze given data sets for specific outcomes. Prerequisite(s): MT 270 or MT 274.

HIM 445. MANAGEMENT OF E-HIM AND INFORMATION GOVERNANCE (3). The focus of this course is on the advanced concepts of managing digital clinical information in health care facilities. Topics include: identity management,
health information exchange and data sharing, current trends in e-HIM, eDiscovery, the personal health record and patient portals. The course will also cover components and strategies of Information Governance including; interoperability of data, compliance data dictionary standards, and factors that influence data integrity. Graduate level includes development of an eDiscovery response plan and Information Governance assessment tool.

HIM 450. HEALTH CARE INFORMATICS & INFORMATION SYSTEMS (3). Introduces foundational knowledge and skills to participate in the design, selection, implementation and use of clinical and administrative information systems. Provides an overview of information systems in all health care settings with emphasis on electronic health record systems, data standards, and data exchanges. Familiarizes the student with new and emerging technologies in the health care field and includes concepts and principles of health care informatics in the health professions and health care delivery systems. The graduate component extends foundational knowledge through additional readings, case analysis, and/or applied project work.

HIM 451. REIMBURSEMENT MANAGEMENT IN HEALTH CARE SETTINGS (3). Reviews the use of coding and classification systems and explores their use in the health care reimbursement system. Examines DRG and coding audits, revenue cycle processes and other management strategies critical to health care facility revenues. Prerequisite(s): HIM 350 or equivalent.

HIM 460. HEALTH STATISTICS AND RESEARCH METHODS (3). An applied course in basic health statistics and research methods intended to introduce common applications in the health care setting. Topics include commonly used health statistics, epidemiology, quality improvement, and outcomes research with an emphasis on study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation and data presentation skills. Emphasis is on the ability to analyze and interpret clinical and other health data for use in research, health care decision- making, and policy development. Prerequisite(s): MT 270 or equivalent.

HIM 461. RESEARCH IN HEALTH SERVICES (3). A continuation of HIM 460. Student works independently under the direction of an assigned instructor to refine the research proposal developed in HIM 460. Student completes the research process through data collection, analysis, conclusions and recommendations for further research. Research is presented in a formal article format. Prerequisite(s): Majors only. Approval of department director. .

HIM 470. ORGANIZATIONAL MANAGEMENT IN HIM (3). Examines the organizational system and the integration of quality improvement strategies, performance management, information management principles and strategies, finance and budget constructs, human resource components, strategic planning, and managing for change, cultural and organizational improvement. Professional ethics related to HIM is also included. NOTE: Senior standing only.

HIM 480.ADMINISTRATION OF HEALTH INFORMATION MANAGEMENT SERVICES (3). Provides the student with opportunities to apply multiple elements from other courses as related to the organization and administration of a health information services department. Emphasizes project management, operation analysis and planning, current topics, emerging issues and career management. Prerequisite(s): Satisfactory completion of all prior HIM coursework or permission of instructor.

HIM 485. MANAGEMENT PRACTICUM (3).At the end of the senior year, students complete an eighty hour management practicum at an approved health care facility with emphasis on completing a major project focusing on HIM management practices, EHR acquisition or system implementation or other comparable project. Additional online course components address HIM professional ethics, strategic management and HIM advocacy. Prerequisite(s): Satisfactory completion of all prior HIM coursework, HIM 385.

HIM 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN HEALTH INFORMATION MANAGEMENT (1-3). Offers an opportunity for a focused course of study with in a specific practice area of health information management under the direction of an assigned instructor. Employs a variety of learning activities, as specified in the learning contract, to extend core knowledge and skills in a specific practice area. Enhances research and written presentation skills through development of a comprehensive topic portfolio. Prerequisite(s): Senior standing. Majors only.

HEALTH SCIENCES

HSC 240. FUNDAMENTALS OF ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY (3). Designed to provide students with an understanding of the basic concepts of human anatomy and physiology. The student will learn basic terminology and the general organization of body systems including the tissue, organ, and organ system levels. The specific organ systems to be studied in this course include the integumentary (skin), skeletal, muscular, nervous, special senses, endocrine, cardiovascular, lymphatic, respiratory, digestive, urinary, and reproductive.

HSC 250. COMPUTER CONCEPTS/APPLICATIONS FOR HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS (3). Explores basic theory and practical application of various software programs emphasizing applications typically utilized in health care settings including word processing, databases, spreadsheets, presentation packages and health care related Internet resources. Course is taught in a laboratory environment with extensive hands-on experience.

HSC 310. MEDICAL TERMINOLOGY (3). Provides an intensive study in the language used in the health care field. Includes the use of prefix, suffix and root words to identify, analyze, define and interpret medical terms. Emphasizes the correct construction, pronunciation, spelling and use of medical terminology, especially as applied in the interpretation of medical reports.
HSC 401.WOMEN’S HEALTH ISSUES (3). Focuses on the maintenance and promotion of women’s health across the full spectrum of women’s lives. Explores physiological, psychological, cultural, economic, political, sociological, and
spiritual factors that influence women’s health over the lifespan. Cross listing: PE 401 or WS 401.

MATHEMATICS (MT)

MT 201. COLLEGE ALGEBRA (3). Includes algebraic operations, equations and inequalities, functions and their graphs, solution of polynomial, exponential and logarithmic functions and linear systems of equations.

MT 204. CONTEMPORARY MATHEMATICS (3). Presents topics in contemporary mathematics of interest to the liberal arts student. Extensive use of technology to explore logic, matrices, probability, exponentials, graph theory, linear programming, game theory and problem-solving skills usable by a productive citizen. Prerequisite(s): Placement by Department.

MT 205. CONTEMPORARY MATHEMATICS FOR LIBERAL ARTS STUDENTS (3). Presents contemporary mathematics for liberal arts students. It emphasizes the use of mathematics in
the natural world using concepts such as social choice, networking, scheduling, symmetry in art and nature, fractals, growth, the Golden Ratio, music and poetry. NOTE: Cannot receive credit for MT 204 and MT 205.

MT 206. CONTEMPORARY MATHEMATICS FOR BUSINESS STUDENTS (3). Presents topics in contemporary mathematics for business students. It emphasizes the use of mathematics in everyday life using real world applications such as set relationships, percentages, statistics, probability, personal finance, and business applications. NOTE: Cannot receive credit for MT 204 and MT 206.

MT 270. INTRODUCTION TO STATISTICS (3). Presents standard topics in introductory statistics for students whose major is not mathematics. Topics include descriptive statistics, probability distributions, estimations, hypothesis testing, linear regression and correlation and other topics.

MT 320. INTRODUCTION TO DISCRETE MATHEMATICS (3). Introduces mathematical tools used by computer scientists with an emphasis on developing problem-solving abilities. Topics include machine logic, set theory, Boolean algebra,
mathematical induction, and data structures. Prerequisite(s): C- or higher in MT 201 or MT 260.

MT 360A. CALCULUS I (4). Treats standard topics of single variable calculus including limits, continuity, derivatives, applications of derivatives, and elements of integration. Prerequisite(s): MT 201. NOTE: Course fee required. Prerequisite(s); ACT math score of 26 or greater, SAT math score of 610 or greater, or C- or higher in MT 260.

MT 360B. CALCULUS II (4). Continues treatment of single variable calculus including definite and indefinite integrals, applications of integrals, transcendental functions, techniques of integration and infinite series. Prerequisite(s): C- or higher in MT 360A, or placement by the department.

MT 405. NUMERICAL METHODS (3). Uses computers in solving linear and nonlinear equations, approximation theory, numerical integration and differentiation, numerical solution of differential equations and linear programming. Prerequisite(s): C- or higher in MT 463, or permission of instructor.

MT 415. LINEAR ALGEBRA (3). Studies vector spaces, linear transformations, matrices, determinants, systems of equations, eigenvalues and characteristic matrices. Prerequisite(s): C- or higher in MT 360A.

MT 417. DISCRETE MATHEMATICAL STRUCTURES (3). Presents tools used by mathematicians and computer scientists. Emphasizes developing problem-solving ability. Topics covered include logic, set theory, counting techniques, mathematical induction, and properties of graphs, digraphs and trees. Prerequisite(s): MT 320.

MT 423A. ABSTRACT ALGEBRA I (3). Provides an axiomatic treatment of basic concepts of groups, rings, and fields. Prerequisite(s): C- or higher in MT 401 and MT 415.

MT 426. HISTORY AND FOUNDATIONS OF MATHEMATICS (3). Discusses topics in ancient methods of numeration and calculation, the history and solution of classical problems, including topics from number theory, algebra, geometry, and calculus. Includes contributions of the great mathematicians, under-represented groups (including minorities and women), and diverse cultures. Investigates the role of mathematics in civilization. Prerequisite(s): MT 360B. NOTE: Required for students preparing to teach secondary mathematics.

MT 430. INTRODUCTION TO MATHEMATICAL MODELING (3). Studies principles of constructing mathematical models using techniques such as: difference equations, proportionality, geometric similarity, graphical analysis and dimensional analysis, simulation with random numbers, and systems of differential equations. Prerequisite(s): MT 360B. NOTE: Required for students preparing to teach secondary mathematics.

MT 441. MODERN GEOMETRY (3). Studies Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometries such as: Mobius, hyperbolic, elliptic, absolute, and projective geometries. Geometries are studied using analytic methods and the relation to real-world situations. Prerequisite(s): MT 360B. NOTE: Required for students preparing to teach secondary mathematics.

MT 445. ADVANCED LINEAR ALGEBRA (3). Continues the study of Matrices, determinants, systems of equations eigenvalues, characteristics matrices, and space matrices. Prerequisite(s): MT 415.

MT 463. DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS (3). Studies solutions first and second order differential equations, applications, linear differential equations, series solutions, laplace transforms, numerical solutions, and systems of linear differential equations with constant coefficients. Prerequisite(s): C- or higher in MT
360B.

MT 470A. MATHEMATICAL STATISTICS I (3). Introduces probability; distribution functions and moment generating functions, correlation and regression; development and applications of binomial, normal, student's T, chi square, and F distributions. Prerequisite(s): MT 360B.
MT 475. STATISTICAL COMPUTING (3). Introduces Python computer programming concepts, principles, and practices. Continues with the use of Python to compute descriptive statistics and visualize data. Introduces computations for hypothesis testing, sampling, conditional probability, and other statistical quantities. Concludes with machine learning for clustering and classification.

SPECIAL TOPICS – ANDERSON (AND)

AND 3900. SEED FELLOWSHIP I (3). Students will 1) understand and be in dialogue about contemporary concepts about how sustainability is showing up in businesses and organizations 2) design and learn how to record a podcast or alternative communication modality in order to communicate learnings with peers and 3) reach out to sustainability practitioners, researchers, and organizational leaders to invite them to speak at Regis. The course will challenge students to explore diverse perspectives, create meaningful relationships, develop a critical consciousness, and service as positive agents of sustainability. Prerequisite(s): Sophomore standing, approval of instructor or director of SEED.

AND 3901. SEED FELLOWSHIP II (3). Students will 1) understand and be in dialogue about contemporary concepts about how sustainability is showing up in businesses and organizations 2) produce a podcast or alternative communication modality and market it in order to communicate learnings with peers 3) engage with practitioners, researchers, and organizational leaders on the topic of sustainability. The course will challenge students to explore diverse perspectives, create meaningful relationships, develop a critical consciousness, and service as positive agents of sustainability. Prerequisite(s): AND 3900, sophomore standing, approval of instructor and director of SEED.

AND 3110E-W. SEED SEMINAR (1). Common Good Computing Seminars are interdisciplinary courses about connecting students with the community outside of Regis University. The aim of each course is to provide students with opportunities to get involved with organizations and members of the surrounding community that require assistance in addressing social, ethical and community-based needs. Ultimately, the seminars strive to connect students with situations where they can find ways to add value, regardless of their specific degree program.

AND 3120E-W. COMPUTING FOR THE COMMON GOOD SEMINAR (1-3). Common Good Computing Seminars are interdisciplinary courses about connecting students with the community outside of Regis University. The aim of each course is to provide students with opportunities to get involved with organizations and members of the surrounding community that require assistance in addressing social, ethical and community- based needs. Ultimately, the seminars strive to connect students with situations where they can find ways to add value, regardless of their specific degree program.



ACCOUNTING (AC)

AC 6020. INTERPRETING ACCOUNTING INFORMATION (3). Examines adjustment of financial statements used for analysis after assessing accounting policies used and other limitations of accounting model. Analysis of firm’s financial ratios, free cash flow, earnings quality, sustainable earnings, creditworthiness, and fundamental (intrinsic) equity value. Prerequisite(s): Prerequisite(s): MBA students must have completed MGT 6001 or FIN 6000. MSA students must have completed Program Foundation courses.

AC 6030. FINANCIAL REPORTING POLICY AND PRACTICE (3). Examines objectives, recognition and measurement concepts, and definitions of financial statement elements in the FASB’s Conceptual Framework; preparation of financial statements; and ethical, economic, and political context of accounting standard-setting and financial reporting policy choices.

AC 6040. FINANCIAL COMMUNICATION (3). Examines the tools to approach a variety of audiences and clearly articulate complex information. Students will use written, spoken, and presentation formats to practice and improve communication skills.  Note: Majors Only.

AC 6050. ADVANCED AUDITING (3). Examines cases of failed audits to assess audit risk; identify relevant assertions, inherent risks, and control risks; formulate audit objectives; and evaluate appropriateness of audit evidence. Examines earnings management incentives and devices; and threats to auditor's independence.

AC 6060. ACCOUNTING THEORY AND RESEARCH (3). Explores accounting theory through the use of accounting research tools and techniques. Students learn the foundations of accounting research and communication of their research to various stakeholders in a professional and informative manner.

AC 6070. ACCOUNTING FOR NONPROFIT AND GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATIONS (3). Examines accounting for not-for-profit organizations and governments. Emphasizes the use of accounting information to help identify and solve problems encountered in the management of these organizations.

AC 6080. INTERNATIONAL ACCOUNTING (3). Examines international financial reporting standards (IFRS) and convergence issues between US GAAP and IFRS. Reviews accounting standards (U.S. GAAP) and other regulatory guidance for foreign exchange, taxation, transfer pricing, and other reporting items.

AC 6090. CASE STUDIES IN MANAGEMENT ACCOUNTING (3). Develops students' management accounting techniques and skills needed to make ethical profit-maximizing decisions. Emphasizes data selection, analysis, decision making and evaluation of results in complex, realistic situations.

AC 6100. CONTROLLERSHIP (3). Examines the function, role, and responsibilities of the chief accounting officer of a business organization. Considers both financial and nonfinancial aspects
of the controllership function. Prerequisite(s): Program
Foundation courses.

AC 6110. TAX INFLUENCE ON BUSINESS DECISION- MAKING (3). Studies the structure of the tax code, principles underlying it and impact on business transactions. Emphasizes tax planning. Prerequisite(s): Program Foundation courses.

AC 6120. SUSTAINABILITY AND CSR FOR ACCOUNTING (3). Explores the accountants' role in sustainability, CSR, and Integrated Reporting in organizations. The topics include adding value through sustainability and CSR initiatives, defining and implementing the initiatives, and developing performance reports.

AC 6140. IT AUDITING (3). Combines accounting, regulation and IT security practices to educate students to protect organizational assets through establishment of auditing best practices, current governmental reporting standards, Sarbanes- Oxley requirements and secure management techniques. Prerequisite(s): Program Foundation courses.

AC 6150. INCOME TAX RESEARCH (3). Develops the ability to research complex income tax questions. Examines the basis of tax law, research materials and research strategies. Research is completed using both manual and automated research systems.

AC 6170. ACCOUNTING INFORMATION SYSTEMS (3). Identifies and defines the manual and automated systems necessary to provide accounting information. Studies and compares systems to prepare financial accounting, cost accounting and tax documents. Develops efficient, controlled systems that provide both required and management information.

AC 6173. DATA ANALYTICS FOR ACCOUNTING (3). Introduces how data analytics is used in business and accounting. It provides the concepts and tools to understand and analyze data in meaningful and actionable ways to enhance decision making.  The course will explore how data analytics
provides relevance to many of the tasks currently performed by accountants and opens new pathways for accountants.

AC 6175. CURRENT TOPICS IN ACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY (3). Explores the growing use of technology and its impacts on the accounting profession. This course will introduce students to the current and emerging technological changes and opportunities occurring in the accounting profession.

AC 6190. FORENSIC AND FRAUD AUDIT (3). Provides an opportunity to study contemporary financial statement fraud cases using a five-part fraud taxonomy: fraud perpetration,
fraud detection, fraud investigation, fraud prosecution and fraud prevention and the accountant's role.

AC 6220. ADVANCED ACCOUNTING (3). Advanced accounting principles and procedures as applied to special areas including partnerships, corporate liquidations, estates and
trusts, foreign currency accounting, segment accounting, equity methods for investment, consolidations, and international accounting. Prerequisite(s): AC 4120.

AC 6230. ISSUES IN ACCOUNTING ETHICS (3). Addresses issues in accounting ethics including how to deal with ethical dilemmas, codes of ethical conduct for accountants, cultural issues in companies that lead to ethical collapse, US regulation for accountant’s ethical conduct, the importance of auditor independence, and how to evaluate ethics cases. Prerequisite(s): Program Foundation courses.

AC 6880E-W SEMINAR IN ACCOUNTING (3). Seminar course exploring current issues in Accounting.

AC 6910. ACCOUNTING ETHICS (3). Provides the knowledge, insight, and analytical tools necessary to make ethical decisions in accounting. Explores the ethical standards and challenges in tax accounting, corporate accounting, and auditing.  NOTE: Students must attend a weekly ethics lab.

AC 6992. ADVANCED ACCOUNTING INTERNSHIP I (3). The Advanced Academic Apprenticeship connects vocation
with academic learning. Goals of the internship are threefold: 1) to gain experience in a chosen professional setting integrating coursework knowledge in a work context, 2) to engage
students in a process of discerning one's professional aspirations upon graduation, 3) develop professional behavior within a work culture. The academic portion of the internship requires face to face meeting times, to be scheduled individually at the first meeting, to discuss progress with assignments.

AC 6993. ADVANCED ACCOUNTING INTERNSHIP II (3). The Advanced Accounting Internship is an opportunity to apply graduate academic learning in an accounting business context. Goals of the internship are threefold: 1) to gain real life experience in a business setting, to integrate coursework knowledge in a work context requiring higher level thinking in a select career path, 2) to engage students in a process of discerning what career direction to pursue upon graduation,
and 3) cultivate professional behavior within a work culture. The academic portion of the internship requires face to face meeting times, to be scheduled individually at the first meeting, to discuss progress with assignments.

BUSINESS – GENERAL (CBE CORE)

CBE 6020. LEADING IN A NEW ERA (3). Explores and examines the concept of shared leadership in organizations and how this paradigm impacts organizational purpose, mission vision, culture, and ethics. Explores concepts related to leading in a socially responsible manner.

CBE 6030. BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE AND ANALYTICS (3). Students gain insight into business intelligence and knowledge management systems. Students learn to utilize applicable tools including BI databases and analytics to examine complicated business problems and to select appropriate management decision models. Existing business databases are reviewed and recommendations for changes are made within this course.

CBE 6070. BUSINESS ACCELERATOR (3). Covers techniques needed to commercialize business ideas. Explores how to take ideas from conception to the market focusing on financial, marketing, operations, capitalization, legal and human resources.  Includes working with business mentors and guest
speakers, start-ups and business executives. Note: Completion of Core Courses or permission of instructor required.

CBE 6090. DESIGN THINKING AND BUSINESS ANALYTICS (3). Utilizes problem-based learning to identifying and solve problems to retool and revitalize business enterprises. Integrates different disciplines and combines business analysis, process modeling, and transformation and user experience design techniques to tackle the most complex problems facing an organization. Complementary methodologies such as AGILE will be introduced.

CBE 6240. ENTREPRENEURIAL INNOVATION (3). Provides an understanding of entrepreneurship. Delivers practice in developing business concepts, conducting a feasibility study, evaluating potential customers and creating business actions toward building a business plan and business model for pitching business ideas to financial institutions and venture capitalists.

CBE 6880E-W. SEMINAR IN CURRENT BUSINESS TOPICS (3). Concentrates on contemporary literature in selected areas of interest to managers. Content varies by term, based on topic's relevance to current business conditions. Prerequisite(s): Permission of instructor.

CBE 6890. MARKETPLACE ETHICS: CULTURE AND PRACTICE (3). Designed to allow students to collect data relating to the culture, operations, and organizational dynamics of an assigned small business or non-profit organization. Students will design and write an application for the BBB Torch Award for Marketplace Trust (See Torch Award explanation at https://www.bbb.org/denver/denverboulder-torch-awards) sponsored by the Better Business Bureau.

CBE 6900E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN BUSINESS (3). Provides an opportunity for faculty directed independent research in any field or topic in business subjects not covered in scheduled course offerings. Prerequisite(s): Approval of degree chair. NOTE: Offered as special study course only.

CBE 6990. INTERMEDIATE INTERNSHIP I (1-3). The Intermediate Academic Internship is an opportunity to apply graduate academic learning in an organizational context. Goals of the internship are threefold: 1) to gain experience in a
business setting by integrating coursework knowledge in a work context in an applied setting, 2) to engage students in a process of refining their career direction to pursue upon graduation,
and 3) cultivate professional behavior within a work culture. The academic portion of the internship is similar to an independent study with face to face meeting times to be scheduled individually at the first meeting, to discuss progress with assignments.

CBE 6991. INTERMEDIATE INTERNSHIP II (1-3). The Intermediate Academic Internship is an opportunity to apply graduate academic learning in an organizational context. Goals of the internship are threefold: 1) to gain experience in a
business setting by integrating coursework knowledge in a work context in an applied setting, 2) to engage students in a process of refining their career direction to pursue upon graduation,
and 3) cultivate professional behavior within a work culture. The academic portion of the internship is similar to an independent study with face to face meeting times to be scheduled individually at the first meeting, to discuss progress with assignments.

CBE 6992. ADVANCED INTERNSHIP I (1-3). The Advanced Academic Internship is an opportunity to apply graduate academic learning in a focused context for students who have experience within the selected industry. Goals of the internship are threefold: 1) to gain experience in a chosen business setting by integrating coursework knowledge in a work context requiring analysis or synthesis in an applied setting, 2) to engage students in a process of refining their career direction to
pursue upon graduation, and 3) cultivate professional behavior within a work culture. The academic portion of the internship is similar to an independent study with face to face meeting times to be scheduled individually at the first meeting, to discuss progress with assignments.

CBE 6993. ADVANCED INTERNSHIP II (1-3). The Advanced Academic Internship is an opportunity to apply graduate academic learning in a focused context for students who have experience within the selected industry. Goals of the internship are threefold: 1) to gain experience in a chosen business setting by integrating coursework knowledge in a work context requiring analysis or synthesis in an applied setting, 2) to engage students in a process of refining their career direction to
pursue upon graduation, and 3) cultivate professional behavior within a work culture. The academic portion of the internship is similar to an independent study with face to face meeting times to be scheduled individually at the first meeting, to discuss progress with assignments.

ECONOMICS (EC)

EC 6000. MANAGERIAL ECONOMICS (3). This course applies quantitative and qualitative economic principles to business analysis and business decision-making. Emphasis is placed on using the student’s experiences as the context for applying economic principles. Analysis of demand and supply drivers, cost behavior, strategy based in market structure, use of
market research to estimate elasticity, determination of the impact of macroeconomic policy on an enterprise’s decisions, and the role of Jesuit values in management.

FINANCE (FIN)

FIN 6020. FINANCIAL DECISION MAKING (3). Examines the use of financial theories and techniques in making financial decisions under conditions of uncertainty. Emphasizes the critical evaluation of concepts to assess their usefulness in practical business situations. Uses computer applications to solve practical problems. Prerequisite(s): MGT 6001.

FIN 6025. FINANCIAL ANALYSIS AND DECISION MAKING (3). Prepares students to assess the financial viability of business projects and make financial decisions regarding the conduct of business.

FIN 6030. INVESTMENTS AND PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT (3). Provides an understanding of the kinds of analysis and techniques used by individual investors and professional money managers to decide on investment objectives and select
possible investment alternatives. Prerequisite(s): FIN 6020 or
FIN 6025.

FIN 6040. FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS MANAGEMENT (3). Provides a framework for understanding financial institutions
and markets, and the effects of government policy on financial institutions, interest rates and levels of economic activity. Prerequisite(s): FIN 6020 or FIN 6025.

FIN 6050. INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT (3). Introduces financial management issues confronting multinational firms. Includes foreign exchange risk management, positioning of funds and cash management, and capital budgeting in the international setting. Prerequisite(s): FIN 6020 or FIN
6025.

FIN 6120. BUSINESS VALUATION (3). Examines valuation of small-to-medium size businesses using market, asset-based, and income approaches. Considers valuation objectives and standards of value. Examines data gathering and analysis; forecasting; valuation adjustments; discount and capitalization rates; and related income tax regulations.

FIN 6125. FINANCIAL PLANNING AND CAPITAL ALLOCATION (3). Prepares students to use various modeling and forecasting tools to value a business, assess business opportunities, and conduct forecasting to inform business decisions and capital allocation.

FIN 6130. MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS FINANCE (3). Examines the financial (and certain accounting and income tax) aspects of mergers and acquisitions, as well as the effects of acquisitions on employees, communities, products and services. Examines acquisition strategy and target screening; transaction structure and financing; and target company valuation and pricing, including contingent consideration and post-closing purchase price adjustment mechanisms. Prerequisite(s): AC
6020 and FIN 6020 or FIN 6025.

HEALTH INFORMATICS (MSHI)

MSHI 600. INFORMATION SYSTEMS CONCEPTS (3). Introduces information systems concepts, architectures, and technologies. Emphasizes information systems resources needed to meet organizational mission and objectives. Focuses on information systems from the business (healthcare) viewpoint including processes, value proposition and different types of information systems. Prerequisite(s): Graduate Standing. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSHI 625. WORKFLOW AND CHANGE MANAGEMENT IN ADAPTION OF HEALTH IT (3). Examines human behavior in organizations focusing on the analysis of data and workflow diagrams, SSC methodology (Start-Stop-Continue Design Decisions), developing an impact analysis, training requirements, process assessment at the micro and macro level affected by
the new technology and introduces change management theories necessary to parallel system implementation. User workflows and processes are used as a basis for analysis. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSHI  635. DESIGN AND SELECTION OF IT SYSTEMS IN HEALTH CARE (3). Introduces planning, acquisition, and implementation of systems which include migration paths, functional requirements, costs, benefits realization and a critical analysis of the system proposed in addition to the technological infrastructure needed to support facility-wide systems.
Activities include evaluating RFP’s and RFI’s, and designing communication and clinical documentation guidelines. Graduate level includes writing an RFI or RFP and development of system evaluation criteria. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSHI  645. MANAGEMENT OF E-HIM (3). The focus of this course is on the advanced concepts of managing digital clinical information and other electronic storage in health care facilities. Topics include: identity management, health
information exchange and data sharing, current trends in eHIM, eDiscovery, the personal health record and patient portals. The course will also cover components and strategies of
Information Governance including; interoperability of data, compliance data dictionary standards, and factors that influence data integrity. Graduate level includes development of an eDiscovery response plan and Information Governance assessment tool. Prerequisite(s): Graduate standing required. Cross listing: HIM 445. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSHI 650. HEALTH CARE INFORMATICS AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN HEALTH CARE SETTINGS (3). Introduces foundational knowledge and skills to participate in the design, selection, implementation and use of clinical and administrative information systems. Familiarizes the student with new and emerging technologies in the health care field and includes concepts and principles of health care informatics in the health professions and health care delivery systems. Prerequisite(s): HSC 250. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSHI 675. HEALTH CARE PERFORMANCE EVALUATION (3). Discusses rigorous evaluation tools and methods to assess clinical quality and clinical systems performance and create data driven actions that set the course for patient-centered care delivery. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSHI 678. NURSING AND CLINICAL INFORMATICS (3). Focuses on the intersections of health information systems technologies and patient care. The course covers health informatics domain areas applicable to nursing workflows and it discusses health care technologies, electronic health records systems, clinical decision support, and digital health care technologies supporting patient care. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSHI 680. HEALTH CARE INFORMATICS CAPSTONE (3). A capstone seminar including Ignatian leadership, health care policy, integration of technology into delivery settings, data analytics, stakeholder relations, regulatory initiatives, health care workforce challenges, trends in IT adoption and completion of a research-based project with a service
component. Prerequisite: all MSHI coursework. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSHI 692. HEALTH INFORMATICS PRACTICUM I (3). Provides a hands-on Health Informatics lab experience that covers all phases of a typical health informatics project—clinical need discovery, existing system and workflow evaluation, system and workflow redesign, implementation evaluation and communicating results. Concludes with a mock presentation to clinical stakeholders and system leadership. Prerequisite(s): MSHI 600, MSHI 625, MSHI 635, MSHI 650, MSHI 675, and MSCC 697. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSHI 696. HEALTH INFORMATICS PRACTCUM II (3). Continues a hands-on Health Informatics lab experience that covers all phases of a typical health informatics project - clinical need discovery, existing system and workflow evaluation,
system and workflow redesign, implementation evaluation and communicating results. Concludes with a mock presentation to clinical stakeholders and system leadership. Prerequisites: MSHI
692. NOTE: Course fee required.

HUMAN RESOURCES (HR)

HR 6350. STRATEGIC HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT (3). Identifies the critical importance of human resources (HR). Examines how HR professional and organizational leaders can maximize human capital and potential to achieve individual team and strategic organizational goals.  Delves into how
professionals align HR efforts to the overall organization strategic plan to improve organizational performance. Examines the importance of creating a culture that increases employee engagement.

HR 6360. EMPLOYMENT LAW AND COMPLIANCE (3). Identifies the federal and state laws and regulations that affect the employment relationship. Focuses on developing programs that help the organization meet its workforce needs in support of business requirements, while preventing lawsuits from employees and Hour Law, Labor Law, Benefits Law, and other federal laws and regulations.

HR 6370. STRATEGIES IN COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS (3). Analyzes the theories, concepts and practices related to managing strategic compensation and benefits programs. Focuses on the role of human resources in managing competitive rewards and pay plans. Specific topics include compensation administration, job evaluation and pay structures, base and incentive pay, executive compensation, and employee benefits plans including required, voluntary, and retirement options.

HR 6380. TALENT AND PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT
(3). Identifies a framework for acquiring and maintaining diverse and talented employees in alignment with business
requirements of the organization. Focuses on the recruitment, selection, and development systems that are part of the human resources function. Discusses approaches and practices to manage employee performance. Explores workforce diversity and its impact on talent management in the organization. Topics include recruitment, selection, and orienting new employees; training and development; performance management and workforce diversity.

HR 6390. EMPLOYEE RELATIONS AND PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT (3). Identifies processes used to maintain effective relationships between employees and management, as well as managing employee discipline to meet the requirements of the organization. Focuses on the role of human resources in the mediation and negotiation of labor/employee relations matters; settlement of employee disputes and grievances and identifying practices and processes to maintain a safe
workplace. Topics include collective bargaining, negotiations, alternative dispute resolution, progressive discipline, workplace investigations and workplace safety. Prerequisite(s): LDR 6210.

LEADERSHIP (LDR)

LDR 6210. LEADING CHANGE AND INNOVATION (3). Enables learners to understand that the need for change is both predictable and unpredictable and can include down-sizing and massive growth spurts that challenge organizational resources. Uses actual workplace situations to diagnose when innovation within organizations is catalyzing change, and when innovation provides a solution for change.

LDR 6240. ORGANIZATIONAL DEVELOPMENT (3). Management of individual and team behavior in complex work organizations with emphasis on models of individual performance and effectiveness, work-related stress, communications, and conflict. An introduction to models of organizational change and development, including current practice and techniques, in addition to an examination of management of individual, interpersonal, and intergroup relations.

LDR 6250. TRANSFORMATIONAL LEADERSHIP (3). Explores the subject of transformational change, and the implications for us as individual leaders, for our organizational cultures as well
as structures. Course combines intellectual rigor with personal challenge and collaboration with creative expression.

LDR 6620. FOUNDATIONS OF ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR (3). Explore how people and groups in organizations behave, react, and interpret events. Examine individual characteristics such as learning, personality, and motivation. Consider group formation, development, and structure.

LDR 6630. ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE AND DESIGN (3). Increases the understanding of the deliberate process of configuring structures, processes, reward systems, and people practices to create an effective organization capable of achieving the business strategy.

LDR 6710. STRATEGIC LEADERSHIP (3). This course is designed to equip strategic leaders with the skills and competencies needed to mobilize their followers and organizations for effective current-day action in preparation for future challenges, threats, and opportunities.

LDR 6830 STRATEGIC CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY AND STEWARDSHIP (3).  Integrates program concepts such as strategic stewardship, leadership, financial analysis, research, organizational change, project management, and human resources, to challenge students to examine these concepts from the perspective of corporate social responsibility. NOTE: All other courses may be taken in any order. When students have successfully completed 27 semester hours of the required course work in the Master of Science in Organization Leadership program, they are permitted to register to LDR 6830--Capstone: Strategic Corporate Social Responsibility and Stewardship, the capstone course.

MANAGEMENT (MGT)

MGT 6000. ACCOUNTING FOR MANAGERS (3). Examines accounting concepts and principles used by managers for business decision making. The course focuses on costing principles used by management that affect short- and long-term business decisions. The course studies the basic concepts and principles of accounting, the preparation and presentation of
financial statements, limitations of these statements, and the ethical dimensions of financial reporting. This course cannot be used for MS Accounting credit, nor for MBA electives or specializations. Students who have taken AC 6000 may not take this course for credit. NOTE: Majors only.

MGT 6001. FINANCE FOR MANAGERS (3). Examines finance concepts managers use in making decisions, including capital investment analysis; financing strategy; working capital management; and projected financial statements. Students who have taken FIN 6000 may not take this course for credit. Prerequisite(s): MGT 6000, or permission of instructor. NOTE: Majors only.

MGT 6010. ETHICAL AND LEGAL ENVIRONMENT OF BUSINESS (3). Examines the intersection of law and ethics. Focuses on how businesses apply legal principles, terminology, and ethical theories. Topics include the structure of the American legal system, business forms, corporations, agency/employment law, along with product liability and negligence.

MGT 6013. DEVELOPING EFFECTIVE ORGANIZATIONS (3). Effective organizations converge adaptable leadership, engaged workforces and aligned processes. Explores concepts from organizational behavior (OB), organizational development (OD) and human resource development (HRD) and from case studies of current organizations.

MGT 6017 OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT (3). Provides practical course studies in Operations Management fundamentals including quality management, forecasting, capacity planning, geolocation, inventory and production control, distribution systems, and planning and scheduling. Provides overviews and interrelationships of general Operations Management subject areas.

MGT 6020. ISSUES IN INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS (3). Examines issues essential to an understanding of international business activity. Includes the nature of international business, international economic institutions and issues, international monetary issues, government activity affecting international trade, social and cultural effects on international business, human resource management and other related issues.

MGT 6110. STRATEGY FORMULATION AND IMPLEMENTATION (3). Explores strategic practices from a business perspective through learning various strategic theories and implementation methods. The course includes cases and simulations that require students to develop and implement strategic theories for making business decisions.

MGT 6150. MANAGING CHANGE (3). Focuses on business industrial change and control management. Explores change in industry standards through technology innovations, markets
and opportunities, corporate skills portfolios, and products and services. Identifies methods available to plan, initiate, and direct change for facilitating positive benefits for future forecasts. NOTE: Fee required.

MGT 6170. POWER AND POLITICS (3). A practical approach to assessing power and political relationships within a business organization and how to successfully maneuver within the system to achieve positive outcomes. Examines issues of different perspectives, goals, and personalities of oneself and others in the areas of general management, change management, and strategic management.

MGT 6505. DATA PREPARATION (3). Creating data-driven business understanding starts with determining objectives and project goals. It continues by identifying available data to accomplish the project and determining its characteristics. In this course students will learn the processes and techniques for collecting, examining, preparing, and verifying data for subsequent analysis and modeling.

MGT 6510 DATA MODELING (3). By modeling data one obtains that ability to predict behaviors described by data. In this course students will learn statistical and machine learning techniques to model data for different project goals. Students will also learn techniques to evaluate the quality of the model. Prerequisite(s): MGT 6505.

MGT 6515. DATA DELIVERY (3). Ideally, data-driven processes are used to inform business decision making across an organization. In this course you will learn techniques to operationalize data models by deploying through dashboards
and other reports that drive organizational understanding and adoption. You will also explore techniques for creating effective visualizations and the use of storytelling. Prerequisite(s): MGT
6505 and MGT 6510,

MGT 6880E-W. SEMINAR IN STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT (3). Seminar course exploring current issues in Strategic Management.

MGT 6950. MBA CAPSTONE (3). Multifaceted project course which serves as a culminating academic experience that reflects the business concepts and practices that affect business, globalization, ethical frameworks and CSR/sustainability in the
21st century workforce. NOTE: Course must be taken at the end of the MBA program. Registration in the Capstone course before a student has completed at least ten MBA courses will result in being automatically dropped from the class.

MARKETING (MKT)

MKT 6020. MARKET OPPORTUNITY ASSESSMENT (3). Assesses customer needs and match them with the capabilities of an organization to provide a solution that benefits the customer and the company. Learners will analyze forces that influence markets, assess buyer behaviors and attributes, evaluate external and competitive factors, and define market segments that present the best opportunity. Market measurements and ratios will quantify and validate strategic business decisions. In a final project, learners will complete a full market opportunity analysis that forms the first sections of a strategic marketing plan.

MKT 6040. GLOBAL MARKETING (3). Examines the impact of conditions unique to international business on the marketing of goods and services. Includes government policies and regulations; cultural differences in advertising, consumer preferences and buying patterns; distribution and pricing differences; exchange rates and other financial concerns within
a global market. Prerequisite(s): MKT 6220.

MKT 6050. STRATEGIC BRAND MANAGEMENT: THE POWER OF THE BRAND (3). Well-positioned brands are
unique and distinctive and a valuable company asset with the ability to influence earnings. Successful brands connect with customers through social and cultural conversations. In this course, students will explore the importance of brand management by examining successful brand strategies for identity, messaging and product portfolio development. Students also will study the importance of brand valuation and the analytical framework and tools necessary to successfully build and protect a strong and competitive global brand.

MKT 6190. DIGITAL MARKETING AND PROMOTION (3). This course addresses digital marketing strategies including: web, search, social and mobile marketing. Students examine unique strengths of digital marketing components, helping students generate innovative approaches to engage, motivate and inspire buyer brand participation.

MKT 6220. MARKETING MIX DECISIONS (3). Applies customer analysis to integrate marketing mix decisions that align product, price, distribution, and promotion decisions critical to market success. Learners create promotion plans to move product or service to the marketplace.

MKT 6225. PRODUCT DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT (3). Comprehensive review of the product development process from a marketing and operations perspective. Create product/service opportunities. Identify customer needs and conduct product concept testing. Learn about product design, architecture, patents and intellectual property, research expenses and revenue potential for your product. Finally, build your project plan and timeline for your new product or service to implement in the marketplace. Prerequisite(s): MKT 6220.

MKT 6230. CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIPS: DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT (3). Development of a CRM data base from a Marketing perspective. Incorporates: Comparison of marketing databases, understanding of customer prospecting acquisition tools, creating customer engagement, developing tracking database metrics and web analytics. Creates a customer loyalty and retention plan.

MKT 6240. MARKETING STRATEGY (3). Explores the applications of marketing strategy principles to the basic marketing, product and service decisions of a project for a business service learning organization. The key emphasis of this course is the development of a comprehensive service learning marketing plan that focuses on customer want and needs and the dynamic global environment.

MKT 6300. PRODUCT MANAGEMENT (3). Includes a computer simulation that provides hands-on experience in running a global company. The simulation provides the opportunity to work with all the essential managerial functions including research and development, marketing, production and finance, and to experience the interactions and interrelationships that businesses must engage in internally and externally to succeed. The course includes practical application of ethical theories as they apply to business decisions.

MKT 6880E-W. SEMINAR IN MARKETING (3). Addresses current topics relevant to marketing managers. Content varies by term, based on student needs and changes in the marketing environment.


COMPUTER INFORMATION SCIENCES (MSC)

MSC 500. FOUNDATIONS OF PROGRAMMING THROUGH GAME DEVELOPMENT (3). Introduces foundations of programming through development of simple games using JavaScript. In-depth investigation of programming fundamentals: pseudo-random processing, mathematical expressions, variable, assignment statements, functions and conditionals through the development of simple games. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSC 501. OBJECT-ORIENTED PROGRAMMING IN JAVA (3). Introduces foundation of programming through simple development of programs using the Java programming language. In-depth investigation of programming fundamentals: mathematical expressions, variables, assignment statements, functions and conditionals. Introductory use of Object- Oriented language features including classes, objects, data
hiding, inheritance, polymorphism, and exception handling. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSC 505. SYSTEMS ANALYSIS AND ARCHITECTURE (3). Studies the analysis and design of computer-based information systems. Explores the SDLC, requirements analysis, modeling techniques, documentation, and visualization tools. Also, demonstrates basic systems architecture concepts supporting design, management, and administration of simple network topologies and protocols. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSC 575. STATISTICAL COMPUTING (3). Introduces Python computer programming concepts, principles, and practices. Continues with the use of Python to compute descriptive statistics and visualize data. Introduces computations for hypothesis testing, sampling, conditional probability, and other statistical quantities. Concludes with machine learning for clustering and classification. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSC690E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY (1-3). Provides an opportunity for faculty directed independent research in any field or topic in computer information systems not covered in scheduled course offerings. Prerequisite(s): MSCC 610 and approval of Department Chair. Prerequisite(s): MSCC 610.

MSC 695E-W. SEMINAR (3). Concentrates on leading edge technology in selected areas of interest to Computer Information Technology professionals based on topics relevant to current technological conditions. Prerequisite(s): MSCC 610.

MASTER OF SCIENCE: CORE (MSCC)

MSCC 610. INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY CONCEPTS (3). Introduces information systems concepts, architectures, and technologies. Emphasizes information systems resources
needed to meet organizational mission and objectives. Focuses on information systems from a management perspective, including applying information technology, developing and acquiring information systems, and managing them. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSCC 630. DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION AND ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE (3). Today’s organizations use digital transformation to be innovative, agile, and competitive. This course presents Enterprise Architecture as an approach for designing and implementing strategic digital transformation
solutions. An architectural approach will be applied to analyze frameworks such as Information Governance and emerging technologies such as cloud computing, Big Data, and AI. Prerequisite(s): MSCC 610 and MSCC 697. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSCC 693. GRADUATE CAPSTONE (3). Teams to critically analyze problems of a real-world organization and design a recommended solution. Case-based scenario used to simulate real-world application of Information Technology knowledge and skills. Simulates a real-world information technology organization where students enhance skills learned in previous courses. Prerequisite(s): MSCC 630. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSCC 697. INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH METHODS (3). Through discussions, students become familiar with the foundational concepts of developing a problem statement for further investigation. Presents students with the skills and knowledge to develop their capabilities to identify, categorize, evaluate and synthesize a body of knowledge for a specific purpose. Prerequisite(s): MSCC 610 and completion of
12 semester hours in the degree requirements and degree
electives area. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSCC 698. GRADUATE THESIS (3). Students complete a master’s thesis that is a substantial body of original scholarly work in the area of Information Technology. Prerequisite(s): MSCC 630. NOTE: Pass/No Pass grading only. Students must have successfully completed all other degree requirements for this program prior to completing this course. Prior to registering for MSCC 698 students must discuss thesis topic with the course instructor, who will involve the faculty advisor to determine if admission to the course warrants approval. NOTE: Course fee required.

DATABASE TECHNOLOGY (MSCD)

MSCD 600. DATABASE ARCHITECTURE (3). Provides an introduction to the internal structures and architectures of database management systems. Focuses on the Oracle10g ORDBMS architecture and associated processes and physical files. Covers general concepts such as design, deployment, and operation. Prerequisite(s): MSCC 610. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSCD 610. DATABASE CONCEPTS (3). Explores data modeling, database design, management concepts, and SQL3 in- depth. Utilizes Oracle10g ORDBMS and Oracle command line interface, SQL*Plus for all lab work. Provides hands-on experience with an enterprise class, object-relational database management system. Prerequisite(s): MSCD 600. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSCD 640. ORACLE® DATABASE ADMINISTRATION (3). Examines key tasks and functions required of a database administrator in a production environment. Students create, start up, and manage a database. In addition, students implement data security and integrity measures and grant access privileges to individual database users. Prerequisite(s): MSCD 610. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSCD 642. DATABASE BACKUP AND RECOVERY (3). Studies the critical tasks of planning and implementing database backup and recovery strategies. Explores backup methodologies based on business requirements in a typical enterprise and utilizes multiple strategies to recover from different types of recovery failures. Prerequisite(s): MSCD 640. NOTE: Course
fee required.

MSCD 644. DATABASE PERFORMANCE TUNING (3). Studies database servers from the perspective of optimization and performance. Focuses on techniques for improving data access and storage, emphasizing performance diagnosis and resolution using real-world scenarios. Prerequisite(s): MSCD
640. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSCD 650. PL/SQL PROGRAMMING (3). Studies advanced SQL and SQL*Plus concepts and how to write PL/SQL procedures, functions and packages. Topics include extending statements to include Set Operators, and building correlated sub queries and hierarchical queries. Student creates and manages PL/SQL program units and database triggers as a basis for complex application development. Prerequisite(s): MSCD
610. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSCD 661. BUSINESS INTELLEGENCE (3). Architectures, theories, methodologies and technologies that transform structured, semi-structured and unstructured data into meaningful and useful information.  Covers analysis of enterprise data requirements to develop queries, reports and building OLAP cubes that use business analytics to answer complex business questions. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSCD 664. INTRODUCTION TO NOSQL DATABASES (3). Introduces students to an overview and history of NoSQL databases (non-relational databases). The four types of NoSQL databases (e.g. Document-Oriented, Key-Value Pair, Column- Oriented and Graph) will be explored in detail. The topics for each of the NoSQL database types will include the detailed architecture, data modeling techniques, the loading and querying of data and the best practices for achieving high performance when using the database. NoSQL database development tools and programming languages will also be examined as part of the course content. Hands-on NoSQL database lab assignments will allow students to use the four NoSQL database types via products such as Cassandra, Hadoop, HBase, MongoDB, Neo4J, Riak, etc. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSCD 665. NoSQL DATABASE CONCEPTS USING CASSANDRA (3). Provides students the necessary skills to develop applications using Cassandra. Topics include data modeling, partitioning and clustering keys, managing data, sharding and indexing using SOLR. Prerequisite(s): MSCD 664, or permission of instructor. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSCD 667. NoSQL DATABASE CONCEPTS USING MONGODB (3). Provides students the necessary skills to develop applications using MongoDB. Topics include document management, querying data, indexing, aggregation techniques and sharding. Prerequisite(s): MSCD 664, or permission of instructor. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSCD 668. NoSQL DATABASE CONCEPTS WITH Neo4J (3). Provides students the necessary skills to develop applications using the Neo4J Graph Database. Topics include data modeling,
Cypher language, data analysis, managing data and performance tuning. Prerequisite(s): MSCD 664, or permission of instructor. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSCD 670. MIDDLEWARE ARCHITECTURES AND DATABASE APPLICATIONS (3). Examines middleware implementation of portals using Oracle's advanced 10gAS platform as an application study. Focuses on middleware design, development and administration of web- based enterprise
portal technology. Explores B2B applications, case studies, and Internet access to the database. Prerequisite(s): MSCD 610. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSCD 675. DATABASE TECHNOLOGIES AND SERVICE ORIENTED ARCHITECTURE (3). Introduces SOA, middleware, with enterprise architecture, interoperability and loose coupling. Explores technical and organizational perspectives and alignment using design principles and industry- standard organizational models. Includes hands-on
implementation of distributed Web Services-based interfaces to database system. Prerequisite(s): MSCD 670. NOTE: Course
fee required.

MSCD 681. DATA WAREHOUSE DESIGN (3). Data warehouse design includes in-depth exploration of organizational decision based on data repository, focusing on requirements, data warehouse design, data extraction and data stores. Includes business intelligence systems implications with hands-on approach to design. Prerequisite(s): MSCD 600 and MSCD 610. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSCD 692. DATABASE PRACTICUM I (3). Simulates a real- world information technology organization where students enhance skills learned in previous database courses. Provides a research platform that can be used towards the collection of data to fulfill the thesis requirement. Prerequisite(s): MSCC
630, MSCD 640 and permission of instructor. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSCD 696. DATABASE PRACTICUM II (3). A continuation of Database Practicum I. Simulates a real-world information technology organization where students enhance skills learned in previous database courses. Provides a research platform that can be used towards the collection of data to fulfill the thesis requirement. Prerequisite(s): MSCD 692 and permission of instructor. NOTE: Course fee required.

MASTER OF SCIENCE: INFORMATION SYSTEMS (MSCI)

MSCI 600. STRATEGIC INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (3). Presents the importance of information technology as a necessary component of a successful business. Focuses on the evolution of information technology from an enabling tool to a competitive business strategy. Illuminates roles of CIO. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSCI 610. ETHICS IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (3). Course illuminates ethical issues regarding information systems (access, data storage, and data utilization). Focuses on developing a set of ethical standards for professionals in
information technology. As IS/IT professionals, we need to seize ideals and principles in a variety of traditional ethical systems
and apply these conceptual structures and guidelines to major problems and dilemmas in an IS/IT workplace. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSCI 615. BUSINESS PROCESS ENGINEERING (3). Focuses on the strategic and organizational issues of process management and the use of Enterprise Resource Planning systems (ERPs). Topics include major strategic approaches used to understand, analyze and implement efficient business processes, workflow modeling techniques, process modeling techniques and procedure models. NOTE: Acceptance to Graduate Programs required. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSCI 625. SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT (3). Focuses on supply chain management from order through delivery, encompassing the interactions of suppliers and customers in a systematic process while utilizing the SAP platform to illustrate concepts and facilitate hands-on learning for students. NOTE: Acceptance to Graduate Programs required. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSCI 630. KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT (3). Presents detailed insights into knowledge management focusing on concepts, theories and technologies that provide the foundation for knowledge management and on information technology as
an important catalyst. Prerequisite(s): MSCI 600, MSCI 610, MSCI 680, MSCI 685 and MSCC 697. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSCI 640. ENTERPRISE TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT (3). Introduction to Enterprise Resource Planning systems. Emphasizes impacts on organizations, development of practical skills associated with Enterprise Resource Planning systems, and the SAP platform. NOTE: Acceptance to Graduate Programs required. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSCI 660. GLOBAL E-BUSINESS (3). Surveys challenges facing business and IT professionals in an increasingly global, technological environment placing emphasis on infrastructure, integration, technology, cultural, organizational, sociopolitical issues, and appreciation of how types of IS influences international business practices. Prerequisite(s): MSCI 600, MSCI 610, MSCI 680, MSCI 685 and MSCC 697. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSCI 680. INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY PROJECT MANAGEMENT (3). Investigates prevalent PM approaches (e.g. Traditional, Agile/Scrum) applicability and how blended best practices support project success. Analyzes project case
failures to determine how to avoid failure and improve business outcomes.  Covers PMO value-add. Prerequisite(s): MSCI 610. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSCI 681. ENTERPRISE PROJECT SYSTEMS (3). Focuses on the total Program Management lifecycle. Introduces skills required to define, configure, plan and track different types of projects.  Microsoft Project will be used to illustrate and execute Enterprise Project Management. Prerequisite(s): MSCC
610. NOTE: Acceptance to Graduate Programs required. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSCI 682. AGILE SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT (3). Explores systems development utilizing Lean, Agile methods to meet goals of timely delivery, meeting budgetary constraints, delivering products frequently, maintaining predictable and reliable outcomes/products. Compares/contrasts traditional
methods for delivering and managing projects with evolutionary approaches. Prerequisite(s): MSCI 600, MSCI 610, MSCI 680
MSCI 685 and MSCC 697. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSCI 685. EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES (3). Covers the impact that advanced/emerging technologies and innovative management have on innovation diffusion within an organization. Critically analyzes case studies of innovation, including emerging processes, products, and organizational structures to discern best practices and develop adoption processes. Prerequisite(s): MSCI 600 and MSCI 610. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSCI 692. ITM PRACTICUM I (3). Includes a real world information technology strategic project using knowledge and skills developed in previous ITM courses. Prerequisite(s): MSCC
697 and permission of instructor. NOTE: Majors only. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSCI 696. ITM PRACTICUM II (3). A continuation of ITM Practicum I.  Includes a real world information technology strategic project using knowledge and skills developed in previous ITM courses. Prerequisite(s): MSCI*692 and permission of instructor. NOTE: Majors only. NOTE: Course fee required.

DATA ENGINEERING (MSDE)

MSDE 620. DATA COLLECTION AND PREPARATION (3). Data Analysis using the Python language and Pandas library along with other popular analysis libraries (e.g. NumPy, MatPlotLib). Students will learn to apply visualization and analytical evaluation to determine important data features, transform the data, address missing and null values, and compare data modelling accuracy based on feature inclusion and transformation.. Prerequisite(s): MSDS 600 and MSDS 610. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSDE 621. DATA WRANGLING (3). Examines various data sources for input into data science type experiments that do
not fit the “row and column” style. Static sources are examined and techniques for preparing the data for importation by
Pandas prior to analysis are considered. Data sources examined include relational and NOSQL databases, web pages, position- delimited files, PDFs, and Excel format. NOTE: Majors only. Course fee required. Prerequisite(s): MSDS 600 and MSDS 610.

MSDE 630. BIG DATA ARCHITECTURE (3). Introduces a variety of methodologies for the design and documentation of a Big Data infrastructure for an enterprise. Students will learn how to create 3rd normal form models, dimensional models (Data Warehouse), NoSQL Database models, Hadoop/HDFS models and an enterprise Data Lake model. Students will learn Master Data Management, Data Policy and Data
Standardization.   Students will evaluate the use of data architecture, data modeling, data governance and data management in the context of building/maintaining a sustainable Big Data infrastructure. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSDE 631. SQL AND NoSQL (3). Introduces Relational Database Technologies that are commonly used within the data infrastructure of most enterprises.  Students will learn SQL for accessing data from various RDBMS, compare and apply various technologies that support data infrastructure projects. In

addition, this course introduces students to Hadoop and NoSQL technologies that are used for Big Data infrastructure projects.  Students will learn SQL-like languages that are used for the technologies that support large data stores. NOTE: Majors only. Course fee required. Prerequisite(s): MSDS 600 and MSDS 610.

MSDE 692. DATA ENGINEERING PRACTICUM I (3). Provides a hands-on technical environment where students apply the knowledge gained from prior Data Engineering courses to build a data infrastructure for an enterprise. Students will integrate creative solutions for complex problems, collaborate as a team member and then demonstrate the ability to work diligently as an individual contributor with respect to aligning technology to organizational objectives. Students will have additional training and lab exercises for Data Engineering. NOTE: Majors only. Course fee required. Prerequisite(s): MSDE 621, MSDE 630,
and MSDE 631.

MSDE 696. DATA ENGINEERING PRACTICUM II (3). Continuation of MSDE 692 using a hands-on technical environment where students apply the knowledge gained from prior Data Engineering courses and build a data pipeline that uses the data infrastructure that was built in DE Practicum I. Students will integrate creative solutions for complex problems, collaborate as team members and then demonstrate the ability to work diligently as individual contributors with respect to aligning technology to organizational objectives. NOTE: Majors only. Course fee required. Prerequisite(s): MSDE 692.

DATA SCIENCE (MSDS)

MSDS 600. INTRODUCTION TO DATA SCIENCE (3). Introduces foundational topics of data science including data manipulation, data analysis using statistics and machine learning, techniques for working with Big Data, communication of analysis using information visualization, and ethical use of data
analyses. Prerequisite(s): Completion of Python self-assessment, MSC575, or Python coding experience. Consult your
admissions counselor, academic success coach, or faculty advisor on the details regarding the Python prerequisite. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSDS 610. DATA ENGINEERING (3). Presents techniques for designing, building, and managing information with relational databases, NoSQL databases, and big data infrastructure. Provides a hands-on experience running the MapReduce algorithm on Hadoop ecosystem. Prerequisite(s): MSDS 600. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSDS 640. ETHICS, PRIVACY, AND SOCIAL JUSTICE IN DATA SCIENCE (3). Examines the ethical and privacy concerns in data science through various case studies and proposed
codes of professional conduct. Concludes with an examination of data science experiments that can be used for social justice concerns. Prerequisite(s): MSDS 600. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSDS 650. DATA ANALYTICS (3). Examines techniques for the discovery and communication of meaningful patterns in data.  Techniques include experimental design, statistical
modeling, machine learning, computer programming, operations research, and data visualization. Introduces classification,
clustering, and recommender systems. Prerequisite(s): MSDS
600. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSDS 655. BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE (3). Architectures, theories, methodologies and technologies that transform structured, semi-structured and unstructured data into meaningful and useful information.  Covers analysis of enterprise data requirements to develop queries, reports and building online analytical processing (OLAP) cubes that use business analytics to answer complex business questions. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSDS 660. STATISTICAL METHODS AND EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN (3). Examines the statistical techniques creating models from data using linear regression and multiple linear regression. Continues with an examination determining the statistical variability between populations using ANOVA.
Concludes with an analysis of information gathering techniques. Prerequisite(s): MSDS 650. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSDS 662. EXPLORATORY DATA ANALYSIS (3). Focuses on analyzing and summarizing the main characteristics of data sets including visual methods. Explores techniques for formulating hypothesis about data for testing and for new data collection and experiments. Prerequisite(s): MSDS 650. NOTE: Course
fee required.

MSDS 664. STATISTICAL INFERENCE AND PREDICTIVE ANALYTICS (3). Examines the process of drawing conclusions about populations from sample data using statistical modeling, machine learning, and data mining. Techniques for determining the validity and the reliability of predictions are also considered. Prerequisite(s): MSDS 650. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSDS 670. DATA VISUALIZATION (3). Examines the creation and study of visual representations of data with the goal of effectively communicating information. Encompasses visual analytics, design theories and methods, visual cognition and perception through the use of various visualization tools. Prerequisite(s): MSDS 650, NOTE: Course fee required.

MSDS 674. GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEMS (3). Introduces GIS software for the collection, analysis, visualization, and interpretation of geographic data. Provides foundational background as to what types of questions can be answered using GIS technologies and spatial analysis. Also provides practical experience with the use of GIS software. Topics include data structures and basic functions, methods for determining patterns in spatial data, and basic cartographic elements. Prerequisite(s): MSDS 610, and MSDS 650. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSDS 680. MACHINE LEARNING (3). Examines the construction and study of software systems that learn from data. Includes supervised and unsupervised learning, and reinforcement learning techniques. Incorporates the use of various machine learning software systems and other statistical software systems for analysis of these techniques. Prerequisite(s): MSDS 650. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSDS 682. TEXT ANALYTICS (3). Investigates linguistic, statistical, and machine learning techniques for modeling the information in textual sources. Includes information retrieval, natural language processing, text classification, and sentiment analysis and the software systems for performing these
analyses. Prerequisite(s): MSDS 650. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSDS 684. REINFORCEMENT LEARNING (3). Investigates reinforcement learning problems, which require making
multiple decisions over time. The theory behind optimizing the decision-making process as well as algorithmic techniques for finding optimal decision sequences is examined. Prerequisite(s): MSDS 680. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSDS 686. DEEP LEARNING (3). Introduces machine learning techniques for deep learning neural networks using Keras with Tensorflow.  Emphasizes the use of deep learning and convolutional neural networks for image segmentation and classification.  Introduces parallel GPU-based computation. Prerequisite(s): MSDS 650. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSDS 688. ARTICIFIAL INTELLIGENCE (3). Introduces the techniques used to create intelligent agents, solve problems by searching, represent knowledge and perform reasoning. Concludes with techniques for learning as well as machine interaction with the world. Prerequisite(s): MSDS 650. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSDS 692. DATA SCIENCE PRACTICUM (3). Provides a hands-on Data Science lab experience that covers all phases of a typical data science project--data discovery, data preparation, model planning, model building, and communicating results. Concludes with a mock presentation to stakeholders--senior management or investors. Prerequisite(s): MSDS 650. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSDS 696. DATA SCIENCE PRACTICUM II (3). Continues a hands-on Data Science lab experience that covers all phases of a typical data science project, data discovery, data preparation, model planning, model building, and communicating results. Concludes with a mock presentation to stakeholders, senior management or investors. Prerequisite(s): MSDS 692. NOTE: Course fee required.

ENTERPRISE SYSTEMS ENGINEERING (MSES)

MSES 602. INTRODUCTION TO DEVOPS ENGINEERING (3). Introduces the methodologies, tools, and insights of the DevOps process and what it can do for an organization. The course covers development, deployment and operations including infrastructure as code, continuous deployment, testing automation, validation, monitoring and security. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSES 612. FUNDAMENTALS OF ENTERPRISE SYSTEMS ENGINEERING (3). Explores systems thinking by comparing and applying systems frameworks, methodologies, design techniques and management tools to problems. The student is provided a systematic approach in identifying stakeholders needs, including human factors, integration, maintainability, and serviceability/reliability; analyzing the problem, developing solution requirements, and designing a system to address
those needs. Prerequisite(s): MSCC 610. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSES 614. SYSTEM ARCHICTURE AND DESIGN (3). Expands on MSES 612 with a focus on the fundamentals of system architectures and the architecting process, including practical
heuristics for developing good architectures. Course looks inside the system boundary to develop a specification for a set of logical and physical elements that comprise the logical and physical architectures, defined to meet the system
requirements reviewed during SRR. The course culminates with a Preliminary Design Review (PDR) in which the system design
is reviewed before detailed design can begin. Prerequisite(s): MSES 612. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSES 618. CONTINUOUS INTEGRATION (3). Explores rapid application development and integration processes designed to build, maintain, secure, test, and validate continuous integration processes. Covers the principles and processes of change management, early validation, integration, test, verification, transition, and live system validation within the Enterprise Systems Engineering discipline. The course enables students to more effectively integrate and prove-in solutions that meet system requirements and customer needs. Prerequisite(s):
MSES 614. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSES 622. SYSTEMS REQUIREMENTS ENGINEERING (3). Theory and applications of requirements elicitation, analysis, modeling, validation, testing, and writing for hardware, software, and enterprise systems. Students will define and prioritize customer expectations, elicit and analyze functional
and quality attribute requirements, and develop artifact models, meta-models, and prototypes. Additional activities to derive
and generate test cases from UML diagrams, deploy validation, verification, and rapid development procedures, & perform hazard analysis, risk assessment, and threat modeling. Prerequisite(s): MSES 612. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSES 642. DEPLOYING AND MANAGING A CLOUD INFRASTRUCTURE (3). Introduction to provisioning, operating, and managing distributed application systems on a Cloud-based platform. Prerequisite(s): MSES 602. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSES 692. ENTERPRISE SYSTEMS ENGINEERING PRACTICUM I (3). Students apply enterprise systems engineering knowledge to one or more projects in support of Regis and/or community organizations. Activities include investigation into research topics and practice with a variety of software and hardware platforms. Prerequisite(s): MSCC 630 and MSCC 697. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSES 696. ENTERPRISE SYSTEMS ENGINEERING PRACTICUM II (3). A continuation of MSES 692. Students apply enterprise systems engineering knowledge to one or more projects in support of Regis and/or community organizations. Activities include investigation into research topics and practice with a variety of software and hardware platforms. Prerequisite(s): MSES 692 and MSCC 630. NOTE: Course fee required.

INFORMATION AND CYBER SECURITY (MSIA)

MSIA 605. ADVANCING TO CYBER SECURITY (3). Instills students with a breadth-first approach that surveys the fundamental aspects of computer systems and establishes a context for subsequent courses in cyber security. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSIA 670. ENTERPRISE INFORMATION ASSURANCE (3). Introduces the basic Information Assurance (IA) model; security of the database, the application and the system.
Examines current security standards, best practices and auditing practices. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSIA 672. MANAGING A SECURE ENTERPRISE (3). Provides the knowledge of designing and managing a secure enterprise. Includes aspects of enterprise security, physical security, disaster-recovery planning, and business continuity planning. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSIA 673. LEGAL BASICS IN CYBER AND INFORMATION SECURITY (3). Legal interpretation of security policy and resulting obligations providing a background to create a stable set of processes, frameworks, and models capable of handling multiplying domestic and international laws and regulations. Prerequisite(s): MSIA 672 or permission of instructor. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSIA 674. PLANNING AND IMPLEMENTING ARCHITECTURE SECURITY (3). Explores security policy development, implementation and standards compliance and testing on corporate systems, application and data. Examines target architectures: telecommunications and wireless enterprise corporate data network. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSIA 675. OFFENSIVE CYBER SECURITY (3). Exposes student to the different hands-on tactics used by offensive cyber
security professionals. Topics include reconnaissance, hijacking, cracking, vulnerability exploitation, and malware deployment. Prerequisite(s): MSIA 605, or permission of instructor. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSIA 678. RISK MANAGEMENT (3). Prepares students to evaluate an organizations exposure to information technology security threats using rigorous policy and standards based analysis of the existing policy directives and the derived threat matrix. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSIA 680. COMPUTER FORENSICS (3). Explores computer forensics encompassing a variety of legal and technical challenges. Provides hands-on and theoretical experience with technology, techniques and legal policy during investigation of computer components. Prerequisite(s): MSIA 675, or permission of instructor. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSIA 682. NETWORK FORENSICS (3). Examines forensic analysis of networks utilizing unique and sophisticated sets of tools, techniques and legal policies. Covers established concepts, methodology and tools to enhance performance of network forensics. Prerequisite(s):  MSIA 675, MSIA 680, or permission of instructor. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSIA 683. ADVANCED FORENSICS (3). Assessment and evaluation of forensic artifacts from systems, networks and hosts with respect to legal techniques and policy utilizing tools and appliances.  Provides exposure to real-life scenarios through competition based learning. Prerequisite(s): MSIA 680 and MSIA 682 or permission of instructor. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSIA 684. IT AUDITING (3). Combines accounting, regulation and IT security practices to educate students to protect
organizational assets through establishment of auditing best practices, current governmental reporting standards, Sarbanes- Oxley requirements and secure management techniques. Prerequisite(s): MBAA 602 or MSAA 602 or permission of instructor. Cross listing: MBAA 614 and MSAA 614. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSIA 685. MALWARE ANALYSIS AND RESPONSE (3). Learn to analyze malicious programs, web pages, and documents. This analysis can be used to identify other indications of infection
and block further damage to the company targeted. Prerequisite(s): MSIA 680 and MSIA 682, or permission of instructor. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSIA 692. INFORMATION ASSURANCE PRACTICUM I (3). Students gain additional information assurance experience through detailed analysis of network datasets with known malware through the framework of a threat intelligence environment. This practicum, while not limited to our Cybersecurity specialty, focuses on the knowledge and skills acquired in the specialty. Prerequisite(s): MSCC630, MSIA672, MSIA678, MSIA680, MSIA682, and minimum of ten degree program courses. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSIA 696. INFORMATION ASSURANCE PRACTICUM II (3). Students gain additional information assurance experience by performing a low level vulnerability assessment of a series of machines and using that information, create a series of policy and procedures which should have prevented this from occurring.  This practicum, while not limited our Policy Management specialty, focuses on the knowledge and skills acquired in this specialty. Prerequisite(s): MSCC630, MSIA672, MSIA673, MSIA678, and minimum of ten degree program courses. NOTE: Course fee required.

SOFTWARE ENGINEERING (MSSE)

MSSE 600. OBJECT-ORIENTED SOFTWARE ENGINEERING (3).  Introduces the Software Engineering Body of Knowledge and the Unified Modeling Language used to communicate the design of object-oriented software systems. Presents an Agile software development process that is enabled with the use of a layered software architecture. Prerequisite(s): MSCC 610. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSSE 610. SOFTWARE REQUIREMENTS AND PROCESSES (3). Examines acquisition, analysis, specification, validation, and management of software requirements. Explores formal software processes, including the definition, implementation, measurement, management, change, and improvement of the software engineering process. Prerequisite(s): MSSE 600. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSSE 635. SOFTWARE ARCHITECTURE AND DESIGN (3). Study of the concepts, representation techniques, development methods, and tools for architecture-centric software engineering. Topics include domain-specific software architectures, architectural styles, architecture description languages, software connectors, and dynamism in architectures. The course covers the foundations and principles of software architecture as well as some of the more recent literature and research issues. Prerequisite(s): MSSE 600, MSSE 670, and MSSE
672. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSSE 640. SOFTWARE QUALITY AND TEST (3). Introduces the software quality assurance process and the means to monitor, control, and evaluate software quality. Presents software testing techniques, tools, and processes. Covers both plan-driven and Agile techniques for software quality and test. Prerequisite(s): MSSE 600. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSSE 642. SOFTWARE ASSURANCE (3). Provides a detailed explanation of software assurances practices, methods, and tools required throughout the software development life-cycle.
Applies life-cycle knowledge in exploring common programming errors and evaluates common software testing tools. Prerequisite(s): MSSE 600 and MSSE 670. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSSE 655. MOBILE SOFTWARE ENGINEERING IN ANDROID (3). Introduces Android software development, using the Java programming language, Android Developer Tools (ADT) and the Android Studio for Android mobile devices. Includes software development of a project in preparation for deployment to Android devices. Prerequisite(s): MSSE 670. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSSE 661. WEB SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT (3). Introduces web page development using HTML/HTML5, CSS/CSS3, and JavaScript. Student learn how to design and develop a website, structure and style its content, and navigate/update the document object model (DOM). NOTE: Course fee required.

MSSE 663. WEB FRAMEWORKS (3). Covers the most popular JavaScript frameworks, including jQuery, AngularJS, and Google Maps. Students learn how to use these frameworks to do DOM manipulation, AJAX, single page applications, and the display/manipulation of maps. Prerequisite(s): MSSE 661. NOTE: Course fee required

MSSE 667. WEB MOBILE FRAMEWORKS (3). Covers popular mobile frameworks that enable the creation of mobile web page apps using HTML, CSS and JavaScript. Students learn how to build rich, interactive web applications that run on virtually all devices (e.g. Android, IOS, Windows). Prerequisite(s): MSSE
661. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSSE 670. OBJECT ORIENTED SOFTWARE CONSTRUCTION (3). Introduces use-case driven iterative software development techniques using a layered software architecture using the Java programming language. Topics include unit testing, the use of various software patterns, and refactoring code. Requires students to document and develop a project using layered software architecture. Prerequisite(s): MSSE 600 and undergraduate-level programming skills. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSSE 672. COMPONENT-BASED SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT (3). Introduces advanced features of the Java software development environment along with auxiliary software development tools. Topics include Eclipse, the Ant build tool, the use of Java exceptions and logging, collections and generics, JDBC and object-relational mapping with Hibernate, XML processing, client-server programming, and multithreaded applications. Prerequisite(s): MSSE 670. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSSE 674. SERVICE-BASED SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT (3). Continues the advanced use of the Java 2 Platform. Topics
include web applications and Java 2 Enterprise Edition. Emphasizes the use of Java Servlets and Java Server Pages (JSPs) to develop web application using a layered software architecture. Other topics include Custom Tag libraries,
Apache Struts, request and response filters, and security. Prerequisite(s): MSSE 672. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSSE 692. SOFTWARE ENGINEERING PRACTICUM I (3). Begins development of a distributed software system using the principles of Service Oriented Architectures. Encourages use of a cloud provider like Amazon Web Services, Windows Azure, or the Google App Engine. Prerequisite(s): MSCC 630. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSSE 695. SOFTWARE ENGINEERING RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT (3). Gain experience and knowledge about established and emerging topics in the field of Software Engineering R&D, including a range of research approaches utilized to study and address significant research problems in the field of software engineering. Propose, create and implement a database-driven software application which is congruent with emerging and/or established topics in the field of Software R&D. Conduct, prepare and publish (i.e. conference presentation) a case study on a software system and/or application. NOTE: Course fee required.

MSSE 696. SOFTWARE ENGINEERING PRACTICUM II (3). Completes development of the software system begun in MSSE
692.  Concludes with a presentation and paper to mock stakeholders, such as senior management or investors. Prerequisite(s): MSSE 692 and permission of instructor. NOTE: Course fee required.

SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND DATABASE TECHNOLOGIES (MCT)
NOTE: Students must be accepted into the MSSED (MCT)
program prior to enrolling in MCT courses.

MCT 609. FUNDAMENTALS OF PROGRAMMING (3). Foundational programming module suitable for students with no previous experience of programming and those with moderate previous knowledge. Provides a foundation in key concepts of functional programming, as well as an appreciation of object-oriented programming.

MCT 610. SOFTWARE ENGINEERING (3). Introduces comprehensive concepts of software engineering including structured software analysis, design and management techniques, systems development lifecycle (SDLC), structured systems analysis and design techniques, Computer Aided Software Engineering (CASE) tools, and software project management. Prerequisite(s): MCT 619.

MCT 611. COMPUTER ARCHITECTURE AND OPERATING SYSTEMS (3). Explores the concepts of computer architecture and operating systems including system components, access methods, numbering systems, and digital logic. Examines operating system design including architectures, input/output, memory, process management, file management and security.

MCT 618. OBJECT-ORIENTED DESIGN (3). Introduces object-oriented analysis and design techniques and industry standard notation UML (Unified Modeling Language). Students develop analysis and design models using CASE tools tracking systems from inception through analysis, solution design, and technical implementation. Prerequisite(s): MCT 610.

MCT 619. OBJECT-ORIENTED PROGRAMMING (3). Explores object modeling, class definition, inheritance, composition, encapsulation, polymorphism, abstract classes, and interfaces. Focuses on the Java programming language emphasizing applets, graphics, data storage, multi-threaded programming, and exception handling.

MCT 620. DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS (3). Investigates design and implementation of internet based distributed applications including APIs, frameworks, standard internet protocol stack, client/server architectures, network programming, Java, I/O, multithreaded programming, Sockets, thin client/web server support, Servlets, JSP, EJBs and web services. Prerequisite(s): MCT 619.

MCT 621. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (3). Introduces the concepts and techniques of Artificial Intelligence (AI) including use of the Prolog language, knowledge representation, machine learning, expert systems, uncertainty, neural networks, and real world application of AI techniques. Prerequisite(s): MCT 609.

MCT 622. REAL-TIME SYSTEMS (3). Explores embedded real- time systems including foundations, designing and developing software, implementation, and performance issues. Focuses on dependable software, design concepts, real-time operating systems (RTOSs), language selection, benefits, testing, static/dynamic analysis methods, tools, debugging, and documentation. Prerequisite(s): MCT 610 and MCT 611.

MCT 623. GRAPHICS PROGRAMMING (3). Introduces theoretical concepts of modern graphics programming including compromises and trade-offs. Hands-on experience will be
gained in two graphics programming environments: Virtual Reality Modeling Language (VRML) and Open Graphics Library (OpenGL). .

MCT 624. THESIS FOUNDAMENTALS (3). Assists students in developing a thesis topic working under an approved research director.

MCT 626. THESIS (3). Assists students to refine their thesis statement, to explore various research methods, to create a project plan, and to begin their secondary research.

MCT 628. SOFTWARE QUALITY AND TEST (3). Reviews the Software Quality Assurance (SQA) and Verification and Validation (V&V) processes. Addresses verification of the behavior of a program on a set of test cases selected from the execution domain. Prerequisite(s): MCT 610.

MCT 692. DATABASE PRACTICUM I (3). Simulates a real- world information technology organization where students enhance skills learned in previous database courses. Provides a research platform that can be used towards the collection of data to fulfill the thesis requirement. Prerequisite(s): MSCD
640. Cross listing: MSCD 692.

MCT 696. DATABASE PRACTICUM II (3). Continuation of Database Practicum I. Simulates a real-world information technology organization where students enhance skills learned in previous database courses. Provides a research platform that can be used towards the collection of data to fulfill the thesis
requirement. Prerequisite(s): MCT 692. Cross listing: MSCD
696.

MASTER OF NONPROFIT MANAGEMENT (MNM)

MNM 6010. HISTORY, THEORY AND THE FUTURE OF THE NONPROFIT SECTOR (3). Examines origins and societal roles of nonprofit organizations in a global environment including social, political, economic, cultural and ideological issues. Addresses types and characteristics of nonprofit organizations, and trends and projections for the future of the third sector.

MNM 6030. CONFLICT RESOLUTION FOR LEADERS (3). Examines the principles and practices of effective communication, with an emphasis on understanding oral communication styles. Explores techniques, tools, tactics and strategies on managing diverse communication styles in nonprofit organizations. Examines theory and practice of resolving conflict, including understanding varying conflict management styles at the intrapersonal, interpersonal and inter- group arenas. Prerequisite(s): MNM 6010.

MNM 6070. SOCIAL JUSTICE AND THE CIVIL SOCIETY (3). Examines the wide range of meanings of social justice using perspectives of philosophy and religion, economics, and politics. We explore the role of the nonprofit sector in growing an equitable and inclusive Common Good by addressing complex social issues including diversity, human rights, and poverty

MNM 6100. LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES FOR NONPROFITS (3). Introduces critical legal issues affecting nonprofit organizations. Explores nonprofit formation, statutory requirements, liability, contract and employment issues, applicable portions of the Federal Tax Code, laws that affect lobbying and public advocacy and laws regarding fund raising. Prerequisite(s): MNM 6010.

MNM 6240. PHILANTHROPY AND GRANT DEVELOPMENT (3). Provides an in-depth examination of all aspects of grant writing including foundation, federal and corporate proposals. Examines the essentials of a successful grant writing strategy for nonprofit organizations. Prerequisite(s): MNM 6010.

MNM 6440. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT OF NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (3). Focuses on using financial information management for budgeting, finance and investment decision- making in nonprofit organizations. Topics include acquisition, reporting, taxation, risk management and regulatory issues. Emphasizes unique problems of nonprofits in capital formation, generating earned income, managing endowments, gifts and tax planning. Prerequisite(s): MNM 6010.

MNM 6470. PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT AND ACCOUNTABILITY (3). Designs, evaluates and analyzes programs through the utilization of research methods and best practices to determine the effectiveness of programs while at the same time providing accountability to the organization's mission. Utilizes evidence-based and other data to evaluate and develop techniques and strategies that can produce effective program measurement. Prerequisite(s): MNM 6010.

MNM 6480. GOVERNANCE AND ORGANIZATIONAL LEADERSHIP (3). Examines accountabilities of nonprofit
governance. Analyzes governing board and executive director roles in leading change, decision processes, and modeling ethical behaviors. Explores strategies which position organization for Third Sector leadership. Prerequisite(s): MNM 6010.

MNM 6510. RESEARCH FOR DECICION-MAKING (3). Examines qualitative and quantitative research design and methods of inquiry and analysis as applied to nonprofit organizations, programs, and services and to civil society globally. Recommended prerequisite(s): Course is better taken in preparation for the capstone or after completing twenty- seven graduate credit hours.

MNM 6550. LEADING FROM WITHIN (3). Explores the role of mindfulness in leadership. Investigates various practices that connect your beliefs and behaviors as it relates to your leadership. Prerequisite(s): MNM 6010.

MNM 6700. FINANCIAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT (3). Examines the principles, strategies and techniques of resource development. Topics include an overview of resource development from foundations, corporations, government and individuals, proposal writing and presentation, direct mail, conducting special events, and individual major gift programs. Prerequisite(s): MNM 6010.

MNM 6770 SERVICE ORIENTED FIELD EXPERIENCE (3). Examines the historical factors, political climate, and unique contributions of the nonprofit sector in a variety of different national and international settings through hands on experience. Students will travel in other countries and/or regions. Prerequisite(s): Course cannot be taken until 30 graduate credit hours have been completed.

MNM 6890E-W. GRADUATE SEMINAR (1-3). Concentrates on contemporary literature and trending topics within the field of nonprofit management. Content varies by term, based on topic’s relevance to current nonprofit trends and happenings. Prerequisite(s): MNM 6010

MNM 6900E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN NONPROFIT MANAGEMENT (1-4). Provides an opportunity for faculty directed independent research in any field or topic in nonprofit management not covered in scheduled course offerings. Prerequisite(s): Approval of degree chair. NOTE: Offered as special study course only.

MNM 6970. PROFESSIONAL PROJECT (3). Forms the capstone experience representing the creation, development, improvement or evaluation of a product or program m or entails the writing of a thesis. Provides immediate applicability in a specific nonprofit agency or sector of the nonprofit world.
Prerequisite(s): Course cannot be taken until 30 graduate credit hours have been
completed.

PROJECT MANAGEMENT

PM 6510. DELIVERING ORGANIZATION EXCELLENCE (3). Prepares learners to lead change by using various contemporary tools and techniques to identify and explore
process improvement opportunities through the use of analysis, critical thinking, and project management methodologies, to deliver organizational excellence.

PM 6520. AGILE PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT (3). Focuses on a flexible, iterative, and incremental approach to product delivery following the values and principles expressed in the Manifesto for Agile Software Development. The course covers understanding Agile project management approaches and deciding how agile a project should be based on business objectives and strategy. Included in the course are the most common agile practices such as Scrum, Kanban, and hybrid approaches. Going beyond processes, the course reiterates the people side of Agile Development, including leadership, team development, and customer collaboration. Covers common Agile practices such as user stories, backlogs, sprints, demonstrations, and retrospectives. Although Agile principles emerged in the software development world, this course will show Agile has expanded to multi-product development, in general, and can be applied to everyday life.

PM 6560. STRATEGIC AND BUSINESS MANAGEMENT FOR PROJECT MANAGERS (3). Explores and examines the concepts related to project strategic alignment, project benefit management/realization, business models and structures, project management client relationship and satisfaction, industry knowledge and standards, and operational functions.

PM 6570. LEADING PROJECTS IN CONTEMPORARY ORGANIZATIONS (3). Explores project management from a strategic management perspective, focusing on development of leadership skills in the management of project teams. Examines the roles of the manager and management team; project selection, organization, and planning process; communications and negotiations; and the tactical and strategic implications in a project environment. Reviews management of business/computer information technology projects including development approaches, technical aspects of project estimation, and manual and automated project management tools.

PM 6580. MANAGEMENT OF PROJECT PERFORMANCE (3). Examines aspects of project risk, cost and schedule management. Identifies the management processes required to ensure the project is completed within budget and on schedule. Provides knowledge required to cost a project, develop a project plan, and allocate the necessary resources to manage a project; analyze risks and opportunities within projects, identify methods for reducing and mitigating risks, manage project performance, including quality, human resources, communications and procurement. Prerequisite(s): PM 6570.

PM 6590. PROJECT MONITORING AND DELIVERY (3). Examines various interrelated functions impacting project deliveries and how functions contribute to the strategic success of the enterprise. Provides the advanced knowledge required to develop, analyze and change a project plan, determine risk and allocate the necessary resources to effectively manage and complete a project in a client environment. Prerequisite(s): PM
6570, and PM 6580.


HCE 430. APPLIED ETHICS IN HEALTH CARE (3). Examines ethical dilemmas in health care and the decision making processes involved in clinical, professional and organizational ethics. Explores philosophical and faith-based foundations including Catholic moral tradition, socio-cultural influences, professional codes, organizational and personal ethical norms. Case studies and topics are analyzed to develop competence in moral reflection and
ethical decision making with consideration of personal, professional and societal values.

HCE 430R. APPLIED ETHICS IN HEALTH CARE (3). HCE 430. APPLIED ETHICS IN HEALTH CARE (3). Examines ethical dilemmas in health care and the decision making processes involved in clinical, professional and organizational ethics. Explores philosophical and faith-based foundations including Catholic moral tradition, socio-cultural influences, professional codes, organizational and personal ethical norms. Case studies and topics are analyzed to develop competence in moral reflection and
ethical decision making with consideration of personal, professional and societal values. NOTE: RN-BSN students only.

HCE 435. ETHICS IN HEALTH CARE SERVICES (3). Examines the practical application of ethical principles, theories and methods to ethical dilemmas in health care with a particular
emphasis on professional and organizational ethics. Formal ethical analysis of case studies and topics is used to explore clinical, organizational and health policy issues, enhance ethical reflection and dialogue, support decision-making, and encourage moral leadership.

HCE 445. ETHICS AND HEALTH (3). Examines ethical issues in the promotion of human health. Topics include bioethical issues across the lifespan as well as contemporary challenges related to community health, health policy, health research, emerging technologies and global health.

HEALTH CARE ADMINISTRATION (HCA)

HCA 402A. THE EVOLVING HEALTH CARE SYSTEM I (3). Examines the structure and function of the US health care system, with an emphasis on the current trends, forces and innovations that shape health and health care delivery now and into the
future.

HCA 402B. THE EVOLVING HEALTH CARE SYSTEM II (3). Examines the structure and function of the US health care system, with an emphasis on the current trends, forces and innovations that shape health and health care delivery now and into the
future.

HCA 408. THE POLITICS OF HEALTH (3). The philosopher George Santayana stated that “those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it.” Students will take a journey from the origins of our modern health care delivery system to
contemporary policy challenges. Prerequisite(s): Permission of instructor. Cross listing: HSA 608.

HCA 420. MARKETING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS IN HEALTH CARE SETTINGS (3). Explores the unique nature and role of marketing in the health care industry. Introduces marketing principles and techniques as applied in health care settings including environmental scanning, market research and marketing strategy. Discusses media, public relations and advertising strategies. The graduate component extends foundational knowledge through additional readings, case analysis and/or applied project work.

HCA 423. FOUNDATIONS OF HEALTH LAW (3). Examines legal and ethical issues involved in the assessment, management, and delivery of health care services, with emphasis on negligence, contract, consents, confidentiality/privacy, risk management, corporate compliance, peer review, and medical/legal issues related to health records.

HCA 425. ASSESSMENT OF QUALITY CARE AND PATIENT SAFETY (3). Reviews the history and theory of quality management in health care settings with emphasis on patient safety, patient satisfaction, patient engagement, the patient/client experience, and regulatory requirements in diverse settings. Explores performance improvement principles, methodologies and tools.

HCA 428. HEALTH CARE ECONOMICS (3). Provides an understanding of the elements necessary to apply basic microeconomic principles to the health care field. Emphasizes economic tools of particular relevance to health care, and to what degree the concepts are appropriate to deal with problems in this field. Demonstrates that economic analysis can provide pertinent and systematic insights into the workings of the health care
system and the evaluation of health care policy. The graduate component extends foundational knowledge through additional readings, case analysis and/or applied project work.

HCA 430. MEDICAL PRACTICE MANAGEMENT (3). Explores issues in practice management in the ambulatory setting including settings staffed by advanced practice medical personnel. Topics include the organizational structure and management of a practice, coding, billing, and reimbursement procedures, marketing, contracting, budgeting and staffing as related to practice management. The graduate component extends foundational knowledge through additional readings, case analysis and/or applied project work.

HCA 432A. LEADING EFFECTIVE ORGANIZATIONS I (3). Explores concepts and theories in leadership and management as they are applied in healthcare settings. Examines leadership versus management skills, team development, systems theory, strategic planning, organizational culture and the role of leadership in the organization.

HCA 432B. LEADING EFFECTIVE ORGANIZATIONS II (3). Explores concepts and theories in leadership and management as they are applied in healthcare settings. Examines leadership versus management skills, team development, systems theory, strategic planning, organizational culture and the role of leadership in the organization.

HCA 436. EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES FOR HEALTH (3). Provides skills, knowledge and competencies important for assessing the utility of emerging technologies from the perspective of wellness, self-care, health maintenance, workforce
management, and ethics.

HCA 440. HEALTH COACHING (3). Explores practical information on providing health coaching services for individuals or groups wanting to improve their health. Incorporates behavioral change theories, adult learning theories, motivational interviewing and program evaluation.

HCA 452. HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN HEALTH CARE SETTINGS (3). Provides an understanding of the principles of human resource management in the health care environment. Emphasizes management techniques such as interviewing, training, career development, job analysis and design, performance evaluation, compensation and benefits, and employment law. Addresses trends in human resource management in health care. The graduate component extends foundational knowledge
through additional readings, case analysis and/or applied project work.

HCA 458.  PROJECT MANAGEMENT IN THE HEALTH CARE SECTOR (3). Introduces principles of project management and the project management body of knowledge including project management software, task assignments, workflow analysis, and project planning as applied in the health care industry. Explores process reengineering with a health care focus. Prerequisite(s): Junior standing.

HCA 466. MANAGING HEALTH SERVICES REIMBURSEMENT (3). Examines health care reimbursement models, revenue cycle management, payor contracts, and issues related to billing compliance. Managed care an emerging payment methodologies are explored in relation to revenue cycle management.

HCA 475. COMMUNICATION IN HEALTH CARE SETTINGS (3). Enhances communication skills needed in business and professional contexts. Focuses on developing a working knowledge of theory and skills for written communication, interpersonal communication, meetings and presentations.
Effective communication skills for dealing with physicians, patients, families, as well as other internal and external parties will receive special attention. Students will gain a working knowledge of
critical thinking and problem resolution skills.

HCA 480. APPLIED CAPSTONE IN HEALTH CARE ADMINISTRATION (3). A comprehensive course integrating prior coursework, knowledge and skills into a live Capstone
project for an organization. Career development and management are emphasized along with social justice, the patient/client experience, and interprofessional practice. Prerequisite(s): All prior Health Care Administration coursework or permission of instructor.

HCA 485.ADMINISTRATIVE INTERNSHIP (3-6). Provides the student an opportunity to observe and participate in management activities in a health care setting. Emphasizes ability to complete assigned projects, gain an overview of the facility, and participate
in a wide variety of functions including budgeting, human resource management, project management and quality improvement activities. Prerequisite(s): Majors only. NOTE: Course is a minimum of 3 credit hours, but can be increase up to 6 credit hours with advisor approval.
HCA 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN HEALTH CARE ADMINISTRATION (1-3). Offers an opportunity for a focused course of study within a specific practice area of health care administration under the direction of an assigned instructor. Employs a variety of learning activities, as specified in the learning contract, to extend core knowledge and skills in a specific practice area. Enhances research and written presentation skills through development of a comprehensive topic portfolio. Prerequisite(s): All lower level Health Care Administration courses. Majors and minors only. Approval of department chair required.

HEALTH AND EXERCISE SCIENCE (HES)

HES 210. INTRODUCTION TO HEALTH & EXERCISE SCIENCE (3). Examines models of health and explores social, economic, cultural, political, and environmental factors that impact health. Introduces principles of exercise across the lifespan from a biomechanical, motor behavior, physiological, nutritional and psychological perspective.
HES 311. RESEARCH DESIGN & STATISTICS (3). Introduces research theory, concepts, inferential and descriptive statistical analysis, and study design. Analyzes relevant literature and applies qualitative and quantitative design, methodology, and interpretation.
HES 350. NORMAL AND THERAPEUTIC NUTRITION (3). Students study the science of nutrition. The course presents the nutritional requirements of humans as the basis of planning an adequate diet with consideration given to variation in food choices due to social, economic, cultural and psychological factors. The course emphasizes the integration of nutritional needs in the care of self and others throughout the life cycle in health and disease. Cross listing(s): NR 350.

HES 374. APPLIED HUMAN ANATOMY (3). Examines the relationships of the musculoskeletal, nervous, integumentary, cardiac, pulmonary, gastrointestinal, renal and reproductive systems of the human body. Integrates cellular and structural factors with clinical application at regional and systemic levels. Co- requisites: HES 375. Prerequisite(s): BL 260 and BL 261.

HES 375. APPLIED HUMAN ANATOMY LAB (1). Demonstrates specific regional and systemic relationships of the human body systems as they relate to a clinical model. Incorporates the use of human cadaveric preparations and models. Co-requisites: HES
374.

HES. 376. APPLIED HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY (3). Examines metabolic, neuromusculoskeletal, cardiac, respiratory, renal, digestive, endocrine, and reproductive systems, including membrane function, electrical activity of cells, neurophysiology, muscle physiology, blood and immune responses, and cellular endocrinology.  Includes applicable cellular chemical concepts. Co- requisites: HES 377. Prerequisite(s): BL 260 and BL 261.

HES 377 APPLIED HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY LAB (1). Integrates current physiological tests of the human body systems designed to interpret normal and abnormal physiological values in the clinical model. Co-requisites: HES 376.

HES 418. HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY (3). Examines the influence of psychological and social variables on health and activity participation. Focuses on stress management, motivation, adherence, access, barriers, and support systems across the lifespan. Prerequisite(s): PSY 250. NOTE: Permission of instructor required for all non-majors.

HES 420. FUNCTIONAL ANATOMY (3). Examines anatomical concepts of the musculoskeletal and nervous systems that form the basis of analysis of human movement. Analyzes joint movement, complex muscular activity, and integration of the nervous system.  Co-requisites: HES 421. Prerequisite(s): HES
374 and HES 375. NOTE: Permission of instructor required for all non-majors.

HES 421. FUNCTIONAL ANATOMY LAB (1). Applies functional anatomy concepts to human movement. Examines anatomical relationships through cadaver prosection, models, and other modalities. Co-requisites: HES 420. Prerequisite(s): HES 374 and HES 375. NOTE: Permission of instructor required for all non- majors.

HES 430. PHYSIOLOGY OF EXERCISE (3). Explores concepts of nutrition and energy production/expenditure during exercise. Examines adaptations of the pulmonary, cardiovascular, skeletal muscle, nervous, urinary, gastrointestinal, and endocrine systems to the stresses of exercise across the lifespan. Co-requisites: HES
431.  Prerequisite(s): HES 374, HES 375, HES 376 and HES 377. NOTE: Permission of instructor required for all non-majors.

HES 431. PHYSIOLOGY OF EXERCISE LAB (1). Applies exercise physiology principles and methods to analysis of human movement.  Examines theoretical concepts during performances assessment of various physiological systems. Co-requisites: HES
430. Prerequisite(s): HES 374, HES 375, HES 376 and HES 377. NOTE: Permission of instructor required for all non-majors.

HES 434. EXERCISE PRESCRIPTION (3). Explores evidence based concepts for the design of exercise programs with special consideration for the normal aging process. Places emphasis on current professional guidelines for exercise prescription. Co- requisites: HES 435. Prerequisite(s): HES 376, HES 377, HES 420, HES 421, HES 430, and HES 431. NOTE: Permission of instructor required for all non-majors.

HES 435. EXERCISE PRESCRIPTION LAB (1). Applies practical and theoretical concepts of exercise prescription across the lifespan with practice exercise prescription and progression of exercise programs for specific cases using current best evidence. Co-requisites: HES 434. Prerequisite(s): HES 376, HES 377, HES
420, HES 421, HES 430, and HES 431. NOTE: Permission of instructor required for all non-majors.

HES 438, NUTRITION ACROSS THE LIFESPAN (3). Investigates sources and functions of nutrients in all stages of the life cycle. Emphasizes topics of dietary guidelines and nutritional assessment when considering eating disorders, weight loss, sports nutrition, food safety, the diet-disease relationship, and analysis of special nutritional requirements and needs during the life cycle. Includes service learning.. Prerequisite(s): HES 376, HES 377, HES 430, HES
431, and NR 350. NOTE: Permission of instructor required for all non-majors.

HES 439. POPULATION-BASED EXERCISE PROGRAMS (3). Explores exercise program development and implementation to address goals of improved health, fitness and weight management in community, corporate and other fitness settings. Examines strategies for exercise promotion, education, and supervision.
Prerequisite(s): HES 434 and HES 435 NOTE: Permission of instructor required for all non-majors.

HES 440. CONCEPTS OF MOTOR BEHAVIOR (3). Examines principles of human motor control, learning, and development. Explores learner and environmental factors influencing motor performance and long-term retention of motor skills. Includes application of theoretical principles and research findings to practical settings. Co-requisites: HES 441. Prerequisite(s): PSY
250, HES 374, and HES 375. NOTE: Permission of instructor required for all non-majors.

HES 441. CONCEPTS OF MOTOR BEHAVIOR LAB (1). Introduces motor behavior experimental methods for quantitative and qualitative analysis of human movement, learning and control during static and dynamic activities.  Integrates theoretical concepts with practical applications. Co-requisites: HES 440. Prerequisite(s): PSY 250, HES 374, and HES 375. NOTE: Permission of instructor required for all non-majors.

HES 450. BIOMECHANICS OF EXERCISE (3). Evaluates internal and external forces acting on the human body. Performs quantitative and qualitative evaluations with the associated kinematic and kinetic variables to describe body movements. Co- requisites: HES 451. Prerequisite(s): HES 311, HES 374, PH 202A, and PH 205A. NOTE: Permission of instructor required for all
non-majors.

HES 451, BIOMECHANICS OF EXERCISE LAB (1). Applies biomechanical measurement methods using quantitative and qualitative analysis of kinematics and kinetics of human movement during static and dynamic activities.  Includes the development and completion of a research project incorporating biomechanical principles. Co-requisites: HES 450. Prerequisite(s): HES 311, HES
374, PH 202A, and PH 205A. NOTE: Permission of instructor required for all non-majors.

HES 460, COMMUNITY HEALTH ASSESSMENT (3). Examines strategies to assess community health and considers community- identified assets and needs. Illustrates factors that impact the community’s health to facilitate a comprehensive understanding of health equity within the defined community. Includes service learning. Prerequisite(s): HES 311, HES 430 and HES 431 NOTE: Permission of instructor required for all non-majors.

HES 465. MANAGEMENT IN HEALTH SETTINGS (3). Applies and evaluates business management principles within a moral and ethical framework. Explores marketing, operations management, human resources, risk management and finance related to health and fitness environments. Prerequisite(s): HCE 445 NOTE: Permission of instructor required for all non-majors.

HES 470. PERSPECTIVES ON GLOBAL HEALTH (3). Explores social inequalities in health, healthcare delivery, and access to health care organizations from local, national and international perspectives. Examines the inter relationship of health and health policy. NOTE: Permission of instructor required for all non- majors.

HES 472. SOCIETY & CULTURE IN HEALTH (3). Explores the relationship of society and culture to health. Describes historical and current influences on health and establishes context to identify the meaning of health and disease in diverse communities. Prerequisite(s): HES 418, NOTE: Permission of instructor required for all non-majors.


HES 490E-W INDEPENDENT STUDY IN HEALTH AND EXERCISE SCIENCE (1-3). Offers an opportunity for independent advanced study in one of the specific Health and Exercise Science disciplines.  NOTE: Approval of Program Director required. Majors only.

HES 498E-W, INTERNSHIP IN HEALTH AND EXERCISE SCIENCE (1-3). Involves placement in a clinical or research facility to experience the application of concepts of Health and Exercise Science. Prerequisite(s): Junior or Senior standing. Adult CPR and AED certification or BLS certification through American Heart Association or American Red Cross. Approval of HES Internship Coordinator required. NOTE: Majors only.

NURSING (NR)

All “NR” courses are for nursing majors only.
Nursing courses designated with an “H” are for the Traditional program honors students only.

NR 350. NORMAL AND THERAPEUTIC NUTRITION (3). Students study the science of nutrition. The course presents the nutritional requirements of humans as the basis of planning an adequate diet with consideration given to variation in food choices due to social, economic, cultural and psychological factors. The course emphasizes the integration of nutritional needs in the care of self and others throughout the life cycle in health and disease. Cross listing(s): HES 350.

NR 400. CONCEPTS FOR THE PROFESSIONAL NURSING ROLE (1). Explores professional nursing roles and values as the foundation to professional nursing practice. Nursing theory is introduced and students are shown how theories guide professional nursing practice. Students are introduced to the components of evidence-based practice and given strategies for sound literature searches. Students will explore issues of culturally unique care circumstances, and develop methods to
provide culturally congruent care for all patients. Course includes a service learning component that focuses the student on the older adult, identifying potential social injustices faced by this population. This geriatric focus also includes an exploration into potential cognitive changes that occur with aging, and provides students with therapeutic measures to apply when those changes present themselves. Prerequisite(s): NR 416.

NR 401. NURSING HONORS SEMINAR I (1). The first course in the Honors curriculum. The focus of this course is the
exploration of various nursing issues to assist the student in identifying potential topics of individual interest. Students will explore topics from a variety of academic perspectives. Potential faculty and community mentors will be introduced. The use of scientific inquiry and basic exploration of nursing research will be emphasized as tools that will be used throughout the Honor’s Curriculum. The concept of reflective practice will be introduced. Prerequisite(s): Acceptance into the honors program.

NR 402. NURSING HONORS SEMINAR II (1). The second course in the Honors curriculum. The focus of this course is the identification of nursing issues of individual interest. The development of a research or clinical project will be explored. Students will develop topics from a variety of academic perspectives including: reflective and evidence-based practice,
argumentation and critical thinking. Potential faculty and community mentors will be identified. Prerequisite(s): NR 401.

NR 403. NURSING HONORS SEMINAR III (1). This is the third
in a series of four Honors Seminars. Seminar is focused on nursing leadership. Students use a variety of perspectives, methods of inquiry, and conceptual frameworks in planning, implementing, and evaluating a leadership honors project. The concept of collegiality and reflective practice continues to be an important component
of personal and professional development. Potential faculty and community mentors for the leadership project are identified. Prerequisite(s): NR 402. Corequisite(s): NR 455H.

NR 404. NURSING HONORS SEMINAR IV (1). This is the final in the series of Nursing Honors Seminars. Seminar focuses on systems-level interventions to improve health outcomes. Students will continue to explore a variety of perspectives, methods of inquiry, and conceptual frameworks as the foundation for the community health-focused Honors project(s) to be completed
this semester in collaboration with faculty and community mentors. The concept of reflective practice will continue to be an important component of personal and professional development. Students present an oral and written reflective synthesis of their Honors experience to a group of professional peers and colleagues (including faculty). Prerequisite(s): NR 403. Corequisite(s): NR 472H.

NR 406A. PHARMACOLOGY 1 (2). Provides an introduction to foundational principles of pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics. In addition, pharmacologic therapy for both health promotion and disease management across the lifespan will be discussed. Major drug classes are paired with body systems, with an emphasis on the mechanism of action, indications, contraindications, adverse effects and patient-centered nursing considerations to include education and safety measures based on environmental socio-cultural, spiritual, and economic issues.

NR 406B. PHARMACOLOGY II (1). Continuation of the principles of pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics for selected drug classes. In addition, drug therapy actions and interactions related to therapeutic and undesirable effects are discussed in relation to health promotion and disease management across the lifespan. Major drug classes are paired with body systems while considering the appropriate patient- centered nursing considerations to include education and safety measures based on environmental socio-cultural, spiritual, and economic issues.  Corequisite(s): NR 406A.

NR 412. PATHOPHYSIOLOGY (3). Designed to promote the understanding of altered physiological processes. General concepts of disease including etiology, pathogenesis, and clinical significance are explored from the genetic, cellular, organ, and systems level. An early introduction to the principles of clinical reasoning explores major concepts in a systems-oriented approach.

NR 413. PHARMACOLOGY (3). Provides a foundation of the principles of pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics. Drug therapy actions and interactions related to therapeutic and undesirable effects are discussed in relation to health promotion and disease management across the lifespan. Major drug classes are paired with body systems with an emphasis on the mechanisms of action, indications, contraindications and adverse effects. Patient-centered nursing consideration will be discussed to include education and safety measures based on environmental socio-cultural, spiritual, and economic issues.

NR 414. HEALTH ASSESSMENT ACROSS THE LIFESPAN (3). This classroom and laboratory course introduces a holistic approach to the assessment of individuals across the lifespan. Includes evaluation of physiological, developmental, psychosocial, spiritual, age related, socio-economic, and socio-cultural components. Students learn to use beginning history taking and physical assessment skills to collect and document data systematically. Provides students the opportunity to practice assessments and related nursing skills while respecting patient and family preferences to provide safe person-centered and compassionate care. Prerequisite(s): NR 416.

NR 416. FOUNDATIONS FOR PROFESSIONAL NURSING PRACTICE (4). Classroom and lab course that socializes students from the cornerstone of liberal arts education to professional nursing education at Regis University. Introduces students to the nursing process and clinical judgement model which provides foundational tools to help students develop sound clinical reasoning skills enabling them to plan safe, high quality patient
care. Introduces students to a wide variety of patient care skills to
be employed across the lifespan, and provides them with simulations in preparation for safe clinical practice. Introduces strategies to facilitate therapeutic relationships with patients through the development of sounds communication techniques. Challenges students to place themselves in the role of the baccalaureate prepared nurse and develop mindfulness of the legal parameters of professional nursing practice set by the American Nurses Association.

NR 420/NR 420H. EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE IN NURSING AND HEALTH CARE INFORMATICS (3). Presents two essential elements for best practice in nursing. Evidence-based practice integrates current scientific evidence with clinical expertise and patient/family preferences for delivery of optimal health care. Develops related knowledge, skills, and attitudes by forming journal clubs to critique published nursing studies and create best- practice presentations for compelling clinical questions associated with nurse-sensitive outcomes. Health care informatics applies information and technology to communicate, manage knowledge, mitigate error, and support clinical decision making. Prerequisite(s): NR 462.

NR 421. CLINICAL REASONING AND JUDGMENT (3). Involves complex problem-based learning using multiple clinical practice disciplines across the life span. Concepts will be integrated from pathophysiology, pharmacology, health assessment, nursing process, and psycho-social, spiritual, and cultural dimensions to enhance clinical reasoning within legal and ethical parameters. Selected clinical situations will be analyzed focusing on students’ ability to utilize their clinical reasoning and clinical judgement skills to identify, prioritize and generate safe and effective care based on the best possible evidence. Nursing majors only. Prerequisite(s): NR 463.

NR 422/NR 422H. CLINICAL LEADERSHIP IN PROFESSIONAL NURSING (3). Explores multiple leadership theories and the process of applying individual leadership roles, skills, and decision- making in the provision of nursing care. Includes healthcare team coordination, and the oversight and accountability for care delivery in a variety of settings. Develops the individual as a
positive clinical leader and empowers the nurse to make decisions.  It also enables the nurse to identify creative, values- centered options for delivering safe, high quality nursing care in diverse practice settings. Students will utilize effective inter- and intra-professional communication and collaborative techniques. These include negotiation and conflict resolution in a culturally dynamic health care environment. As part of this course the student will complete a leadership project associated with a local facility.  Prerequisite(s) or Co-requisite(s): NR 464.

NR 444R. PROFESSIONAL ROLE DEVELOPMENT (3). Examines contemporary professional nursing roles and issues, standards of practice, Jesuit mission, service learning, personal and professional values, and academic tools that foster success in the nursing program. Prerequisite(s): Acceptance into Nursing Program. NOTE: RN-BSN and RN to MS Nursing Program students only.

NR 448R. UPDATES IN ILLNESS AND DISEASE MANAGEMENT (3). Focuses on updates in genomics and genetics, pain management, the stress response, immune disorders, mental disorders, rehabilitative, and end-of-life care. Examines acute and chronic disease pathophysiology, evidence-based disease management, and nursing care of selected disorders. Prerequisite(s): NR 444R. NOTE: RN-BSN and RN to MS Nursing Program students only.

NR 451. INTRODUCTORY NURSING PRACTICUM/ EXTERNSHIP (3). Under the preceptorship of a registered nurse, Introductory Nursing Practicum students provide direct patient care in selected specialty areas. Enhances competency and critical decision-making in the reality of the practice setting. Emphasizes skills and procedures, organization and priority setting, written and oral communication, and the nurse’s role including investigation, teaching and discharge planning. Prerequisite(s): NR
412, NR 406B or NR 413, and NR 463.

NR 452R. CONTEMPORARY TOPICS IN HEALTH CARE (3). Explores professional nursing role within contemporary health care topics areas, including informatics, human diversity and cultural competence, gerontology, vulnerable populations, violence, social justice, and global health. Students engage in service learning and reflection. Prerequisite(s): NR 444R. NOTE: RN-BSN and RN to MS Nursing Program students only.

NR 455/NR 455H. HEALTH PROMOTION, DISEASE PREVENTION, HEALTH POLICY, AND NURSING PRACTICE (3). Applies the nursing process for patients who may be an individual, family, group, community, or population. Influences on individual, family, group, community, and population for health promotion will be studied, with special focus on the vulnerable. Health Promotion Planning, including assessment, plan development, utilization of evidence-based interventions, outcome measurements and evaluation of interventions will be explored. Progress on Healthy People and National Leading Health
Indicators will be analyzed. Implications of policy on health outcomes, access, equity, affordability, and social justice for health promotion and healthcare delivery will be discussed for the US and globally. Nursing's engagement in the policy making processes for health promotion and disease prevention will be examined for individuals and populations. Advocacy for social justice will be explored through the lens of nursing professionalism and practice in support of the University Mission, Catholic Social Teachings, Jesuit Values, and Health Policy. Prerequisite(s): NR 462.

NR 455R. HEALTH PROMOTION, DISEASE PREVENTION, HEALTH POLICY AND NURSING PRACTICE (3). Applies the nursing process for patients who may be an individual, family, group, community, or population. Influences on individual, family, group, community, and population for health promotion will be studied, with special focus on the vulnerable. Health Promotion Planning, including assessment, plan development, utilization of evidence-based interventions, outcome measurements and evaluation of interventions will be explored. Progress on Healthy People and National Leading Health Indicators will be analyzed. Implications of policy on health outcomes, access, equity, affordability, and social justice for health promotion and healthcare delivery will be discussed for the US and globally. Nursing's engagement in the policy making processes for health
promotion and disease prevention will be examined for individuals and populations. Advocacy for social justice will be explored through the lens of nursing professionalism and practice in
support of the University Mission, Catholic Social Teachings, Jesuit Values, and Health Policy. Prerequisite(s): NR 444R. NOTE: RN- BSN and RN to MS Nursing Program students only.

NR 460R. EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE IN NURSING (3). Focuses on the role of nurse as informed consumer of research. Develops skills for evidence-based practice by forming journal clubs to understand aspects of nursing research, critique published nursing studies, and develop best-practice presentations. Prerequisite(s): NR 444R. NOTE: RN-BSN and RN to MS Nursing Program students only.

NR 462. INTRODUCTION TO MANAGING HEALTH CARE OF THE ADULT AND OLDER ADULT (4). This beginning theoretical, laboratory, and clinical course focuses on the art and science of nursing and the roles of the nurse as care provider/care designer/manager, and coordinator in relation to the complex health needs of residents with multiple co-morbidities in long
term care. Explores components of nursing process in relation to human responses to alterations in health. Content focuses on pathophysiology/pharmacology, medical management, evidence- based practice models, and the application of nursing process in the provision of care for adult and older adult patients. Clinical experiences are designed to focus on the beginning application of nursing therapeutics, including selected technical skills, nursing process, development of organizational skills, priority setting, health care management, and clinical reasoning in the assimilation of the professional nurse role. Pre-requisite(s) or Co-requisite(s): NR 412, NR 413, and NR 414. NOTE: $200.00 Lab fee required.

NR 463. COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH CARE MANAGEMENT OF THE ADULT AND OLDER ADULT I (5). This theoretical, laboratory, and clinical course focuses on the art and science of nursing and the roles of the nurse as care designer and manager. Explores components of nursing process and health promotion in relation to human responses to alterations in health. Content focuses on the continued assimilation of the professional nursing role in clinical practice through classroom and clinical experiences designed to develop organizational skills, priority setting, comprehensive health care management, and clinical reasoning skills. Nursing majors only. Prerequisite(s): NR 414 and NR 462. Pre-requisite(s) or Co-requisite(s):  NR 412 and NR 413.

NR 464. COMPLEX HEALTH CARE MANAGEMENT OF THE ADULT AND OLDER ADULT II (5). This theoretical and clinical course integrates the role of the nurse as coordinator of care in
relation to human responses to alteration in health. Focus is on the role of the nurse as a leader and collaborator in the interprofessional implementation of care management using evidence-based practice models. Application of nursing process includes the provision of care for adult and older adult patients within the context of their families and environments. The focus of clinical practice is the continuing development of organizational skills, priority setting, clinical reasoning, complex health care management, and problem solving as the student assimilates the role of the professional baccalaureate nurse generalist. Pre- requisite(s): NR 412, NR 406B or NR 413, and NR 463. NOTE:
$200.00 Lab fee required.

NR 465. CHILDBEARING FAMILIES AND REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH (5). This theory and clinical course addresses the needs and care of the childbearing family as they progress through the experiences of reproductive health, pregnancy, childbirth, becoming a family, and women’s health. Through the lens of the nursing process, the student applies current evidence-based principles related to physiological, psychosocial, ethical, and spiritual care when planning and performing nursing care for childbearing families and overall women’s health. Utilizes classroom, virtual, and focused clinical experiences to addresses family centered nursing care during the antepartal, intrapartal, postpartal, neonatal periods, and women’s health. The interrelationship between theory, practice, and research provides a foundation for this course. Prerequisite(s): NR 414 and NR 462. Pre-requisite(s) or Co-requisite(s): NR 412 and NR 413.

NR 466R. COMMUNITY HEALTH NURSING (3). Provides overview on population-based nursing. Explores principles relevant to community health nursing including public health, epidemiology, and environmental health. Addresses impact of health care policies on social justice and health care disparities. Prerequisite(s): NR 444R. RN-BSN and RN to MS Nursing Program students only.

NR 470. NURSING CARE OF CHILDREN AND FAMILIES (4). This theoretical and clinical course focuses on the art and science of providing ethical, evidence-based nursing care to children and their families within a quality and safety framework. Utilizing current patient care technologies and practice guidelines, the course emphasizes the understanding of pathophysiology unique
to the pediatric population in the provision of quality nursing care. For each developmental level, the course content holistically addresses relevant anticipatory guidance, health promotion, and developmentally appropriate communication strategies. In
addition, the course examines health care policy, finance, and regulatory environments affecting today’s children and families. The relationship among theory, practice, and research provides a foundation for the course. Prerequisite(s): NR 463. Pre- requisite(s) or Co-requisite(s): NR 412 and NR 406B or NR 413.

NR 472/NR 472H. COMMUNITY AND POPULATION FOCUSED NURSING (4). This theoretical and clinical course provides an in-depth examination of population and community health concepts. Students analyze roles of nurses in community and population-based nursing focused at individual, family, community and systems levels of practice. Emphasis is on the promotion of healthy communities using the nursing process, epidemiological, ethical, environmental, and public health principles. Through clinical experiences in community-based settings, students are engaged in community assessments, program planning/management, health teaching, and provision of evidence-based nursing practice to address the health needs of identified populations including vulnerable populations. Prerequisite(s): NR 412, NR 406B or NR 413, and NR 463. NR
455 must be completed prior to or concurrently with NR 472.

NR 473. MENTAL HEALTH NURSING (4). This theoretical and clinical course addresses the principles and techniques of therapeutic communication as it applies to working with patients who present with symptoms of mental health disorders in acute care and community settings. Contemporary issues in the field of mental health nursing are explored within a psychosocial, cultural, spiritual, economic, legal, and ethical environment. The role of the nurse is based on standards of practice and focuses on health promotion, disease prevention, and management for patients with mental health issues across the life span. Students apply theoretical concepts in clinical settings while working with individuals, families, communities, groups, and underserved populations with varying levels of complexity. The
interrelationship among theory, practice, and research provides a foundation for the course. Prerequisite(s): NR 462

NR 478R. COMMUNITY HEALTH NURSING PRACTICUM (3). Fosters integration of community health theory into clinical practice while students complete 45 hours of practicum in community settings. Examines emergency preparedness, community and family assessment, health promotion, and program evaluation. Prerequisite(s): NR 444R and NR 466R (may be taken concurrently). NOTE: RN-BSN and RN to MS Nursing Program students only. Student must be compliant with RHcomply@regis.edu to register for this course. Permission of Clinical Placement Advisor required.

NR 480R. THE NURSE LEADER-MANAGER (3). Expands knowledge of leadership and management principles applied to health care, the changing health care system, health outcomes, professional issues, political action, and career development. Explores ethical, legal, and policy issues related to nursing practice. Prerequisite(s): NR 444R. NOTE: RN-BSN Program students only.

NR 483. CLINICAL CAPSTONE: PROFESSIONAL NURSING PRACTICUM (5). This culminating professional course promotes readiness for practice and prepares the accelerated or senior nursing student to make a smooth transition into the role of the professional registered nurse. The framework for this course is drawn from the American Nurses Association (ANA) Standards of Nursing Practice and the roles of the BSN nurse delineated in the American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN) Essentials of Baccalaureate Education for Professional Nursing Practice.  Students apply nursing and leadership theories as a direct care provider for groups of diverse patients during an
extensive clinical practicum experience. Theoretical and reflective content builds upon prerequisite nursing knowledge. Prerequisite(s): NR 464.

NR 485R. LEADERSHIP IN NURSING CAPSTONE (3). This leadership course is designed to provide the student an opportunity to integrate leadership and management principles into professional practice and reflect on RN-BSN completion program learning. Students engage in faculty directed assignments and projects as indirect practice activities to achieve course and
program outcomes. Prerequisite(s): NR 444R and NR 480R or
NR  600.

NR 488E-W. TOPICS IN CLINICAL NURSING PRACTICE (1-8). Clinical elective courses focusing on specific areas of nursing practice. Content varies according to student need and availability of faculty resources. Prerequisite(s): Nursing majors only. Permission of appropriate department director required.

NR 490E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN NURSING (1-6). Topics by arrangement with individual faculty. Prerequisite(s): Nursing majors only. Permission of appropriate department director required.

GRADUATE

HEALTH CARE ETHICS (HCE)

HCE 600. ORGANIZATIONAL ETHICS AND HEALTH CARE COMPLIANCE (3). Addresses advanced concepts in organizational ethics and health care compliance including the dynamics of personal and professional values in relation to organizational behavior, and the integration of mission, organizational ethics and corporate regulatory compliance. Explores contemporary ethical issues in organizational ethics and
health care compliance through applied case presentation, theory- based ethical analysis and ethical decision making in both individual and group contexts.

HCE 604. ETHICS FOR NURSE LEADERS (3). Examines ethical and moral reasoning relevant to professional nursing practice and health care delivery in today’s society. Explores philosophical and faith-based foundations, including Catholic moral tradition, socio- cultural influences, professional codes, organizational and personal ethical norms. Ethical issues are examined with emphasis on advanced practice nursing, leadership roles and models of health care delivery. Introduces skills in analyzing ethical dilemmas and evaluating ethical practice using ethical theory, moral argument, and case studies.

HCE 709. HEALTH CARE ETHICS FOR PHYSICAL THERAPISTS (3). Examines ethical and moral reasoning processes in health
care. Philosophical and faith-based foundations, including Catholic moral tradition, socio-cultural influences, professional codes, organizational and personal ethical norms are explored. Ethical issues are examined with emphasis on leadership and the practice of physical therapy. Students will analyze ethical dilemmas and evaluate ethical practice using ethical theory, moral argument, and case studies.

HCE 742. ETHICS AND ADVOCACY IN PHARMACY (3). Examines ethical and moral reasoning in health care. Emphasizes pharmacy practice and leadership. Explores philosophical, faith- based foundations including Catholic moral tradition, socio- cultural influences, professional codes, organizational and personal ethical norms. Analyzes ethical dilemmas/practices using ethical theory, moral argument, cases studies. Note: Majors only.

HEALTH SERVICES ADMINISTRATION (HSA)

HSA 601. LEADERSHIP AND ORGANIZATION DEVELOPMENT IN HEALTH CARE SETTINGS (3). Explores individual leadership qualities and organizational dynamics with emphasis on various elements of organization development including communication, culture, values, process redesigns, re- engineering, knowledge management and methods of assessing and diagnosing organizational effectiveness. Examines current leadership and organization theories and approaches used in dealing with organizational problem solving and assessment.

HSA 602. STRATEGIC PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT IN HEALTH SERVICES (3). Addresses the business planning process emphasizing strategic planning, business plan development and evaluation, advanced project management, and marketing research and strategy. Focuses on financial analysis, market projection, risk assessment, and implementation planning principles as applied to new or expanded services and/or other business opportunities.

HSA 604. FOUNDATIONS OF HEALTH CARE ECONOMICS, ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT (3). Overviews macro and microeconomics in health care. Studies accounting theory in both the profit and non-profit health care organization for non-financial managers. Includes financial management and forecasting, budgeting, cost analysis/control and case management. Prerequisite(s): Graduate standing. NOTE: Requires student to have basic skills in use of electronic spreadsheets.

HSA 608. THE POLITICS OF HEALTH (3). The philosopher George Santayana stated that “those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it.” Students will take a journey from the origins of our modern health care delivery system to contemporary policy challenges. The graduate component extends foundational knowledge of quality and safety through additional readings, cases analysis and/or applied project work.

HSA 620. MARKETING AND PUBLIC RELATIONS IN HEALTH CARE SETTINGS (3). Explores the unique nature and role of marketing in the health care industry. Introduces marketing principles and techniques as applied in health care settings including environmental scanning, market research and marketing strategy. Discusses media, public relations and advertising strategies. The graduate component extends foundational knowledge through additional readings, case analysis and/or applied project work. Prerequisite(s): Approval of academic advisor required.

HSA 623. FOUNDATIONS OF HEALTH LAW (3). Examines legal and ethical issues involved in the assessment, management, and delivery of health care services, with emphasis on negligence, contract, consents, confidentiality/privacy, risk management, corporate compliance, peer review, and medical/legal issues related to health records. The graduate component extends foundational knowledge of quality and safety through additional readings, case analysis and/or applied project work.

HSA 624. ASSESSMENT OF QUALITY CARE AND PATIENT SAFETY (3). Reviews the history and theory of quality management in health care settings with emphasis on patient safety, patient satisfaction, patient engagement, the patient/client experience, and regulatory requirements in diverse settings. Explores performance improvement principles, methodologies and tools.  The graduate component extends foundational knowledge of quality and safety through additional readings, case analysis and/or applied project work. Prerequisite(s): Graduate standing.
HSA 625 E-W. ADVANCED CONCEPTS IN QUALITY (3). Examines concepts related to the application of quality initiatives and strategies related to quality improvement in health care settings. Thematic topics for specific initiatives may include Lean Methodology concepts, Six Sigma, and other methods related to performance improvement in health care. Prerequisite(s): HSA
624 NOTE: Graduate standing required.

HSA 628. HEALTH CARE ECONOMICS (3). Provides an understanding of the elements necessary to apply basic microeconomic principles to the health care field. Emphasizes economic tools of particular relevance to health care, and to what degree the concepts are appropriate to deal with problems in this field. Demonstrates that economic analysis can provide pertinent and systematic insights into the workings of the health care
system and the evaluation of health care policy. The graduate component extends foundational knowledge through additional readings, case analysis and/or applied project work.

HSA 630. MEDICAL PRACTICE MANAGEMENT (3). Explores issues in practice management in the ambulatory setting including settings staffed by advanced practice medical personnel. Topics include the organizational structure and management of a practice, coding, billing, and reimbursement procedures, marketing, contracting, budgeting and staffing as related to practice management. The graduate component extends foundational knowledge through additional readings, case analysis and/or applied project work.

HSA 636. EMERGING THECHNOLOGIES FOR HEALTH (3). Provides skills, knowledge and competencies important for assessing the utility of emerging technologies from the perspective of wellness, self-care, health maintenance, workforce
management, and ethics.

HSA 652. HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN HEALTH CARE SETTINGS (3). Provides an understanding of the principles of human resource management in the health care environment. Emphasizes management techniques such as interviewing, training, career development, job analysis and design, performance evaluation, compensation and benefits, and employment law. Addresses trends in human resource management in health care. The graduate component extends foundational knowledge
through additional readings, case analysis and/or applied project work. Prerequisite(s): Approval of academic advisor required.

HSA 658.  PROJECT MANAGEMENT IN THE HEALTH CARE SECTOR (3). Introduces principles of project management and the project management body of knowledge including project management software, task assignments, workflow analysis, and project planning as applied in the health care industry. Explores process reengineering with a health care focus. The graduate component extends foundational knowledge of quality and safety through additional readings, case analysis and/or applied project work.

HSA 660. METHODS OF INQUIRY AND RESEARCH (3). Examines qualitative and quantitative research assumptions, design, methods and ethical considerations as applied in health services research. Reviews statistical methods and tools, critique of published findings, data evaluation, analysis and presentation. Explores advanced concepts in health care outcomes and operations research applications. Prerequisite(s): Graduate standing.

HSA 663. ADVANCED CONCEPTS OF HEALTH CARE FINANCE (3). Provides application based case studies for cost utilization, financial forecasting, budgeting and analysis, cash management techniques, and planning models and applies these concepts to management practice in the health care industry. Includes financial management and forecasting, statement preparation and analysis, cost analysis and control and case management. Prerequisite(s): HSA 604 and approval of academic advisor required. NOTE: Basic skills in use of electronic spreadsheets required.

HSA 670. BIOSTATISTICS AND HEALTH DATA ANALYSIS (3). Examines skills and knowledge necessary to manage and analyze biomedical data. Reviews statistics used for decision-making, population health assessment, and inferential research analysis. Uses common statistical software to conduct analysis, interpret results and draw conclusions. Prerequisite(s): Permission of instructor required.

HSA 674. ISSUES AND TRENDS IN QUALITY AND PATIENT SAFETY (3). Provides an opportunity to develop and lead an initiative in patient quality, safety and/or risk in a health care setting.  Emphasis is on the ability to lead a project and gain an overview of the quality improvement and patient safety activities in various health care facilities. Prerequisite(s): HSA 624 and HSA
672. NOTE: Graduate standing required.

HSA 675. COMMUNICATION IN HEALTH CARE SETTINGS (3). Enhances communication skills needed in business and professional contexts. Focuses on developing a working knowledge of theory and skill for written communication, interpersonal communication, meetings and presentations.
Effective communication skills for dealing with physicians, patients, families, as well as other internal and external parties will receive special attention. Students will gain a working knowledge of
critical thinking and problem resolution skills. Prerequisite(s): Graduate standing required.

HSA 680. CONTEMPORARY ISSUES IN HEALTH SERVICES DELIVERY SYSTEMS (3). A Capstone seminar examining contemporary issues in health services delivery systems. Topics include integration of delivery settings, managed care trends, stakeholder relations, health policy, regulatory initiatives, health care workforce, health promotion, and complementary medicine. Includes presentation of the master’s project. NOTE: Graduate standing required.

HSA 681E-W. SPECIAL TOPICS IN HEALTH SERVICES ADMINISTRATION (3). Advanced study within a focused topic
or area of practice related to health services administration under the direction of an assigned instructor. The student may select a new/established module or modify an established module through development of an individualized learning contract. Prerequisite(s): Graduate standing required.

HSA 682. INTERPROFESSIONAL FOUNDATIONS OF GLOBAL HEALTH (1). Examines the growing body of knowledge, scholarship, and engagement in global health. Challenges students in the health professions to become engaged leaders to help address growing global health disparities. Cross listing: NR 681, PHRM 781, DPT 780M, and DPT 781M. NOTE: Majors only.

HSA 690E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN HEALTH SERVICES ADMINISTRATION (1-4). Topics by arrangement with individual
faculty. Prerequisite(s): Majors only and approval of academic advisor required.

HSA 696. MASTER’S PROJECT IN HEALTH SERVICES ADMINISTRATION (3). Examines a current health care organization/system issue or problem. Students may work in conjunction with or at a particular agency to investigate and
collect data on the problem. The final project, both in written and oral form, exhibits appropriate communication skills, evidence of critical thinking and problem solving skills, and a dedicated understanding/ cohesive description of the issue. Prerequisite(s): HSA 680 and Graduate standing required.

INTERPROFESSIONAL EDUCATION (IPE)

IPE 601. INTERPROFFESIONAL APPROACHES TO INTEGRATIVE HEALTH AND NUTRITION (3). Designed for healthcare professionals who wish to deliver a holistic model of health care with an interest in becoming interprofessional leaders in multidisciplinary clinical practice. Topics in this course include disease prevention, chronic disease, mental health, pain management, movement/mobility, nonpharmacological interventions, meditation/breathwork, food as medicine, herbal benefits and more. The intent is to engage healthcare professionals across disciplines, learn scope of practice,
develop a clear and concise way of developing treatment plans/documentation patient care, and use scientific evidence to evaluate different modalities of care. Finally, the course will integrate a universal code of health care ethics and Jesuit principles to inform sound practice.

MASTER OF ARTS: COUNSELING (MCPY)

NOTE: ONLY STUDENTS IN THE DIVISION OF COUNSELING AND FAMILY THERAPY CAN TAKE MCPY AND MFT COURSES.

MCPY 505. SKILLS FOR HELPING PROFESSIONALS (3). Explores the fundamentals of counseling and the role of helping professionals in society. Surveys roles, attitudes, and behaviors of effective helping relationships. Recommended for students who intend to pursue graduate study in Professional Counseling leading to a LPC. Prerequisite(s): Permission of MAC instructor. NOTE: Course grading is Pass/No-Pass only.

MCPY 601. INTERPROFESSIONAL FOUNDATIONS IN GLOBAL HEALTH (1). Examines strategies for students to become engaged leaders in the health professions within the current global reality. Core concepts of international service, poverty and global injustice, structural violence, determinants of health, culture and foreign aid will be addressed.

MCPY 602. SPIRITUALITY AND COUNSELING (3). Explores how spirituality, religion and a search for meaning are central to the counseling experience. Focuses upon understanding how spirituality and the religious imagination influence and enhance the practice and effectiveness of the therapeutic encounter. NOTE: Counseling and Marriage and Family Therapy degree and
certificate seeking students only.

MCPY 605. HUMAN GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT (3). Provides an advanced study of normal human development from infancy throughout the life span, emphasizing integration of theory and research appropriate to each life phase. Considers the impact of cultural variation on life phases.

MCPY 610. THEORIES OF COUNSELING (3). Introduces the major historical and contemporary theories of counseling. Examines techniques and styles of counselors using distinct approaches to counseling along with their application to case studies.

MCPY 615. CULTURAL ISSUES AND SOCIAL JUSTICE (3). Examines the multicultural and socioeconomic influences of psychology, personality development and perceptions of abnormal behavior and counselor attitudes. Presents theories of multicultural counseling and competencies. Discrimination and oppression are considered from a social justice perspective along with related strategies including advocacy.

MCPY 620. ABNORMAL PSYCHOLOGY (3). Provides an in- depth examination of abnormal psychological development and multicultural variations. Studies the theoretical approaches and treatments that flow out of various psychological paradigms

MCPY 622. DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT PLANNING IN CLINICAL MENTAL HEALTH COUNSELING (3). Exploration of clinical mental health procedures for assessing developmental, behavioral, and mental disorders. Emphasis on cultural and contextual factors influencing behavior and the impact of these factors on assessment and diagnosis.

MCPY 625. PROFESSIONAL ORIENTATION AND ETHICAL ISSUES (3). Examines ethical codes, standards, state statutes, practice guidelines, professional organizations and history. Focuses on ethical decision-making skills and contemporary ethical issues
in the counseling field.

MCPY 630. GROUPS: PROCESS AND COUNSELING (3).
Studies theories of group counseling including group dynamics and leadership. Includes different types of groups and group composition. Experiential learning methods are employed. Prerequisite(s): MCPY 635. May take concurrently with MCPY
636. Pass/No Pass grading only.

MCPY 635. COUNSELING TECHNIQUES I (3). Introduces the psychotherapeutic process and dynamics of the helping relationship. Focuses on developing basic counseling skills such as clinical interviewing, clinical record keeping and report writing, DSM-IV-TR diagnosis, assessment of various clinical issues, and treatment planning. Assists students in preparing a professional resume, practicing interviews for a practicum position, and identifying sites for their practicum/internship experience. Prerequisite(s): MCPY 605, MCPY 615, MCPY 620 and either MCPY 610 or MFT 610. Pass/No Pass grading only.

MCPY 636. COUNSELING TECHNIQUES II (3). Reviews current therapies used in community counseling settings, particularly
depth psychotherapy, humanistic psychotherapy, and community cultural therapies. Includes skill development through role plays and videotaping. Prerequisite(s): MCPY 635.  May take concurrently with MCPY 630. Pass/No Pass Grading Only.

MCPY 640. RESEARCH METHODS AND PROGRAM EVALUATION (3). Provides an understanding of types of research methods including quantitative and qualitative designs, basic statistics, and ethical and legal considerations in research.
Principles, practices and applications of needs assessment and program evaluation are reviewed.

MCPY 645. CLINICAL ASSESSMENT (3). Focuses on the application of basic concepts and statistics in the interpretation of tests and inventories utilized by counselors. Explores testing methodologies, interpretive criteria, and ethical and multicultural implications from the psychological perspective.

MCPY 650. CAREER COUNSELING AND DEVELOPMENT (3). Develops a comprehensive understanding of theories of career development and their application to diverse populations. Explores methods of effective career counseling, test administration, and interpretation of assessment tools.

MCPY 651. MILITARY: FAMILY ORIGINS AND LIFE CYCLES (3). An in-depth study of military family life cycle including adult development, nontraditional family structures and special populations. The impact of transitions such as career, marriage, divorce, military deployment, and death at different stages of the family life cycle as guides to therapeutic understanding.

MCPY 652. MILITARY: ADDICTION COUNSELING AND TREATMENT (3). Examines the psychological and behavioral effects of substance use and other addictions in military individuals and families; reviews assessment techniques and approaches to treatment in this population.

MCPY 653. COUNSELING MILITARY COUPLES (3). Marriage and family therapists and professional counselors, both experienced and newly-emerging, will develop a more targeted skill set in theories and techniques addressing issues found in couple relationships that are unique within the military culture. Special emphasis is given to counseling the military couple in areas of depression, PTSD, Traumatic Brain injury, secondary trauma, substance abuse, domestic violence, infidelity, divorce and
intimacy. Student will have the opportunity to demonstrate their competencies in working with these couple issues in a military counseling setting.

MCPY 654. COUNSELING MILITARY FAMILIES (3). Provides the student with the knowledge and understanding of the impact of military culture on the family, cycle of deployment, post- deployment, re-deployment, and integration into the community. Beginning with an overview of the military lifestyle and the unique circumstances that such a lifestyle poses to career service personnel, their spouses, and their children, the course then focuses on the common concerns of constant relocations and deployment of the military partner/parent and situations faced by the spouse and children who grow up in a military family. Special post-traumatic stress disorder PTSD), secondary trauma, grief, loss, substance abuse, domestic violence, attachment, intimacy,
and change issues.

MCPY 655. MILITARY: CRISIS, TRAUMA, AND LOSS (3). Examines the impact of trauma and loss on military personnel and their families, survivors of natural disasters, violence and terrorism. Emphasis is on counselors’ s immediate response, assessment and treatment protocols for recovery, trauma and addiction, post-traumatic stress, suicide assessment and prevention.

MCPY 656. APPROACHES TO TRAUMA THERAPY (3). Provides an overview of techniques used for individuals and families impacted by traumatic experiences. Includes introduction to trauma-informed therapy, EMDR, prolonged exposure to therapy, neuro and biofeedback, and mindfulness approaches to treatment.

MCPY 660. SUBSTANCE ABUSE TREATMENT (3). Examines the psychological and behavioral effects of substance abuse in individuals and families; reviews assessment techniques and approaches to treatment of this population.

MCPY 668. PLAY IN FAMILY THERAPY (3). Examines theoretical foundations and the utilization of play in family therapy. Explores filial therapy techniques as well as other models of parent-child relational therapy with families from diverse populations and various presenting issues. Cross listing MFT 668. Prerequisite(s): MCPY 635.

MCPY 670. ADVANCED PLAY THERAPY: GRIEF, ABUSE, AND TRAUMA (3). Explores interdisciplinary theories of creativity and expressive arts as well as their therapeutic practices in the use of imagery, storytelling, dance, music, psychodrama, poetry, writing, movement, dream work and visual arts. Prerequisite(s): MCPY
635.

MCPY 672. CRISIS, TRAUMA, AND LOSS (3). Examines the impact of trauma and loss on military personnel and families, survivors of natural disasters, violence, and terrorism. Emphasis on counselors immediate response, assessment and treatment protocols for recovery, trauma and addition, post-traumatic stress, suicide prevention and assessment.

MCPY 674. GRIEF THERAPY AND LIFE TRANSITIONS (3). Explores life transitions and grief therapy as a necessary psychological experience for personal and communal transformation. Examines various clinical approaches and techniques through primary texts, demonstrations, case study and role play.

MCPY 676. ECOPSYCHOLOGY: A TRANSFORMATIVE PERSPECTIVE (3). Explores and imagines the transformative possibilities of the earth-human relationship and the psychological and spiritual well-being of individuals, families, communities, and the world. Applies transformative, clinical and eco-psychological perspectives.

MCPY 677. COUNSELING PRE-ADOLESCENTS AND ADOLESCENTS (3). Examines theories and techniques specific to developmental needs of pre-adolescents and adolescents (ages 11-
18). Emphasizes individual and systemic approaches to prevention, assessment, counseling techniques, and consultation skills that pertain to pre-adolescents and adolescents. Prerequisite(s): MCPY
635.

MCPY 678. INTRODUCTION TO PLAY THERAPY (3). Includes a historical and theoretical basis of play therapy. Emphasizes various theoretical approaches and philosophical foundations regarding the process of play therapy. Experiential methods, role- plays, and supervision of non-clinical play therapy cases are incorporated. Prerequisite(s): MCPY 635.

MCPY 679. SANDTRAY IN PLAY THERAPY (3). Introduces the use of Sandtray techniques for use with individuals and families. Exploration of theory, applications, stages, and ethical issues. Emphasizes depth, Humanistic and Relational/Cultural approaches. Didactic and experiential methods used. Prerequisite(s): MCPY
635.
MCPY 680. CURRENT TRENDS IN PLAY THERAPY (3).
Explores current trends in play therapy and creative interventions with children, adolescents, and families. This course will also explore assessment, diagnosis, treatment planning, and legal and ethical issues specific to counseling children, adolescents, and families. Specific topics may include: animal assisted, art, and adventure/nature based therapy. Prerequisite(s): MCPY 635 or MFT 635 and MCPY 678.

MCPY 682. PERSONAL MYTHOLOGY AND NARRATIVE (3). Examines how the personal life story gives symbolic form to a person's core values and meaning. Emphasizes the relationship between personal stories, myths and therapeutic, transformative processes.

MCPY 683. APPROACHES TO DREAM WORK (3). Explores the value that dream images, symbols, and motifs have for clinical practice for personal, cultural, and ecological transformation. Examines Jungian, Freudian, and Archetypal theories and applications of dream work.

MCPY 684. PLAY THERAPY AND COUNSELING INTERNATIONALLY (3). Provides students with introductory and advanced instruction in play therapy and an understanding of the role culture plays in counseling, with a focus on international counseling. Prerequisite(s): MCPY 635.

MCPY 685. QUALITATIVE RESEARCH METHODS (3). Examines phenomenological approaches to research from the humanistic and “Human Science” tradition. Focuses upon a descriptive analysis of the meaning and value of everyday experience as 'lived' phenomena.

MCPY 686. PSYCHOTHERAPEUTIC RELATIONSHIP: A DEPTH PERSPECTIVE (3). Explores the dynamics and effective use of the therapeutic relationship to bring about transformation. Particular emphasis is placed on understanding transference and counter- transference and the distinct and shared experiences of client and therapist in the therapeutic process.

MCPY 687. CULTURAL NARRATIVES: LITERATURE, MYTHS, AND FAIRY TALES (3). Explores the role of imagination in fashioning the narrative and transformative patterns of our daily lives. Identifies traditional and universal themes which appear in cultural, political, ecological and personal texts.

MCPY 690E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY: COUNSELING (1-3). Provides an opportunity for faculty-directed independent research in an approved topic in counseling not covered in scheduled course offerings. Prerequisite(s): Permission of degree chair required.

MCPY 692. PRACTICUM: CLINICAL SUPERVISION (3). Provides student in Practicum with individual and group supervision by program faculty. Co-requisite: MCPY 693. Prerequisite(s): MCPY
635. Permission of instructor and clinical coordinator required. Pass/No Pass grading only. NOTE: Fee required.

MCPY 693. COUNSELING PRACTICUM (3). Offers initial exposure to community counseling field placement. Emphasizes counseling role, agency function, and basic skills. Prerequisite(s): MCPY 630, MCPY 635 and MCPY 636. Pass/No Pass grading only.

MCPY 695E-W. SEMINAR IN COUNSELING PSYCHOLOGY (3). Addresses current topics relevant to professional counselors in a variety of settings. Content varies by term according to the changing concerns of practicing psychotherapists as well as current issues in individual, family, and group counseling.

MCPY 696. SUPERVISION IN CLINICAL COUNSELING (3). Intended for post-master’s marriage and family therapy practitioners who are preparing to become AAMFT clinical supervisors. Covers conceptual/theoretical approaches to supervision, and supervised practice in couples and family therapy.

MCPY 697. SUPERVISION IN MARRIAGE AND FAMILY THERAPY (3). Intended for post-master’s clinical counseling practitioners who are preparing to become clinical supervisors. Covers conceptual approaches to supervision, methods, ethical and legal issues, and evaluation of supervisees in mental health settings.

MCPY 698A. SUPERVISED COUNSELING INTERNSHIP A (3). Expands and enhances the training begun during Practicum. Provides more in-depth clinical experience and helps to develop clinical skills. Prerequisite(s): MCPY 630, MCPY 636, MCPY 693. Permission of instructor and Clinical coordinator required. Pass/No Pass grading only. NOTE: Includes 350 hours of supervised clinical experience at an approved training site.

MCPY 698B. SUPERVISED COUNSELING INTERNSHIP B (3). Expands and enhances the training begun during Practicum. Provides more in-depth clinical experience and helps to develop clinical skills. Prerequisite(s): MCPY 630, MCPY 636 and MCPY
698A. Permission of instructor and Clinical coordinator required. Pass/No Pass grading only. NOTE: Includes 300 hours of supervised clinical experience at an approved training site.

MCPY 698C. SUPERVISED COUNSELING INTERNSHIP C (3). Expands and enhances the training begun during Practicum. Provides more in-depth clinical experience and helps to develop clinical skills. Prerequisite(s): MCPY 698B. Permission of
instructor and clinical coordinator required. Pass/No Pass grading only. NOTE: Includes 350 hours of supervised clinical experience at an approved training site.

MASTER OF ARTS: MARRIAGE AND FAMILY THERAPY (MFT)

NOTE: ONLY STUDENTS IN THE DIVISION OF COUNSELING AND FAMILY THERAPY CAN TAKE MCPY AND MFT COURSES.

MFT 601. INTERPROFESSIONAL FOUNDATIONS IN GLOBAL HEALTH (1). Examines strategies for students to become engaged leaders in the health professions within the current global reality. Core concepts of international service, poverty and global
injustice, structural violence, determinants of health, culture and foreign aid will be addressed.

MFT 605. HUMAN AND RELATIONAL DEVELOPMENT (3). Provides an advanced study of normal human development from infancy throughout the life span, emphasizing integration of theory and research appropriate to each life phase. Considers the impact of cultural variation on life phases.

MFT 610. THEORIES OF FAMILY THERAPY (3). Explores the historical development of theories of family therapy which have grown out of the paradigmatic shift from focusing on the
individual to focusing on the influences of the family system and larger social contexts.

MFT 615. CULTURAL ISSUES AND SOCIAL JUSTICE (3). Explores cultural contexts of relationships, social justice issues and current research and therapeutic strategies related to socioeconomic status, religious and cultural values, ethnic background, gender, sexual orientation and mental and physical abilities.

MFT 616. SYSTEMIC POWER AND OPPRESSION (6). Explores how socio-political identity shapes attitudes, values, beliefs, and emotions. Students will learn how the intersection of their own and clients’ socio-political identities inhibit or facilitate the therapeutic relationship and process. Students will learn how cultural context shapes symptoms and how this context can inform interventions in the system. NOTE: Limited to students completing the Marriage and Family Therapy degree or counseling students.

MFT 620. ASSESSMENT, DIAGNOSIS, AND TREATMENT PLANNING (3). Exploration and practice of assessment and diagnosis skills, attending to clients' cultural context, and using DSM-5 diagnostic criteria and a structured clinical interview format.  Includes practice of biopsychosocial diagnostic assessment and treatment planning.

MFT 621. INTEGRATED HEALTHCARE (3). Explores the connection between emotional, psychological, and physical health. Content includes information on health behavior change, psychopharmacology, ways that stress manifests in the body, and therapist interventions for impacting health changes.

MFT 625. LEGAL AND ETHICAL ISSUES IN FAMILY THERAPY (3). Explores AAMFT Code of Ethics, Colorado legal statutes and ethical decision making models. Professional identity and public responsibility of marriage and family therapists will be explored.

MFT 626. SPECIAL TOPICS IN CFT (3). Topics will vary by instructors. The course will provide in depth focus on special topics in couple and family therapy practice.

MFT 635. PROCESS ORIENTED PRACTICE IN MFT (3). Introduces the psychotherapeutic process and dynamics of helping relationships. Focuses on developing basic counseling skills such as clinical interviewing, clinical record keeping and report writing, diagnosis, assessment of clinical issues, and treatment planning. Pass/No Pass grading only.

MFT 638. COMMON FACTOR SKILLS IN FAMILY THERAPY (3). Students will develop techniques and skills to work with families and couples while integrating their skills within a theoretical approach. Activities include assessment, practice with enactments, live supervision, case conceptualization, co-therapy, treatment planning, and case presentation. Prerequisite(s): MFT
610, MFT 616, MFT 620, MFT 625 and MFT 635.

MFT 640. RESEARCH METHODS AND PROGRAM EVALUATION (3). Provides an understanding of types of research methods including quantitative and qualitative designs, basic statistics, and ethical and legal considerations in research. Principles, practices and applications of needs assessment and program evaluation are reviewed.

MFT 650. MULTI-CONTEXTUAL FAMILY LIFE CYCLE (3). An
in-depth study of family life cycle including adult development. The impact of transitions such as career, marriage, divorce, and death at different stages of the family life cycle as guides to therapeutic understanding.

MFT 651. MILITARY: FAMILY ORIGINS AND THE LIFE CYCLE (3). An in-depth study of military family life cycle including adult development, nontraditional family structures and special populations. The impact of transitions such as career, marriage, divorce, military deployment, and death at different stages of the family life cycle as guides to therapeutic understanding.

MFT 652. MILITARY: ADDICTION COUNSELING AND TREATMENT (3). Examines the psychological and behavioral effects of substance use and other addictions in military individuals and families; reviews assessment techniques and approaches to treatment in this population.

MFT 653. COUNSELING MILITARY COUPLES (3). Marriage and family therapists and professional counselors, both experienced and newly-emerging, will develop a more targeted skill set in theories and techniques addressing issues found in couple relationships that are unique within the military culture. Special emphasis is given to counseling the military couple in areas of depression, PTSD, Traumatic Brain injury, secondary trauma, substance abuse, domestic violence, infidelity, divorce and intimacy. Student will have the opportunity to demonstrate their competencies in working with these couple issues in a military counseling setting.

MFT 654. COUNSELING MILITARY FAMILIES (3). Provides the student with the knowledge and understanding of the impact of military culture on the family, cycle of deployment, post- deployment, re-deployment, and integration into the community. Beginning with an overview of the military lifestyle and the unique circumstances that such a lifestyle poses to career service personnel, their spouses, and their children, the course then focuses on the common concerns of constant relocations and deployment of the military partner/parent and situations faced by the spouse and children who grow up in a military family. Special post-traumatic stress disorder PTSD), secondary trauma, grief, loss, substance abuse, domestic violence, attachment, intimacy, and change issues.

MFT 655. MILITARY: CRISIS, TRAUMA, AND LOSS (3).
Examines the impact of trauma and loss on military personnel and their families, survivors of natural disasters, violence and terrorism. Emphasis is on counselors’ s immediate response, assessment and treatment protocols for recovery, trauma and addiction, post-traumatic stress, suicide assessment and prevention.

MFT 656. APPROACHES TO TRAUMA THERAPY (3). Provides an overview of techniques used for individuals and families impacted by traumatic experiences. Includes introduction to trauma-informed therapy, EMDR, prolonged exposure to therapy, neuro and biofeedback, and mindfulness approaches to treatment.

MFT 660. ADDICTION ASSESSMENT AND TREATMENT (3). Examines the psychological and behavioral effects of substance abuse in individuals and families. Students will learn assessment techniques and approaches to treatment for individuals, couples, and families who are seeking support for substance use and other addictions. NOTE: Graduate counseling students only.
MFT 662. COUNSELING MILITARY COUPLES (3). Explores couple relationship dynamics within the military culture focusing
on enhanced cognitive behavioral couple therapy, solution-focused therapy, EFCT, and Gottman method couple therapy. Addresses issues of TBI, PTSD, IPV, and infidelity.

MFT 665. GENDER AND SEXUALITY (3). Explores the physical, psychological, social, cultural, and ethical aspects of human sexuality and gender development. Male and female gender roles, sexual expression, sexual misconceptions, variations in gendered or sexual behavior, and common sexual and relationship concerns. Prerequisite(s): MFT 635.

MFT 667. COUPLE THERAPY (3). Provides an overview of theories of couples therapy, relational dynamics, cycles of partnering, negotiating, therapist alliance and bias. Emphasizes skills for working with couples conflict, violence, infidelity, commitment and divorce. Prerequisite(s): MCPY/MFT 635.

MFT 668. PLAY IN FAMILY THERAPY (3). Examines theoretical foundations and the utilization of play in family therapy. Explores filial therapy techniques as well as other models of parent-child relational therapy with families from diverse populations and various presenting issues. Prerequisite(s): MCPY/MFT 635.
Cross-listing: MCPY 668.

MFT 669. ADVANCED COUPLE THERAPY (3). Students pursue advanced understanding and application of theory and techniques in couple therapy. Students apply assessment skills to inform treatment planning, interventions, and evaluation of couple progress. Teaching strategies include discussions, demonstrations, and role plays. Prerequisite(s): MCPY/MFT 635 and MFT 667.

MFT 690. PRACTICUM: THE PRACTICE OF FAMILY THERAPY (3). Focuses upon the practice and techniques of various systemic approaches used to treat clients in therapy. Students will employ Multi-Generational, Experiential (Satir), Structural, Strategic, or Solution-focused therapies in videotaped therapeutic work with clients. Prerequisite(s): MFT 638. Co-Requisite: MFT 692.

MFT 692. PRACTICUM: CLINICAL SUPERVISION (3). Provides students in practicum with individual and group supervision by program faculty who are AAMFT approved supervisors (or candidates). Prerequisite(s): MFT 638. Co-Requisite: MFT 690. NOTE: Fee required.

MFT 699A. SUPERVISED MFT INTERNSHIP A (3). Clinical supervision of individual, couple and family therapy which focuses on the principles and practice of Marriage and Family Therapy. Prerequisite(s): MFT 690. Pass/No Pass grading only.

MFT 699B. SUPERVISED MFT INTERNSHIP B (3). Clinical supervision of individual, couple and family therapy which focuses on the principles and practice of Marriage and Family Therapy. Prerequisite(s): MFT 699A. Pass/No Pass grading only.

MFT 699C. SUPERVISED MFT INTERNSHIP C (3). Clinical supervision of individual, couple, and family therapy which focuses on the principles and practice of Marriage and Family Therapy. Prerequisite(s): MFT 699A and MFT 699B.

MFT 699D. SUPERVISED MFT INTERNSHIP D (3). Clinical supervision of individual, couple, and family therapy which focuses on the principles and practice of Marriage and Family Therapy. Prerequisite(s): MFT 699A and MFT 699B.

NR 600/NR 600A. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORKS FOR LEADERSHIP AND ADVANCED NURSING PRACTICE (3). Examines the historical and philosophical context of knowledge development in nursing in order to provide a sense of professional heritage and identity for emerging nurse leaders. Theories from nursing, related sciences, and leadership are critiqued and evaluated for their usefulness and applicability to nursing roles in practice, research, education, and management. Students examine their own leadership competency in relation to
contemporary health care issues and the health care environment. Service learning and its relationship to the Regis mission of
Ignatian philosophy, social justice, and leadership in service to others is integrated to promote delivery of advanced nursing care to diverse populations.  Prerequisite(s): Admission to the MS Nursing, or permission of Program Director.

NR 602/NR 602A. ADVANCED APPLICATION OF RESEARCH FOR EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE (3). Designed to enable the student to translate research in building an evidence-based nursing practice for improving health outcomes for populations. Various quantitative and qualitative research designs, methods, and analytical procedures such as clinical practice guidelines,
systematic reviews, meta-analysis reports and others are presented, compared, and critiqued. Methodologies used in nursing to generate evidence and the approaches to implementation of evidence-based practice models in education, administration, and practice settings are examined. Ethical and cultural dimensions associated with the research process are appraised to insure protection of human subjects. Prerequisite(s): NR 600/NR 600A and verification of undergraduate statistics course.

NR 603. INFORMATICS (3). Provides knowledge and skills for
nurse leaders to analyze, evaluate, and utilize health care information systems for the delivery of patient care. Students examine clinical, administrative, patient education, and evidence-based practice informatics applications, ethical and legal issues, and the design and implementation of information systems in health care systems. Prerequisite(s): NR 600 Cross listing: NR 703.

NR 605. ADVANCED PHYSIOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY ACROSS THE LIFESPAN (3). Building on basic anatomy, physiology and pathophysiology, this graduate level science-based course utilizes a comprehensive approach to address the underlying principles of disease processes across the life span. Etiology, epidemiology, and theories related to pathogenesis are examined. The focus is on the differentiation of physiological and pathophysiological findings and identification of treatment
modalities for a variety of frequently presenting problems of clients in primary care across the lifespan. Prerequisite(s): Admission to the MS Nursing Program.

NR 605N. ADVANCED PHYSIOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY ACROSS THE LIFESPAN (3). Building on basic anatomy, physiology and pathophysiology, this science-based course utilizes a comprehensive approach to address the underlying principles of disease processes across the lifespan. Etiology, epidemiology, and theories related to pathogenesis are examined. The focus is on differentiation of physiological and
pathological findings and identification of treatment modalities for a
variety of frequently presenting problems of clients in neonatal acute care and addressing pathophysiology across the lifespan. Prerequisite(s): Prerequisite(s): Admission to the MS Nursing Program. Designed for students in NNP program.

NR 606. ADVANCED HEALTH ASSESSMENT, PATHOPHYSIOLOGY, AND PHARMACOLOGY ACROSS THE LIFESPAN (6). Provides a framework for systematic data collection, organization, precise recording, accurate physical and psychosocial assessment, and communication of data reflecting the health status of the patient and family. A holistic perspective facilitates an analysis of cultural, occupational, and environmental factors integral to an understanding of both the patient and family's physical and psychosocial wellbeing. Building on basic anatomy, physiology and pathophysiology, this graduate level science-based course utilizes a comprehensive approach to address the underlying principles of disease processes across the life span. Etiology, epidemiology and theories related to pathogenesis are included. Students will also identify drug management regimens for selected disease states, and will learn mechanisms of action, indications for use, efficacy,
adverse effects, monitoring parameters, dosing principles and drug interactions for common drug classes.

NR 607. ADVANCED PHARMACOLOGY FOR ADVANCED PRACTICE (3). Prepares advanced practice registered nursing (APRN) and MS in Nursing Leadership in Health Care Systems students for drug therapy management across the life span in a variety of primary care settings. Studies the mechanisms of action, indications for use, efficacy, adverse effects, monitoring parameters, dosing principles and drug interactions for common drug classes used in primary care. Identification and selection of appropriate drug management regimens for selected disease states will be addressed.  Develops safe prescribing techniques using evidence- based pharmacotherapeutics and standards of practice. Prerequisite(s): Admission to the MS Nursing Program.

NR 607N. ADVANCED PHARMACOLOGY FOR ADVANCED PRACTICE. Prepares advanced practice registered nursing (APRN) and MS in Nursing Leadership in Health Care Systems students for drug therapy management across the lifespan in a variety of primary care settings. Studies the mechanisms of action, indications for use, efficacy, adverse effects, monitoring parameters, dosing principles and drug interactions for common drug classes with additional emphasis on drugs used in acute care of the neonate. Identification and selection of appropriate drug management regimens for
selected disease states will be addressed. Develops safe prescribing techniques using evidence-based pharmacotherapeutics and standards of practice. Prerequisite(s): Admission to the MS Nursing Program. Designed for students in the NNP program.

NR 608. HEALTH CARE POLICY AND ISSUES IN PRACTICE (3). Focuses on health policy formation and evaluation. Learning activities will facilitate students´ opportunities to learn about change in the context of public policy and politics. Public health care policy will be examined with emphasis on its relationship and application to advanced practice nursing, leadership roles in management and education, and models of health care delivery. Topics include history, trends, and issues in health care systems; legal issues; legislation and regulation; funding, planning, delivery, and evaluation of health care services to individuals and populations; and accessibility, quality and outcome issues. Advocacy as part of service learning will be explored. Prerequisite(s): NR 600.

NR 609. POPULATION HEALTH AND INTERPROFESSIONAL COLLABORATION PRACTICUM (3). Focuses on the application of advanced nursing concepts related to the provision of culturally relevant health promotion and clinical prevention interventions in the student’s area of clinical specialization.  Using epidemiologic data, the student will
employ collaborative strategies in the design, coordination, and evaluation of population-based, patient-centered care. Student will build upon previous course work in advocacy-focused service learning. Clinical hours (105) are required. Prerequisite(s):  NR 600. NOTE: Student must be compliant with RHcomply@regis.edu to register for this course. Permission of Clinical Placement Advisor required.

NR 614. FOUNDATIONS OF FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT FOR NURSING LEADERS (3). Prepares students to apply essentials of financial management to nursing leadership roles in health care systems.  An overview of health care economics, financial concepts, and budgeting in health care organizations is presented. The use of financial information and economic principles including cost/benefit analysis for strategic planning, decision-making, and
the development of a business plan are addressed. Prerequisite(s):
NR 600.

NR 620/NR 620A. HEALTH CARE ORGANIZATIONS AND SYSTEMS LEADERSHIP (3). Enables the student to assume a leadership role in evaluating models of health care delivery and organizational systems. Health care organizations will be evaluated based upon organizational theory and research. Quality improvement principles with a focus on patient safety and regulatory requirements are explored in a variety of health care settings.  The interpretation and analysis of health care performance data as it relates to improving organizational performance are examined. Principles of informatics and health care technologies are introduced as frameworks for the improvement of outcomes of care. Prerequisite(s): NR 600/NR
600A.

NR 623 LEADERSHIP IN HEALTH CARE SYSTEMS PRACTICUM (3). Designed to be a culmination of the learning throughout the master's degree program. Using a combination of seminar and 105 hours of precepted clinical experiences, students synthesize and apply previously learned concepts in preparation for leadership roles. Prerequisite(s): All MS in Leadership in Health Care
Systems core and focus area courses. NOTE: Student must be compliant with  RHcomply@regis.edu to register for course.

NR 623E. LEADERSHIP IN HEALTH CARE SYSTEMS PRACTICUM: MANAGEMENT FOCUS (3). Capstone course. Focuses on the integration and application of major concepts covered throughout the graduate nursing program in preparing students for leadership roles in nursing management environments. Students are guided in preparing for the end of program comprehensive evaluation which is based on Regis University and LHSON program outcomes, AONE
nursing executive certification guidelines, and ANCC advanced nurse executive certification guidelines.  Using a combination of seminar and precepted clinical experiences, students synthesize and apply previously learned leadership and management principles to a
specific health care setting and discuss theory practice disjunctions. One hundred and five (105) precepted clinical/field hours are required. Prerequisite(s): All MS in Leadership in Health Care Systems core and focus area courses. NOTE: Student must be compliant with  RHcomply@regis.edu to register for course.
NR 626. ADVANCED CARE IN ACUTE-CARE I FOR ADULTS ACROSS THE LIFESPAN (5). Fosters clinical competency and emphasizes evidence-based practice in the adult acute/critical and chronic health care settings. Emphasizes the integration of theory, assessment, and advanced therapeutics for adults and frail elders in high acuity patient settings. Students will perform comprehensive clinical assessment including appropriate diagnostics and therapeutic testing. Management of acute and chronic health problems will be accomplished with the direction of clinical preceptors. Clinical settings will include one of a variety of acute/critical care areas including, but not limited to: Coronary Care Unit (CCU), Medical Intensive Care Unit (MICU), Surgical Intensive Care Unit (SICU), Emergency Departments, intermediate care and specialty services such as transplant and oncology. Gerontology experiences in complex long-term care, rehabilitation, and/or inpatient units specializing in the acute care of elders will also be provided. (Includes clinical practicum 105 hours acute care with 30 of these hours as gerontology enrichment).

NR 627. ADVANCED PRACTICE IN ACUTE-CARE II FOR ADULTS ACROSS THE LIFESPAN (5). Prepares students to diagnose, treat, and follow patients with acute/critical care health problems across the adult age span. Emphasis is placed on the highest acuity of disease entities encountered in acute/critical care areas. (Includes clinical practicum 105 hours acute care with 30 of these hours as gerontology enrichment).

NR 628. ADVANCED DIAGNOSTICS & THERAPEUTICS (2). Introduces students to the role and scope of practice for Adult- Gerontology Acute-Care Nurse Practitioners and the principles of diagnostic and treatment modalities utilized in the acute/critical care settings. Content includes principles of fluid replacement, hemodynamic monitoring and electromechnical interventions. Analysis of relevant laboratory data and interpretation of radiographs and eletrocardiograms (ECG's) will be included. Laboratory practice will include procedures such as suturing, intubation, venous and arterial line insertion, and application of invasive therapeutic and diagnostic devices.

NR 629. CLINICAL TOPICS AND PROFESSIONAL ISSUES FOR ADULT-GERONTOLOGY ACUTE-CARE NURSE PRACTITIONER (5). Integrates the biomedical, psychological, and social elements of nurse practitioner practice. Under the supervision of an experience preceptor, students will provide in-depth, advanced practice nursing care to patients with acute, chronic, and complex health problems across the adult age span. Integration of current nursing and biomedical research evidence into the clinical decision-making process will be emphasized. Professional issues relevant to acute
care nurse practitioners will be explored. (Includes clinical practicum
105 hours acute care with 30 of these hours as gerontology enrichment).

NR 630. ADVANCED HEALTH ASSESSMENT OF THE PATIENT AND FAMILY (3). Provides a framework for systematic data collection, organization, precise recording, accurate physical and psychosocial assessment, and communication of data reflecting the health status of the patient and family. A holistic perspective facilitates an analysis of cultural, occupational, and environmental factors integral to an understanding of both the patient and
family’s physical and psychosocial wellbeing. The course provides the student an opportunity to develop advanced skills necessary to evaluate deviation from the normal assessment. The student will also practice advanced physical assessment skills in simulated clinical settings. Prerequisite(s): Admission to the graduate program in nursing.

NR 630F. ADVANCED HEALTH ASSESSMENT OF THE
PATIENT AND FAMILY (FNP TRACK) (4). Provides a framework for systematic data collection, organization, precise recording, accurate physical and psychosocial assessment, and
communication of data reflecting the health status of the patient and family. A holistic perspective facilitates an analysis of cultural, occupational, and environmental factors integral to an understanding of both the patient and family’s physical and psychosocial wellbeing. The course provides the student an opportunity to develop advanced skills necessary to evaluate deviation from the normal assessment. The student will also practice advanced physical assessment skills in simulated clinical settings. Prerequisite(s): Admission to the graduate program in nursing. NOTE: Lab fee required.

NR 637. WOMEN’S HEALTH AND CHILDBEARING FOR THE FAMILY NURSE PRACTITIONER (3). Introduces the foundation for the women's health care management process and the care of women across the lifespan. Prepares students to assume professional roles and responsibilities in the management of normal and common primary care variations pertaining to gynecological care such as contraceptive care, breast health, menopause, and sexually transmitted infections. Examines the broad scope of prenatal care and includes: normal patterns of pregnancy, post-partum women, and those with deviations from
normal in the pregnant woman/family and fetus. Emphasis is placed on the collaborative management of interventions to achieve desired outcomes during pregnancy. Students use scholarly
inquiry to further develop their practice knowledge. Research related to normal and at-risk client systems is applied. Prerequisite(s): NR 600, NR 605, NR 607, NR 630, or permission of Program Director.

NR 638. FOUNDATIONS IN CRITICAL CARE NURSING (4). Provides a strong foundation for entry level practice for critical care nursing with a holistic approach. Advanced assessment, monitoring techniques, and pathophysiology, as well as therapeutic modalities and nursing interventions will be addressed.

NR 639. CRITICAL CARE NURSING PRATICUM (2). Provides practical application of the critical care nurse role based upon American Association of Critical-Care Nurses (AACN) Standards of Practice and critical care nursing practice guidelines. Evidence- based practice using nursing knowledge, experience, and leadership theories will be applied in the direct care for diverse patients.

NR 646. TEACHING AND LEARNING STRATEGIES IN HEALTH CARE (3). Integrates teaching and learning theories for educating individuals and populations in clinical and academic settings.  Teaching strategies are grounded in educational theory, assessment of learner needs, and evidence-based teaching practices. This theoretical approach guides the selection and implementation of instructional methods and learning strategies. Students explore innovative practices in health care and nursing educational environments. Prerequisite(s): Admission to the MS Nursing or Graduate Certificate Program.

NR 647. CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT (3). Designed to promote the formulation of program outcomes and curriculum
development in various contemporary academic and practice settings.  The course focuses on elements of curriculum development and educational activities in healthcare education including:  evidence-based assessment, program content analysis, curriculum design and implementation, continuing professional education, and evaluation strategies. Guiding conceptual frameworks and underlying philosophical, socioeconomic, political, and contemporary health care trends that impact curriculum development and changes are analyzed. Prerequisite(s):
Admission to the Graduate program or Post-Graduate Health
Education Certificate.

NR 648. EVALUATION METHODS IN HEALTH CARE EDUCATION (3). Addresses formulating program outcomes and evaluating curricula that reflect contemporary trends in the healthcare environment.   Students will use a variety of strategies to assess and evaluate all domains of learning and outcomes in classroom, laboratory, and clinical settings. The process of program evaluation includes the assessment of educational outcomes for individuals and populations. Students will analyze and apply frameworks and models to assess and evaluate outcomes for continuous quality improvement.

NR 651. PROFESSIONAL INTEGRATION (3). Integrates core concepts in nursing for the nurse practitioner. Builds on the skill set essential for independent practice. Prerequisite(s): NR 600, NR 602, NR 608, and 75% of program requirements completed.

NR 652. ADVANCED HEALTH ASSESSMENT FOR THE NEONATAL NURSE PRACTITIONER (4). Presents a framework for systematic collection of a comprehensive database that includes pertinent history and physical assessments of the pregnant woman, neonate, and healthy child through age two. NOTE:  Includes 105 clinical hours of precepted clinical practice. Lab fee required.

NR 653. GENETICS AND EMBRYOLOGY FOR THE NEONATAL NURSE PRACTITIONER (3). Provides a scientific foundation in embryology and genetics for practice. Analyzes the principles of human genetics, genetic testing and screening, genetic abnormalities and gene therapy for implications for the neonatal nurse practitioner.

NR 654. ADVANCED PRACTICE PROCEDURES FOR THE HIGH RISK INFANT (2). A theory, application, and skills course addressing the assessment and management of neonatal procedures commonly encountered in neonatal intensive care facilities. Prerequisite(s): NRP (Neonatal Resuscitation) Certification, NR 605, NR 607, NR 652 or permission of instructor. NOTE: Laboratory practicum includes procedural techniques. Fee required.

NR 655. CARE OF THE CHILD TO AGE TWO (3). Covers common elements of primary and acute care of the child to age two, including those children who are former high risk infants or remain hospitalized beyond infancy in a neonatal intensive care of pediatric unit. Topics will include physical and developmental assessment, infant and child development, principles of well child care, and common childhood diseases. Care of the infant and child with chronic conditions such as congenital heart disease, chronic lung disease and surgical problems will also be addressed. Prerequisite(s): NR 652 and NR 653.

NR 656. MANAGEMENT OF THE HIGH RISK NEWBORN (5). Application of theory to practice in the development of a plan of care based on research evidence, pathophysiology, nursing and pharmacology principles, and protocols for the neonate. Prerequisite(s): NRP (Neonatal Resuscitation) Certification, NR
605, NR 607, NR 652 or permission of instructor. NOTE: Includes 105 hours of precepted clinical practice.

NR 657. CLINICAL INTEGRATION FOR THE NEONATAL NURSE PRACTITIONER (5). Focuses on the integration of advanced perinatal and neonatal theory, skill competency, critical thinking and clinical management of the low and high risk neonate and family. Prerequisite(s): NRP (Neonatal Resuscitation) certification, NR 605, NR 607, NR 652, NR 653, NR 654, NR 656, or permission of instructor. NOTE: Includes 415 hours of precepted clinical practice.

NR 658. HEALTH CARE EDUCATION PRACTICUM (3). Designed for students to synthesize and analyze knowledge of educational principles and theories learned through prior coursework and their practicum experience. 105 precepted practicum hours required. Prerequisite(s): NR 646, NR 647, and NR 648. NOTE: Enrollment in or completion of all health care education certificate courses.

NR 659. PRIMARY HEALTH CARE OF CHILDREN AND THEIR FAMILIES (3). Examines growth and development, health maintenance, health promotion and disease prevention for children from birth through adolescence. Studies pediatric specific acute and chronic conditions including injuries. Incorporation of family into treatment and management is included. Students will
develop skills in assessment, diagnosis, treatment and management specific to this population. Prerequisite(s): NR 600, NR 605, NR
607, NR 630, or permission of Program Director.

NR 660. PRIMARY HEALTH CARE ACROSS THE LIFESPAN I (5). Examines health maintenance, disease prevention, and health promotion across the life span. Students begin to develop skills in assessment, diagnosis, treatment, management, education and follow up of health maintenance exams, acute and chronic conditions, including injuries. NOTE: 210 Clinical hours of precepted experience are required. Prerequisite(s): NR 637, NR
659, or permission of Program Director.

NR 661. PRIMARY HEALTH CARE ACROSS THE LIFESPAN II (6). Examines health maintenance, disease prevention, and health promotion across the life span. Students begin to develop skills in assessment, diagnosis, treatment, management, education and follow up of health maintenance exams, acute and chronic conditions, including injuries. Detailed instruction in cardiac EKG interpretation and radiological assessment and interpretation are included. NOTE: 210 Clinical hours of precepted experience are required. Prerequisite(s): NR 637, NR 659, NR 660 or permission of Program Director.

NR 662. PRIMARY HEALTH CARE ACROSS THE LIFESPAN III (5). Examines health maintenance, disease prevention, and health promotion across the life span. Students begin to develop skills in assessment, diagnosis, treatment, management, education and follow up of health maintenance exams, acute and chronic conditions, including injuries. NOTE: 210 Clinical hours of precepted experience are required. Prerequisite(s): NR 637, NR
659, NR 660, NR 661 or permission of Program Director.

NR 667. PRIMARY CARE PROCEDURES A (1). Introduces theory, application, and skills addressing the assessment and management of patient procedures commonly encountered in
primary care settings. Students begin to develop and apply these skills necessary for clinical experience. Prerequisite(s): NR 600, NR 605, NR 607, NR 630. NOTE: Pass/No Pass grading only.

NR 670. ADVANCED PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY (3). Course builds on principles developed in the Pharmacology for Advanced Practice course. The focus will be to prepare the advanced psychiatric/mental health practitioner student with an in-depth conception of the clinical applications of the psychotropic drugs used to manage a spectrum of psychiatric disorders across the life span including substance use disorders. Prototypical agents and indications for use, efficacy, therapeutic and adverse effects, monitoring parameters, dosing principles, and drug interactions
for psychotropic medications using evidenced based principles will be discussed. Legal requirements for prescribing and the
challenges of medication management will also be explored. Prerequisite(s): NR 607.

NR 671. PSYCHIATRIC ASSESSMENT AND PSYCHOPATHOLOGY (4). A theoretical course for advanced psychiatric assessment techniques and psychopathology across the life span. The use of psychiatric interviewing techniques related to interpersonal transactions that influence therapeutic alliance with clients will be discussed. This will include the use of tools that guide the development of an accurate diagnosis in order to
achieve successful therapeutic outcomes. DSM-5 classifications, differential diagnosis, and behavioral management are
foundational. Practitioners will learn how to consider each client's unique cultural background to best tailor care to their individual, unique needs. Theoretical foundations will be explored.
Simulation. Prerequisite(s): NR 605 and NR 630.

NR 672. PSYCHIATRIC ADVANCED PRACTICE I (5). Provides students with the didactic content and clinical experience to enhance their diagnostic skills and develop comprehensive treatment planning and management for patients across the lifespan with psychiatric disorders. Students learn about evidence- based psychiatric management practices that address the bio- psycho-social needs of patients and adhere to ethical and legal standards supporting safe and efficacious psychiatric care. Pre- requisite()s): NR 670 and NR 671. Clinical hours = 105.

NR 673. PSYCHIATRIC ADVANCED PRACTICE II (5). Provides students with the didactic content and clinical experience to enhance the knowledge and skills developed in NR 672. Students apply evidence-based practices to diagnose, develop treatment plans, and manage the psychopharmacologic care of patients across the lifespan with acute and chronic psychiatric disorders. Evidence-based psychotherapeutic modalities used for individual,
family, and group treatment are presented and applied by students in the clinical setting. Pre-requisite(s):NR 670, NR 671, and NR
672. Clinical hours = 210.

NR 674. PSYCHIATRIC ADVANCED PRACTICE III (5). Provides the content and clinical experience to support the synthesis of knowledge and increasing autonomy in the diagnosis, treatment planning and management for patients across the lifespan with complex and chronic psychiatric presentations using a variety of evidence-based treatment modalities. Population-focused and community mental health needs and interventions as well as integration of mental health and primary care will be addressed. Prerequisite(s): NR 670, NR 671, NR 672, and NR 673. Clinical hours = 315.


NR 681. INTERPROFESSIONAL FOUNDATIONS OF GLOBAL HEALTH (1). Examines the growing body of knowledge, scholarship, and engagement in global health. Challenges students in the health professions to become engaged leaders to help address growing global health disparities. Cross listing(s): HSA
682, PHRM 781, DPT 780M, and DPT 781M. NOTE: Majors only.

NR 683. INTRODUCTION TO INTERPROFESSIONAL SPIRITUAL CARE (1). Provides a basic spiritual care foundation for providers.  Using Ignatian pedagogy, an interprofessional approach incorporates theory, observation and reflection. Clarifies roles of the spiritual care team.

NR 684. INTRODUCTION TO INTERPROFESSIONAL SPIRITUAL CARE II (2). Provides advanced spiritual care knowledge and application to clients. Based on Ignatian pedagogy, includes an interprofessional approach with didactic and field components emphasizing spiritual care delivery. Field experiences include mentoring in various work-place settings. Prerequisite(s): NR 683.

NR 690E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN GRADUATE NURSING (1-6). Topics by arrangement with individual faculty. Prerequisite(s): Majors only and permission of the appropriate department director required.

NR 695. CULTURAL DIVERSITY IN HEALTH CARE (3). Explores the components of cultural competence in health care. Issues related to cultural diversity in health and illness are discussed and analyzed. The graduate component extends foundational knowledge through additional readings, case analysis and/or applied project work.

NR 699. COMPREHENSIVE EVALUATION, MASTER OF SCIENCE (0). This course is a comprehensive evaluation of the student’s achievement of Regis University and LHSON MS Program Outcomes. Students provide a presentation reflecting on the Regis University and LHSON MS Program Outcomes with
provisions of evidence of this achievement. NOTE: Completion of all MS in Nursing program courses or permission of Program Director. Pass/No Pass grading only.

DOCTOR OF NURSING PRACTICE (DNP)

NR 701. THEORETICAL APPLICATION FOR DOCTORAL NURSING PRACTICE (3). Facilitates development and evaluation of new practice and delivery approaches based on theories from various disciplines of study. Students examine, critique, and develop theoretical frameworks that direct health care delivery to improve the health of individuals, aggregates, and communities. Reflecting on the complexity of health care, students develop ethical and evidence-based approaches for the application of natural and social sciences to communities of interest. The course also integrates the concepts of population health and equity of
care delivery for vulnerable, underserved, and diverse populations. NOTE: DNP students only.

NR 702. APPLIED STATISTICS (3). Develops skills and knowledge to manage and analyze biomedical data. Statistics used for
decision-making, population health assessment, and inferential research analysis are applied to describe the health of populations, quality assurance initiatives, appraisals of effectiveness of interventions, and predicting risk in urban or rural, geographic or
population-based, vulnerable or underserved populations. NOTE: DNP students only.

NR 703. INFORMATICS (3). Provides knowledge and skills for nurse leaders to analyze, evaluate, and utilize health care information systems for the delivery of patient care. Students examine clinical, administrative, patient education, and evidence- based practice informatics applications, ethical and legal issues, and the design and implementation of information systems in health care systems. Prerequisite(s): NR 600 or NR 622. NOTE: DNP students only. Cross listing:  NR 603.

NR 704. EPIDEMIOLOGY AND HEALTH PROMOTION FOR POPULATIONS (3). Provides the epidemiological foundations for assessing and planning population health promotion and disease prevention. Emphasizes core concepts of epidemiology including epidemiology models, determinants of health and illness, epidemiological methods and data measurements and examining the epidemiology of populations across the lifespan. Students examine the role of the DNP in collaborating with community partners in using epidemiology study results for addressing gaps in care for vulnerable and underserved populations at local, state, national, and global levels. NOTE: DNP students only.

NR 706A-C. DNP PROJECT (1). The Capstone project will provide a demonstration of evidence based application of course and clinical experiences to meet University, School, and Program outcomes. The Capstone project will include a DNP practice change initiative. Students take Capstone Project A seminar early in the program to explore a variety of DNP roles and their DNP role in their practice setting. Students identify the vulnerable, underserved, or diverse populations with whom they are working, establish a practice problem and review the relevant literature in preparation for establishing their practice change initiative. The Capstone committees are established to guide the students in the practice projects. Pre- or co-requisite: Appropriate NR 715 or NR 725 courses. NOTE: DNP students only.

NR 707. CLINICAL RESEARCH FOR THE DOCTOR OF NURSING PRACTICE (3). As the costs of health care continue to rise, and society's ability to meet these costs declines, there is increasing interest in the efficacy, economic evaluation, and overall patient satisfaction with health care interventions across populations. This course provides background information on the theoretical foundations, implementation, and evaluation of outcomes research in evidence-based practice, and emphasizes
the ongoing use of data to improve the processes, systems, and delivery of care to vulnerable, underserved, and diverse populations. Examines concepts related to utilization of outcome data in clinical decision-making at the programmatic and organizational level and develop an outcomes research project proposal. NOTE: DNP students only.

NR 708. HEALTH POLICY ANALYSIS AND DEVELOPMENT (3). Students critically analyze public policy and the implications of policy to consumers, professionals and policy makers. Financial
and legal influences are discussed as students evaluate policy decisions and strategize ways to drive policy supportive of health care, health care delivery, health care education and the practice of nursing. Shows evidence of leadership in the development and implementation of health care policy within institutions and the public arena at all levels from local to international. NOTE: DNP students only.

NR 709. HEALTH SYSTEM DECISION MAKING (3). Students develop and articulate their vision and mission for a nursing practice enterprise as a foundation for a strategic plan to improve health outcomes with diverse, vulnerable, and/or underserved populations. In collaboration with inter-professional and community partners, students apply network and systems thinking and strategic planning principles to authentic issues within the context of a global and evolving health care environment. Case study analysis and organizational and leadership theory are used
to develop a nursing practice enterprise to improve the nation's health.  Students will analyze diverse health care systems in relationship to local, state, national, and global health care
markets and population needs. Students will examine and develop marketing and sales strategies that impact health care delivery and education. A comprehensive business plan will be developed that incorporates cost-effective financial planning and project funding. Principles of business, finance, economics, and health policy will be used to develop effective plans that improve the quality of care, especially for vulnerable, underserved, or diverse populations. Students apply foundationally and nursing administration knowledge, skills, and attitudes to their advanced practice role. NOTE: DNP students only.

NR 711. ADVANCED LEADERSHIP FOR COLLABORATIVE MODELS OF CARE (3). Addresses advanced practice models for nurse practitioners, including scope of practice, standards of care, practice guidelines and credentialing. Collaborative models of health care and collaborative practice are presented and address issues related to access to care. Principles of leadership and management are presented and include advanced communication skills, ethical decision-making, office management, and insurance and billing.  The role of the nurse practitioner as a member of health care delivery teams is presented with a focus on coalition building, human relations development, and workforce planning. Leadership skills emphasize creating change and negotiating conflict to provide health care to selected populations within collaborative care models. Evaluation strategies and outcomes served as a basis for determining quality of care. NOTE: DNP students only.

NR 712. DYNAMICS OF ORGANIZATIONS, SYSTEMS DESIGN, AND EVALUATION (3). Analyzes the theoretical basis for organizations and the role and structure of organizations across the health care continuum both globally and within multiple contexts.  Students examine quality and safety initiatives, relationships of structure, finance, function, design, and risk management from a systems model perspective. Further,
students use ethical leadership concepts to analyze complex situations and environment to operationalize best practice standards in service to vulnerable, underserved, diverse populations. NOTE: DNP students only

NR 715A-C. APPLICATION TO PRACTICE CLINICAL HOURS (1-7).  Students register for a variable number of credit hours based on faculty review of transcripts and degree plan requirements. These precepted experiences are designed to assist students apply theory to practice, identify theory to practice disjunctions, and complete a DNP Capstone Project in the student’s area of interest. Application to practice hours may be scheduled in conjunction with the student’s capstone project courses. NOTE: DNP students only
NR 721. STRATEGIC PLANNING IN AN EVOLVING HEATLH CARE ENVIRONMENT (3). Students apply foundational and nursing administration knowledge, skills, and attitudes to their advanced practice role. Students develop and articulate their vision and mission for a nursing practice enterprise as a foundation for a strategic plan to improve health outcomes with diverse, vulnerable, and/or underserved populations. In collaboration with interprofessional and community partners, students apply network and systems thinking and strategic planning principles to authentic issues within the context of a global and evolving health care environment. Case study analysis and organizational and leadership theory are used to develop a
nursing practice enterprise to improve the nation’s health. NOTE: DNP students only.

NR 722. HEALTH CARE SYSTEMS FINANCE AND MARKETING (3). Students will analyze diverse health care systems in relation to local, state, national, and global health care markets and population needs. Students will examine and develop
marketing and sales strategies that impact health care delivery and education.  A comprehensive business plan will be developed that incorporates cost effective financial planning and project funding. Principles of business, finance, economics, and health policy will be used to develop effective plans that improve quality of care, especially for vulnerable, underserved, or diverse populations. NOTE: Students must have matriculated into the DNP to be eligible to take this course.

NR 725A-D. APPLICATION TO PRACTICE CLINICAL HOURS (1-7). Students register for a variable number of credit hours based on faculty review of transcripts and degree plan
requirements. These precepted experiences are designed to assist students apply theory to practice, identify theory to practice disjunctions, and complete a DNP Capstone Project in the student’s area of interest. Application to practice hours may be scheduled in conjunction with the student’s capstone project courses. NOTE: DNP students only.

NR 799. PROJECT DEFENSE (0). Required of all DNP students. Consists of an oral comprehensive presentation on core and specialty course content and evidence of achievement or program and university outcomes. Prerequisite(s): all DNP theory and capstone project courses in the emphasis, greater than 80% of all application to practice clinical hours, and approval of the appropriate director/coordinator. Note: DNP students only.

DOCTOR OF PHARMACY (PHRM)

PHRM 601. PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY: FROM BENCH TO BEDSIDE (3).  An overview of the pharmaceutical industry (RxI) in the context of the drug development process. Students will learn the role that pharmacy-trained individuals can have within the RxI and its associated support services industries. Prerequisite(s): PHRM 728, or permission of instructor.

PHRM 602. MEDICAL EVIDENCE EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIONS (3). Designed to expand on the students' understanding of medical evidence evaluation. Topics include constructing and executing systematic searches using primary, secondary, and tertiary literature, including guidelines and grey literature; systematically analyzing critiquing and comparing research findings, formulating written and verbal responses to questions, devising a well-written medical sound document, and providing a medically sound oral presentation. Prerequisite(s): PHRM 601 and PHRM 728, or permission of instructor.

PHRM 603. LEGAL AND REGULATORY ENVIRONMENT FOR THE PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY (3). Introduces students to legal and regulatory practices within the pharmaceutical industry. Topics include pharmacovigilance procedures across the drug development and post marketing lifespan, regulatory considerations for INDs, NDAs and clinical trials. Regulations regarding US and FDA procedures, as well as those outside of the US will be discussed. Prerequisite(s): PHRM 602 and PHRM 728, or permission of instructor.

PHRM 604. STUDY DESIGN IN THE PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY (3). Introduce students to the types of studies conducted to bring a product from conception to market and beyond.  They will gain an overview of research methods, developing scientific questions, hypotheses, and statistical inference.  They will be introduced to clinical trials and procedures necessary to conduct them. They will be introduced
to observational trials to support a product and as surveillance for safety signals. They will be introduced to health economics and outcomes research (HEOR) methods used by decision makers to compare interventions and treatment options. This course will develop each student's ability become pharmacists specializing in the pharmaceutical product lifecycle. Prerequisite(s): PHRM 603 and PHRM 728, or permission of instructor

PHRM 701. INTEGRATED PHARMACOTHERAPY 1 (4). Introduction to basic biochemical, pharmacologic, pharmacokinetic, pharmaceutical, and medicinal chemistry principles essential to understanding the scientific basis of drug therapy.

PHRM 702. INTEGRATED PHARMACOTHERAPY 2 (4). Integrated approach to understanding the pharmacotherapy of disease states. Covers biochemistry, physiology, pathophysiology, medicinal chemistry, pharmacology, and pharmacotherapy of presentation and management of gastrointestinal, endocrine, cardiovascular, renal and nutrition disorders. Includes principles of dosage forms and drug delivery strategies. Prerequisite(s): PHRM
701.

PHRM 703. INTEGRATED PHARMACOTHERAPY 3 (4). Integrated approach to understanding the pharmacotherapy of disease states. Covers biochemistry, physiology, immunology, pathophysiology, medicinal chemistry, pharmacology, and pharmacotherapy of presentation and management of cardiovascular, endocrine, psychiatric, and respiratory disorders. Includes principles of dosage forms and drug delivery strategies. Prerequisite(s): PHRM 702.

PHRM 704. INTEGRATED PHARMACOTHERAPY 4 (4). Integrated approach to understanding the pharmacotherapy of disease states. Covers biochemistry, immunology, physiology, pathophysiology, medicinal chemistry, pharmacology, and pharmacotherapy of presentation and management of infectious disease, neurologic, psychiatric, and respiratory disorders. Includes principles of dosage forms and drug delivery strategies Prerequisite(s): PHRM 703.

PHRM 721. INTEGRATED PHARMACY LABORATORY 1 (1). Introduces basic pharmaceutical measurements, prescription interpretation and dispensing, emphasizing preparation of sterile
products. Physical assessment, documentation, and clinical chemistry skills are covered that extend student understanding of disease states covered in the IP sequence.

PHRM 722. INTEGRATED PHARMACY LABORATORY 2 (1). Introduces compounding of tablet, topical, and oral suspensions and solutions. Examines about devices for home diabetes monitoring. The second half of the semester focuses on pulmonary assessment, inhaler counseling, and smoking cessation counseling.

PHRM 730. PHARMACY AND THE UNITED STATES HEALTH CARE SYSTEM (3). Examines ways health care is accessed and used in the United States. Compares other systems around the world. Discusses roles of regulatory agencies, advocacy organizations, and the pharmaceutical industry. Covers issues of public health policy, economic behavior, outcomes.

PHRM 740. PHARMACY LAW AND POLICY (3). Examines the history of pharmacy laws and how the laws structured current practice guidelines and impact the distribution/dispensing of drugs. Explores state and local statutes concerning business and pharmacy practice. Civil liability and professional ethics are discussed.

PHRM 741. THERAPEUTIC PRINCIPLES OF SELF-CARE (3). Provides principles of self-care, product selection and rational use of nonprescription medications. Emphasizes appliances, durable medical goods, and OTC testing devices. Practices interviewing, decision-making for patient triage, and consultation skills. Service learning allows students to consider issues of self-care in socio- economically challenged populations.

PHRM 750. INTRODUCTION TO PHARMACY PRACTICE (2). Focuses on preparing students for the introductory pharmacy practice experiences. Students spend the semester obtaining necessary training for experiential education, learning elements of professionalism, specifically, communications, interactions, and behaviors. Introduction is also made to health care documentation and drug information.

PHRM 751. INTRODUCTORY PHARMACY PRACTICE EXPERIENCE 1 (2). The first of five introductory experiential courses. Students spend six hours weekly at a community or institutional site learning about the pharmacy practice setting and completing assignments related to concepts in their concurrent coursework. Prerequisite(s): PHRM 750.

PHRM 705. INTEGRATED PHARMACOTHERAPY 5 (4). Integrated approach to understanding the pharmacotherapy of disease states. Covers biochemistry, physiology, pathophysiology, medicinal chemistry, pharmacology, and pharmacotherapy of presentation and management of selected renal, hepatic, hematological, infectious disease, and cardiovascular disorders. Includes principles of dosage forms and drug delivery strategies. Prerequisite(s): PHRM 704.

PHRM 706. INTEGRATED PHARMACOTHERAPY 6 (4). Integrated approach to understanding the pharmacotherapy of disease states. Covers biochemistry, physiology, pathophysiology, medicinal chemistry, pharmacology, and pharmacotherapy of presentation and management of selected cardiac, vascular, and renal disorders. Includes principles of dosage forms and drug delivery strategies. Prerequisite(s): PHRM 705.

PHRM 707. INTEGRATED PHARMACOTHERAPY 7 (4). Integrated approach to understanding the pharmacotherapy of disease states. Covers biochemistry, physiology, pathophysiology, medicinal chemistry, pharmacology, dosage form and drug delivery strategies, and pharmacotherapy of selected neurologic, psychiatric, bone and joint, and immunologic disorders. Prerequisite(s): PHRM 706.

PHRM 708. INTEGRATED PHARMACOTHERAPY 8 (4). Integrated approach to understanding the pharmacotherapy of disease states.  Covers biochemistry, physiology, pathophysiology, medicinal chemistry, pharmacology, and pharmacotherapy of presentation and management of selected women’s and men’s health, oncologic, and infectious disorders. Includes principles of dosage forms and drug delivery strategies. Prerequisite(s): PHRM
707.

PHRM 709. INTEGRATED PHARMACOTHERAPY 9 (4). Integrated approach to understanding the pharmacotherapy of selected disease states including oncologic and hematologic disorders, viral and fungal infections and transplant. Covers biochemistry, physiology, pathophysiology, medicinal chemistry, pharmacology, and pharmacotherapy, with principles of dosage forms and drug delivery strategies. Prerequisite (s): PHRM 708.

PHRM 710. INTEGRATED PHARMACOTHERAPY 10 (4). Integrated approach to understanding the pharmacotherapy of selected disease states including psychological and neurological disorders, and bacterial infections.  Covers biochemistry, physiology, pathophysiology, medicinal chemistry, pharmacology, and pharmacotherapy, with principles of dosage forms and drug delivery strategies. Prerequisite(s): PHRM 709.

PHRM 711. INTEGRATED PHARMACOTHERAPY 11 (4). Integrated approach to understanding/solving problems of concomitant diseases through complicated patient cases. Material from previous pharmacotherapy courses is addressed, and new material is introduced. Includes physicochemical/biological principles of dosage forms and drug delivery methods for appropriate treatment. Prerequisite(s): PHRM 710.

PHRM 712. INTEGRATED PHARMACOTHERAPY 12 (4). Integrated approach to understanding/solving problems of concomitant diseases through complicated patient cases. Material from previous pharmacotherapy courses is addressed, and new material is introduced. Includes physicochemical/biological principles of dosage forms and drug delivery methods for appropriate treatment. Prerequisite(s): PHRM 711.

PHRM 723. INTEGRATED PHARMACY LABORATORY 3 (1). The course is designed to develop patient assessment and counseling, prescription preparation, extemporaneous compounding, and dispensing skills. The topic sequence is designed to coordinate with those presented in the integrated therapeutics sequence.

PHRM 724. INTEGRATED PHARMACY LABORATORY 4 (1). Builds on skills introduced in IL 1-3 and acquire new patient assessment, communication, pharmaceutical calculations, prescription preparation and dispensing, and extemporaneous compounding skills. Topics are designed to complement the integrated pharmacotherapy course. Prerequisite(s): PHRM 723.

PHRM 725. PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT I (1). Course series
(PD-1, 2) builds foundational pharmacy professional development
skills.  Throughout this course series, students will apply research skills to evaluate contemporary healthcare literature, create clear and organized presentation using physical and audiovisual tools, develop professional presentation skills, identify methods of objective assessment, and begin their practice of life-long-learning. Predetermined scientific and pharmacotherapeutic focus areas will be assigned for each of the professional journal club
presentations. Prerequisite(s): PHRM 724.

PHRM 726. PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT II (1). Course series (PD-1, 2) builds foundational pharmacy professional development skills. Throughout this course (PD-2), students will apply research skills to evaluate contemporary healthcare literature, create clear and organized presentations, learn to effectively utilize audiovisual tools, develop professional presentation skills, identify methods of objective assessment, gain medication therapy management (MTM) knowledge and skills, and begin their practice of life-long-learning. Faculty mentors with predetermined scientific and pharmacotherapeutic focus areas will be assigned for each professional seminar presentation during Professional Development 1 & 2. Prerequisite(s): PHRM 725.

PHRM 727. INTEGRATED LITERATURE EVALUATION 1 (3). Study of literature evaluation and research study design. Discuss advantages and disadvantages of primary, secondary, and tertiary literature. Systematically approach drug information requests and to efficiently find and evaluate biomedical literature. Evaluate a study for validity, design, and methods.

PHRM 728. INTEGRATED LITERATURE EVALUATION 2 (3). Study of literature evaluation including critical assessment of research design and statistical method. Systematic evaluation of primary literature. Students learn to respond systematically to drug information requests and to efficiently find and evaluate biomedical literature and apply it to patient care. Prerequisite(s): PHRM 727.

PHRM 731. LITERATURE AN PHARMACOECONOMIC ANALYSES (3). Builds on topics covered in PHRM 727 and 728 and includes literature evaluation of observation studies (i.e., case- control, cohort), and meta-analyses (observational and/or experimental studies), as well as evidence-based medicine topics (primary literature/clinical practice guidelines to impact patient care). Presents methods to evaluate pharmacoeconomic studies
by examining collection and analysis of monetary costs of a pharmaceutical product and alternatives, compared to the value of effects (e.g., quality of life or efficacy).  Careful interpretation of pharmacoeconomic studies to inform healthcare decision making
is addressed. Prerequisite(s): PHRM 728 and PHRM 730.

PHRM 732. LEADERSHIP AND MANAGEMENT (3). Introduces topics such as key business relationships, planning, market analysis, ownership, service offerings, competitive strategies, and operations.  Covers fundamental principles of leadership, including attributes of effective leaders, and cultivation of personal
leadership qualities.

PHRM 743. FAITH, SPIRITUALITY AND CULTURE IN HEALTH CARE (3). Survey of different religious beliefs and how people in various faith traditions access and use health care resources; emphasis on understanding and communicating with patients who present with less commonly encountered beliefs.

PHRM 752. INTRODUCTORY PHARMACY PRACTICE EXPERIENCE 2 (2). The second of five experiential courses. Students spend six hours weekly at a community site learning about the community pharmacy practice setting and completing assignments related to concepts in their concurrent course work. Prerequisite(s): PHRM 451.

PHRM 753. INTRODUCTORY PHARMACY PRACTICE EXPERIENCE 3 (2). The third of five experiential courses. Students spend six hours weekly at a community site learning about the community pharmacy practice setting and completing assignments related to concepts in their concurrent course work. Prerequisite(s): PHRM 752.

PHRM 754. INTRODUCTORY PHARMACY PRACTICE EXPERIENCE 4 (2). Introductory Pharmacy Practice Experience 4 is the fourth of five experiential courses. Students spend six
hours weekly at an institutional site learning about the
institutional pharmacy practice setting and completing assignments related to concepts in their concurrent course work. Prerequisite(s): PHRM 753.

PHRM 755. INTRODUCTORY PHARMACY PRACTICE EXPERIENCE 5 (2). Inter-professional simulations designed to combine pharmacy knowledge with practice in professionalism. Prerequisite(s): PHRM 754.

PHRM 760. ADVANCED PHARMACY PRACTICE EXPERIENCE I (6). This is the first of eight required advanced experiential courses.  The APPE is designed to expand students’ knowledge and practice skills needed to perform activities commonly encountered in a variety of pharmacy practice settings.

PHRM 761. ADVANCED PHARMACY PRACTICE EXPERIENCE II (6). This is the second of eight required advanced experiential courses.  The APPE is designed to expand students’ knowledge and practice skills needed to perform activities commonly encountered in a variety of pharmacy practice settings.

PHRM 762. ADVANCED PHARMACY PRACTICE EXPERIENCE III (6). This is the third of eight required advanced experiential courses.  The APPE is designed to expand students’ knowledge and practice skills needed to perform activities commonly encountered in a variety of pharmacy practice settings.

PHRM 763. ADVANCED PHARMACY PRACTICE EXPERIENCE IV (6). This is the fourth of eight required advanced experiential courses.  The APPE is designed to expand students’ knowledge and practice skills needed to perform activities commonly encountered in a variety of pharmacy practice settings.

PHRM 764. ADVANCED PHARMACY PRACTICE EXPERIENCE V (6). This is the fifth of eight required advanced experiential courses.  The APPE is designed to expand students’ knowledge and practice skills needed to perform activities commonly encountered in a variety of pharmacy practice settings.

PHRM 765. ADVANCED PHARMACY PRACTICE EXPERIENCE VI (6). The eighth of eight required advanced experiential courses. Designed to expand the student's knowledge and practice skills needed to perform activities commonly encountered in a variety
of pharmacy practice settings. Prerequisite(s): PHRM 764. NOTE: Majors Only.

PHRM 766. ADVANCED PHARMACY PRACTICE EXPERIENCE VII (6). The eighth of eight required advanced experiential courses.  Designed to expand the student's knowledge and practice skills needed to perform activities commonly
encountered in a variety of pharmacy practice settings. Prerequisite(s): PHRM 765. NOTE: Majors Only.

PHRM 767. ADVANCED PHARMACY PRACTICE EXPERIENCE VIII (6). The eighth of eight required advanced experiential courses.  Designed to expand the student's knowledge and practice skills needed to perform activities commonly encountered in a variety of pharmacy practice settings. Prerequisite(s): PHRM 766. NOTE: Majors Only.

PHRM 771. IMMUNOLOGY OF CURRENT AND EMERGING INFECTIOUS DISEASES (3). Provide students an in depth review on the role of innate and adaptive immune responses to viral, bacterial, fungal and parasitic infections and how specific pathogens are transmitted. Topics will include emerging infectious diseases that are not discussed in other curriculum. Discussions regarding the treatment of these emerging infectious diseases will include evaluations of FDA guidelines and primary literature recommendations. Containment and government agency response strategies will also be discussed for Category A-
C pathogens. Course will provide students background knowledge and guidance toward treatment of emerging infectious diseases
that healthcare workers may experience in practice. NOTE:
Second and third-year pharmacy students only.

PHRM 772. DRUGS OF ABUSE (3). Covers the pharmacological, clinical, and societal aspects of psychoactive/psychotropic drugs of abuse. Special emphasis is placed on observable signs and symptoms, screening, and therapeutic management of commonly abused drugs. NOTE: Students must have a P-2 standing.

PHRM 774. ADVANCED TOPICS IN COMPOUNDING AND DRUG DELIVERY (3). Students will apply biopharmaceutical principles to the design and preparation of compounded dosage forms. The class will consist of theoretical discussions, pharmaceutical compounding, and product analysis.

PHRM 775. PHARMACOGENOMICS (3). Using a bench-to- bedside approach, the course content spans from foundational genetic concepts to the role of pharmacogenomics in managing selected disease states. In addition, the ethical, legal and social implications of pharmacogenomics will be presented.

PHRM 776. ADVANCED TOPICS IN DRUG INFORMATION- ONLINE (2). Expands on the understanding of drug information. Topics include answering difficult drug information questions, interpreting and critiquing the primary literature, formulary management, and medical writing. Prerequisite(s): PHRM 727 and PHRM 728. NOTE: P3 standing required.

PHRM 777. PALLIATIVE CARE (3). This course is designed to develop skills in the interdisciplinary team approach and principles of palliative care, including symptom assessment and management, ethical issues, and advance care planning. Emphasis is placed on
the role of the pharmacist in the palliative care and hospice settings.

PHRM 778. SPANISH FOR PHARMACY PRACTICE I (3). Introduces elemental and basic conversational Spanish. Basic words and phrases, and health-related words will be covered so that students can communicate with Spanish-speaking patients and clients. NOTE: Students must have a P-2 standing.

PHRM 779. APPLIED LEADERSHIP IN PHARMACY PRACTICE (3). Discover, reflect on, and enhance leadership skills by emphasizing the development of a personal mission statement, timeless leadership and influence principles, conflict management, positive reinforcement strategies, effective interpersonal communication, embracement of adversity, and emotional intelligence. Prerequisite(s): PHRM 451 and PHRM 752.

PHRM 780. SPANISH FOR PHARMACY PRACTICE II (3). This Intermediate Medical Spanish course, tailored for pharmacy students, helps students move from a beginning knowledge of general and medical Spanish to an intermediate level of Medical Spanish.  It is perfect for the student with 3+ years of High School Spanish or 2+ years of college Spanish in the past, who wants to review what they already know and gain more knowledge of medical terminology in the pharmacy context.

PHRM 781. INTERPROFESSIONAL FOUNDATIONS IN GLOBAL HEALTH I (1). Examines strategies for students to become engaged leaders in the health professions within the current global reality. Core concepts of international service, poverty and global injustice, structural violence, determinants of health, culture and foreign aid will be addressed. Co-requisite: NR
681, HSA 682, DPT 780M, and DPT 781M.

PHRM 783. ADVANCED TOPICS IN DRUG INFORMATION (3). Expands on the students' understanding of drug information. Topics will include literature evaluation, claims in the media and the basis for truth, formulary management, medication safety initiatives, and medical writing. Prerequisite(s): PHRM 727 and PHRM 728.

PHRM 784. INTRODUCTION TO INTERPROFESSIONAL SPIRITUAL CARE (1). Blended foundational inter-professional course assessing spiritual care needs of clients to maximize quality of care outcomes. Activities include personal reflection, interventions, and identification of roles of spiritual care team through participation in community observation.

PHRM 785. INTERPROFESSIONAL SPIRITUAL CARE (2). Blended inter-professional course advancing knowledge in application of spiritual assessment and support of whole patient needs. Includes a community field experience working with spiritual provider mentors in various settings- examples: hospital and hospice.  Prerequisite(s): PHRM 784.

PHRM 786. ADVANCED SELF CARE (3). Incorporation of multiple disease-states in the self-care arena to evaluate and determine appropriate self-care product selection and non- pharmacologic recommendation for numerous patient populations.  Further emphasis on interviewing, decision-making for patient triage, and consultation skills will be
incorporated. NOTE: Majors Only.

PHRM 788. CRITICAL REVIEW IN ONCOLOGY RESEARCH (3). Provides critical review of preclinical and clinical oncology pharmacy research. Emphasis of study is placed on ground- breaking discoveries in oncology pharmacotherapy. Reviews and discusses essential articles from primary literature sources in order to develop an original research proposal in the field of oncology pharmacy. NOTE: Students must be in professional year 3 of the pharmacy program. Prerequisite(s): PHRM 728.

PHRM 789. PRINCIPLES OF MEDICINAL CHEMISTRY AND DRUG DESIGN (3). Introduction to the fundamentals of medicinal chemistry, including the mechanistic organic chemistry
of enzyme function and drug metabolism, receptor binding theory,
and drug design and discovery. Primary literature will be referenced in order to develop a thorough understanding of basic principles and to explore select case studies. Students will be expected to apply learned principles in the computer aided
rational design of their own novel drug molecule. NOTE: Second- year pharmacy (P2) standing or above required.

PHRM 790E-W. DIRECTED STUDY SERIES (3). Individually supervised independent study related to current topics in pharmaceutical sciences. A contract between the student and supervising faculty, detailing learning objectives, activities used to attain the objectives, and the basis for evaluation must be developed and approved in advance.

PHRM 791. ACUTE CARE (2). Provides a more comprehensive evaluation of conditions commonly encountered in hospitalized patients. Students will begin their acute care APPE rotations more prepared to evaluate complex patient situations. Prerequisite(s): PHRM 710.  NOTE: Second-year pharmacy (P2) standing or above required.

PHRM 792. ADVANCED NEUROLOGY (3). Focuses on neurological disorders that may have new or not well established treatments. Topics will include, among others, Guillain-Barre Syndrome, Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis, Fibromyalgia, Huntington’s Disease, and NMDA Receptor Encephalitis. NOTE: Second-year pharmacy (P2) standing or above required.

PHRM 793. PHARMACY ENTREPRENEURSHIP (3). Focuses on key business relationships; business planning; market analysis; forms of ownership; service offerings; competitive strategies; promotion/marketing, customer service, financial, inventory and human resource management, reimbursement challenges; and professional advocacy to support pharmacy entrepreneurship.

PHRM 794. PHARMACY RESIDENCY PREPARATION (1). Provides students the opportunity to explore what a pharmacy residency is, learn skill that will help them be a competitive applicant and learn what it means to be a pharmacy leader. NOTE: Third-year pharmacy (P3) standing required.

PHRM 795. IMMUNOLOGY AND VACCINES (3). Provides students with in depth discussions regarding how the immune system responds to different types of disease. Students will gain a better understanding of how vaccines that protect from such diseases are developed and delivered. The course will also devote time to discussing special cases of vaccinology such as travel vaccines, cancer vaccines and animal vaccines as a means to prevent spread of zoonotic disease. The course will then end with a review of FDA guideline for vaccine development, approval, reporting of adverse effects and the current vaccine schedules.

PHRM 796. CRITICAL EVALUATION OF ALTERNATIVE MEDICINE (3). Offers a critical review of the popular and scientific literature on a variety of claims of alternative medicine. Clinical faculty will offer insights into appropriate and supportive means of patient counseling. Prerequisite(s): PHRM 728.

PHRM 797. INTRODUCTION TO PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY: BENCH TO BEDSIDE (1). An overview of the pharmaceutical industry (RXL) in the context of the drug development process. Student will learn the role that pharmacy- trained individuals can have within the RXL and its associated support services industries. NOTE: P2 standing required.


PHRM 798. POINT-OF-CARE TESTING CERTIFICATE (1). Students will earn a point-of-care certificate through a program offered by NACDS. The format includes pre-reading, a two day program, and a skills assessment. Program fee is $100.00
Prerequisite(s): PHRM 705.

PHRM 799. A REFLECTIVE LOOK AT HOLISTIC MEDICINE (3). Provides an opportunity for students to learn about and reflect on holistic and alternative medication practices. Understanding this will help students interact their patients while respecting their values and beliefs. NOTE: P2 or P3 standing required.

DOCTOR OF PHYSICAL THERAPY (DPT)

DPT 701. HUMAN ANATOMY AND HISTOLOGY (6). Examines normal gross anatomy and histology across the lifespan. Explores relationships of the musculoskeletal, nervous, integumentary, and cardiopulmonary systems at the cellular, tissue, organ, and system level. Neuromusculoskeletal embryology is included. Co-requisite: DPT 770. NOTE: Laboratory includes cadaver dissection.

DPT 703. BIOMECHANICS AND KINESIOLOGY-EXTREMITIES (3).  Investigates the structure and function of tissues during movement. Explores kinematic, kinetic and muscle function relationships of extremity single and multi-axis joints. Laboratory includes principles and methods of evaluation for muscle and joint function for extremities.

DPT 704. NEUROSCIENCE (4). Studies the structure/function of the nervous system across the lifespan. Includes cellular, systemic, and clinical pathology discussions of peripheral and central neural components. Examines sensations, perceptions, cognition, and muscle control as well as introduces pathology and basic examinations of these systems. Prerequisite(s): DPT 701. NOTE: Laboratory included.

DPT 705. BIOMECHANICS AND KINESIOLOGY - SPINE (2). Investigates structure and function of tissues during movement. Explores kinematic, kinetic and muscle function relationships of axial single and multi-axis joints. Laboratory includes principles and methods of evaluation for TMJ /Spine muscle and joint function. Prerequisite(s): DPT 701 and DPT 703. NOTE: Laboratory included.

DPT 706. MOVEMENT SCIENCE (2). Investigates the theoretical principles of motor learning and motor control. Analysis of the motor behavior approach to movement science and clinical intervention is discussed. Co-requisite: DPT 704. NOTE: Laboratory included.

DPT 707. EXAMINATION OF THE MOVEMENT SYSTEM (4). Analyzes neural recruitment of muscle, kinematic and kinetic characteristics of multi-joint movement patterns in the
extremities across the lifespan. Balance, upper extremity function, transitional movement, and gait are addressed. Prerequisite(s): DPT 705. NOTE: Laboratory included.

DPT 708. MANAGEMENT APPLICATIONS OF PHYSIOLOGY: MAP I (3). Studies physiologic principles necessary for physical activity, physiologic changes and adaptations that occur with exercise and the associated effects of physical activity on health and wellness across the lifespan. Addresses measurement of fitness and development of training programs to improve physical fitness. NOTE: Laboratory included.
DPT 710A. PHARMACOLOGY (1). Investigates pharmacokinetic and pharmacotherapeutic principles in light of clinical application, therapeutic and adverse effects, and drug interactions. Emphasizes knowledge of the relationship between medications and physical therapy interventions to improve patient/client outcomes.
Co-requisite: DPT 732.

DPT 710B. PHARMACOLOGY (1). Continuation of 710A. Investigates pharmacokinetic and pharmacotherapeutic principles in light of clinical application, therapeutic and adverse effects, and drug interactions. Emphasizes knowledge of the relationship between medications and physical therapy interventions to improve patient/client outcomes. Prerequisite(s): DPT 710A.

DPT 712. DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING AND PROCEDURES (2). Introduces the foundations and principles of diagnostic imaging and procedures used in clinical management to include radiographic imaging, MRI and electrophysiologic studies. Rationales and guidelines for examination selection are discussed. Performs nerve conduction and needle EMG studies. Examines basic interpretation of diagnostic imaging as well as interpretation of EMG and nerve conduction studies. Prerequisite(s): DPT 704. NOTE: Laboratory included.

DPT 714. PSYCHOSOCIAL ASPECTS OF HEALTH CARE (3). Explores the physical therapist's role and evidence-based strategies for effective interprofessional management of patients with biopsychosocial considerations related to disability, chronic
pain, mental health, substance use, spirituality, loss, physical abuse, culture and diversity.

DPT 715. HEALTH CARE POLICY (2). Explores major forms of health care delivery and how they interact with physical therapy services. Investigates practice settings, organizational structures, reimbursement mechanisms, and the impact of managed care from a fiscal, quality, and legal perspective.

DPT 716. BUSINESS MANAGEMENT (2). Introduces principles of strategic planning, market analysis, personnel, fiscal, and total quality management through development of a business plan. Applies legal boundaries and ethical guidelines related to service provision issues.

DPT 719. EXERCISE FOUNDATIONS (1). Investigates principles of therapeutic exercise in relationship to clinical interventions. Integrates individual exercise prescription for optimal health across the lifespan. Focuses on basic principles for identification, intervention, modification and progression of therapeutic exercises. Prerequisite(s): DPT 708. NOTE: Laboratory included.

DPT 730. PHYSICAL THERAPY EXAMINATION (3). Introduces physical therapy examination, evaluation, and diagnosis within a clinical decision making framework referencing the Guide to Physical Therapist Practice. Prerequisite(s): DPT 701, DPT 703, and DPT 708. NOTE: Laboratory included.

DPT 731. DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS (2). Applies clinical decision making principles to differential diagnosis of clients with movement system dysfunction across multiple systems. Explores the primary care practitioner's role in reviewing systems to differentiate movement system disorders from those requiring a referral. Prerequisite(s): DPT 735, DPT 737 and DPT 738. NOTE: Laboratory included.


DPT 732. MANAGEMENT APPLICATIONS OF PHYSIOLOGY: MAP II (4). Studies physiology and pathophysiology of the cardiovascular and pulmonary systems across the lifespan. Incorporates physiologic principles in the physical therapy management of patients with cardiovascular and pulmonary conditions. Co-requisite: DPT 710A. Prerequisite(s): DPT 701 and DPT 708. NOTE: Laboratory included.

DPT 733. MUSCULOSKELETAL MANAGEMENT I (3). Initiates patient management strategies for individuals with musculoskeletal problems. Course emphasizes individuals with lower extremity musculoskeletal problems. Includes therapeutic exercise, manual therapy, and modalities for lower extremity regions. Prerequisite: DPT 730. NOTE: Laboratory included.

DPT 734. MUSCULOSKELETAL MANAGEMENT II (3). Develops patient management strategies for individuals with musculoskeletal problems. Course emphasizes lumbopelvic and thoracic regions. Includes therapeutic exercise, manual therapy, and modalities for individuals with lumbopelvic and thoracic conditions. Prerequisite(s): DPT 733. NOTE: Laboratory included.

DPT 735. MUSCULOSKELETAL MANAGEMENT III (3). Refines patient management strategies for individuals with musculoskeletal problems. Course emphasizes upper extremity, craniofacial and cervical spine. Includes therapeutic exercise, manual therapy, and modalities for upper extremity, craniofacial and cervical
conditions. Prerequisite(s): DPT 734. NOTE: Laboratory included.

DPT 736. NEUROLOGICAL MANAGEMENT I (3). Studies the intervention for individuals with neurological dysfunction based upon neurophysiological and pathokinesiological mechanisms resulting in pathology, impairments, functional limitations, and disabilities. Emphasizes application and integration of theoretical constructs, evidence-based practice, examination, evaluation, diagnosis, prognosis, intervention, and measurement of outcomes. Prerequisite(s): DPT 704, DPT 706, DPT 707, DPT 710, DPT 730 and DPT 732. NOTE: Laboratory included.

DPT 737. NEUROLOGICAL MANAGEMENT II (5). Continues the study of interventions for individuals across a lifespan with neurological dysfunction based upon neurophysiological and pathokinesiological mechanisms resulting in pathology, impairments, functional limitations, and disabilities. Emphasizes evidence-based clinical decision making for examination,
evaluation, diagnosis, prognosis, intervention, and measurement of outcomes. Prerequisite(s): DPT 736. NOTE: Laboratory included.

DPT 738. MANAGEMENT APPLICATIONS OF PHYSIOLOGY: MAP III (5). Studies physiology and pathophysiology of the gastrointestinal, renal, endocrine, immune and integumentary systems across the lifespan. Incorporates identification of signs and symptoms associated with disease. Discusses management of
patients with conditions, affecting these systems or a combination of systems. Prerequisite(s): DPT 732. NOTE: Laboratory included.

DPT 739. EXERCISE APPLICATIONS (2). Integrates individual exercise interventions for optimal health across the lifespan. Focuses on the identification, intervention, and progression of therapeutic exercises for patients in various phases of rehabilitation. Laboratory included. Prerequisite(s): DPT 735, DPT
737, and DPT 738. NOTE: Laboratory included.

DPT 740. MANAGEMENT OF THE MOVEMENT SYSTEM (2). Applies clinical decision-making principles for the management of
individuals with movement system dysfunction, across multiple systems, for special areas of practice including geriatrics, pediatrics, ergonomics, orthotics and prosthetics. Applies management principles across episodes of care. Prerequisite(s): DPT 735, DPT 737, and DPT 738.

DPT 750. CLINICAL EDUCATION I (2). Focuses on examination, evaluation, and intervention techniques in a clinical setting. Utilizes written and oral interpersonal communication skills with patients/ clients, family, and other staff. Emphasizes professional
socialization, self-assessment, and critical thinking. NOTE: Pass/No
Pass grading only.

DPT 751. CLINICAL EDUCATION II (4). Emphasizes application of comprehensive prevention, examination, evaluation, diagnosis, prognosis, intervention, and outcome strategies for clients with cardiopulmonary, musculoskeletal, and/or neuromuscular
problems in a clinical setting. Requires refinement of interpersonal communication skills, role delineation, and professional behaviors. Prerequisite(s): DPT 750. NOTE: Pass/No Pass grading only.

DPT 752. CLINICAL EDUCATION III (5). Focuses on the integration and application of all previous course and clinical work in relationship to the development, enhancement, and restoration of movement function, the prevention of movement dysfunction, and non-patient care opportunities. Prerequisite(s): DPT 751. NOTE: DPT 752 and DPT 753 are a 24-week combined clinical experience. Length and timing of clinical placements at any one facility may vary.

DPT 753. CLINICAL EDUCATION IV (6). Continues the focus of DPT 752. In addition to the refinement of critical thinking and clinical decision making, emphasizes the autonomous practice and professional socialization in the clinical setting. Non-patient care opportunities will also be included. Prerequisite(s): DPT 752. NOTE: DPT 752 and DPT 753 are a 24-week combined clinical experience. Time may be divided into a number of clinical placements of varied lengths and practice settings.

DPT 760E-W. INDEPENDENT STUDY IN PHYSICAL THERAPY (1-6). Advanced study in specific topic of interest in the areas of practice, research, or education developed by contract and conducted under the supervision of a faculty member. This is an optional course that is offered with the permission of the faculty. Prerequisite(s): Graduate standing and permission of instructor required.

DPT 770. PROFESSIONAL ISSUES/CASE MANAGEMENT I (1). Begins a six course sequence. Introduces mission and philosophy, curriculum model, and service learning. Explores student values, principles of teaching, learning and aspects of professionalism. NOTE: Laboratory and service learning included.

DPT 771. PROFESSIONAL ISSUES/CASE MANAGEMENT II (2). Introduces health care delivery systems, regulation of and legal requirements for clinical practice and documentation and the role of the physical therapist and physical therapist assistant. Uses evidences from the literature and other available sources to discuss clinical situations in small group tutorials with faculty facilitation. These tutorials use problem-based learning concepts. Expands application of communication and teaching/learning theory. Prerequisite(s): DPT 770. NOTE: Laboratory and service learning included.


DPT 772. PROFESSIONAL ISSUES/CASE AND PRACTICE MANAGEMENT III (1). Expands concepts of problem-based learning using patient scenarios. Discusses diversity, scope of practice, and professionalism in clinical settings, as well as difference in management and leadership roles, payment processes and financial implications for providing services. Prerequisite(s): DPT 771. NOTE: Laboratory and service learning included.

DPT 773. PROFESSIONAL ISSUES/CASE MANAGEMENT IV (1). Continues problem-based learning using patient scenarios to expand the application of communication and teaching/learning theory and the role of a doctoring profession. Jesuit mission, evaluating strategies for competency-based education, conflict resolution and clinical negotiation skills are integrated into the tutorials. Prerequisite(s): DPT 772. NOTE: Laboratory and service learning included.

DPT 774. PROFESSIONAL ISSUES/CASE MANAGEMENT V (1). Fosters development of professional teaching skills and dialogue through the presentation of clinical case reports and preparation of an educational session. Practices skills as change-agents and leaders in the use of EBP during case discussions. Prerequisite(s): DPT 773. NOTE: Laboratory and services learning included. Co- requisite(s): DPT 751. Prerequisite(s): DPT 773.

DPT 775. PROFESSIONAL ISSUES/CASE MANAGEMENT VI (1). Reflects on professional roles with focus on leadership practices, professional mission statement, and service-learning engagement. Enhances mentorship and teaching skills in collaboration with first- year DPT students and faculty. Explores refinement of
professional communication skills. Prerequisite: DPT 774. NOTE: Laboratory and service learning included.

DPT 776. INTRODUCTION TO EVIDENCE BASED PRACTICE (3). Explores research methodologies used in health care research. Examines descriptive and inferential statistics, and evidence-based practice principles. Addresses literature searches and evidence-based analysis of research reports with a focus on treatment effectiveness studies.

DPT 780E-W. TOPICS IN PHYSICAL THERAPY I (1). Advances study in topics of interest related to physical therapy practice.

DPT 781E-W. TOPICS IN PHYSICAL THERAPY II (1). Advances study in topics of interest related to physical therapy practice.

DPT 790. EVIDENCE BASED PRACTICE I (2). Introduces clinical research and narrative review projects. Reviews ethical constraints and obligations of research. Introduces survey
research methods and seeking research funding. Addresses critical analysis of research reports, with a focus on diagnostic literature. Prerequisite(s): DPT 776.

DPT 791. EVIDENCE BASED PRACTICE II (1). Examines data and performs statistical analysis. Narrative groups present results in publishable format. Clinical Research groups collect data, submit Introduction/Methods in publication format, and outlines anticipated Results/Table/Figures. Critically analyze the prognostic literature. Prerequisite(s): DPT 790.

DPT 792. EVIDENCE BASED PRACTICE III (2). Culmination of the Evidence Based Practice Series in which students compose final manuscripts and present scholarly works reflecting the integration of EBP. Prerequisite(s): DPT 791.
DPT 796. CAPSTONE (1). Focuses on the culmination of the student’s clinical and professional development based on the portfolio presentation. Clinical education reflections and curricular review are also included in the capstone.

DPT 799. COMPREHENSIVE EXAM (0). Administered following the completion of all academic requirements of the curriculum with the exception of completing clinical case reports, other clinical education requirements and capstone course. Serves as
the component of the capstone experience that measures success of curricular outcomes and prepares the student for the licensure examination. NOTE: Pass/No Pass grading only.

HCE 709. HEALTH CARE ETHICS FOR PHYSICAL THERAPISTS (3). Examines ethical issues and moral reasoning processes in health care. Philosophical and faith-based foundations including Catholic moral tradition, sociocultural influences, professional codes, and organizational and personal ethical norms are
explored. Ethical issues are examined with emphasis on leadership and the practice of physical therapy. Students will analyze ethical dilemmas and evaluate ethical practice using ethical theory, moral argument, and case studies. NOTE: A required course in the Doctor of Physical Therapy program. Offered on campus.

RESIDENCY IN ORTHOPAEDIC PHYSICAL THERAPY (ROPT)
DPT 801. ADVANCED CLINICAL PRACTICE I (3). Residents will develop advanced clinical decision making in practice using critical inquiry, understand models of health care delivery, explore movement systems and pain in clinical reasoning, and review essentials in medical management and radiology. NOTE: Course fee required.

DPT 802. ADVANCED CLINICAL PRACTICE II (1). Developing advanced practice including ethics, practice management and contemporary healthcare topics including regenerative medicine and genetics. Integrating spirituality and holistic care for the individual. Leadership development and exploration of mentoring, teaching and learning concepts.

DPT 811. ORTHOPAEDIC SPECIALTY PRACTICE I (2). Management of individuals with impairments related to cervical and thoracic regions, cranio-facial region and concussion. Functional anatomy, biomechanics, pathophysiology, medical management, and movement systems study in these regions will be included using evidence based practice.

DPT 812. ORTHOPAEDIC SPECIALTY PRACTICE II (3). Management of individuals with impairments related to the upper extremity. Functional anatomy, biomechanics, pathophysiology, medical management, and movement systems study in these regions will be included using evidence based practice and advanced leadership development.

DPT 813. ORTHOPAEDIC SPECIALTY PRACTICE III (4). Management of individuals with impairments in the lumbar spine, pelvis and lower extremity. Functional anatomy, biomechanics, pathophysiology, medical management, and movement systems study in these regions will include evidence based practice and capstone development.


DPT 900. VIRTUAL ROUNDS I (1). Mentoring in advanced clinical practice in orthopaedic manual clinical practice with a focus to advanced clinical decision making based upon active
patient care. Faculty supported environment including professional issues and development of research presentations.

DPT 901. VIRTUAL ROUNDS II (1). Mentoring in advanced clinical practice in orthopaedic manual clinical practice with a focus to advanced clinical decision making based upon active
patient care. Faculty supported environment including professional issues and development of research presentations.

DPT 902. VIRTUAL ROUNDS III (1). Mentoring in advanced clinical practice in orthopaedic manual clinical practice with a focus to advanced clinical decision making based upon active
patient care. Faculty supported environment including professional issues and development of research presentations.

DPT 903. MANAGEMENT OF LOWER EXTREMITY DISORDERS (3). Integrates manual therapy and exercise intervention techniques in the management of individuals with lower extremity disorders. NOTE: Intensive laboratory included.

DPT 904. MANAGEMENT OF UPPER EXTREMITY DISORDERS (3). Advanced management of impairments in the upper extremity through the integration of manual therapy and exercise interventions. Management is based upon advanced clinical decision making with evidence informed practice. Instruction in regional dry needling included.

DPT 905. MANAGEMENT OF LUMBOPELVIC DISORDERS (3). Advanced management of impairments in the lumbo-pelvic region through the integration of manual therapy and exercise interventions. Management is based upon advanced clinical decision making with evidence informed practice. Instruction in regional dry needling included.

DPT 906. MANAGEMENT OF CERVICOTHORACIC DISORDERS (3). Advanced management of impairments in the cervicothoracic region through the integration of manual therapy and exercise interventions. Management is based upon advanced clinical decision making with evidence informed practice. Instruction in regional dry needling included.

DPT 910. CLINICAL PRACTICUM (3). Final testing process to complete the Fellowship program. Live skill testing, patient case simulation, reflective examination, evidence-based knowledge assessment and assessment of overall progression in the program, including review of mentorship and reporting. NOTE: Fellowship in Orthopaedic Manual Therapy students only. Fee required. Pass/No Pass grading only.

DPT 911. FOMPT FULFILLLMENT (0). Variable course which allows for student registration to attend missed in-person events such as weekend intensives, with prior approval, and to fulfill missed requirements overall in the FMOPT program.

