ACC 2301 Fundamentals of Financial Accounting
Students will study the accounting cycle, financial statements, accounting analysis, assets, liabilities,
capital and analysis of financial statements.
Pre-Requisites: None; College Algebra or Intro to Statistics strongly recommended.
ACC 2302 Fundamentals of Managerial Accounting
Students will study accounting for partnerships and corporation owner’s equity, management
accounting, and developing information for production decision making.
Pre-Requisites: ACC 2301
ACC 3301 Intermediate Accounting I
Provides in-depth knowledge of basic accounting principles and procedures including analysis of 
traditional accounting statements to discern organizational strengths and weaknesses. 
Pre-Requisites: ACC 2301 and ACC 2302 
ACC 3302 Intermediate Accounting II 
A continuation of ACC 3301.
Pre-Requisites: ACC 2301, ACC 2302, and ACC 3301 
ACC 3320 Fundamentals of Taxation 
Introduction to the role of taxes in contemporary society and their impact on individuals and 
business entities with emphasis on Federal income taxation. 
Pre-Requisites: ACC 2301 and ACC 2302.  
ACC 3370 Auditing Theory and Practice 
Principles and procedures applied by independent auditors and internal auditors, responsibilities of 
auditors, development of audit programs, accumulation of evidence, statistical and EDP auditing 
applications and reporting. 
Pre-Requisites: ACC 2301 and ACC 2302 
ACC 3382 Fraud Examination 
Develops an understanding and appreciation of the major methods employees use to commit 
occupational fraud.  Students will learn how and why occupational fraud is committed, how 
fraudulent conduct can be deterred, and how allegations of fraud should be investigated and 
resolved.  
Pre-Requisites: ACC 2301 and ACC 2302 
ACC 4310 Accounting Internship 
Provides students with job searching skills, on-the-job work experience and training related to 
academic education and long-term goals. May be repeated once for credit as an elective, but only 
three credit hours will count toward any accounting major. Fulfills experiential learning 
requirement. 
Pre-Requisites: ACC 3301, ACC 3302, and 6 additional hours of upper level Accounting coursework 
ACC 4380 Advanced Financial Accounting 
Accounting problems in respect to multiple ownership, consolidated financial statements and 
partnership accounts; modern currency translations; segmental reporting, and advanced accounting 
theory. 
Pre-Requisites: ACC 2301, ACC 2302, ACC 3301 and ACC 3302 

ASL 1401 American Sign Language I 
American Sign Language (ASL) is the language of the Deaf community in the United States and 
Canada. The course also treats Deaf culture.  This course, together with ASL 1402, meets 
 
 
requirement for modern language. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
ASL 1402 American Sign Language II 
American Sign Language (ASL) is the further study of the language of the Deaf community in the 
United States and Canada.  American Sign Language I and II (ASL 1401 and ASL 1402) together 
meet the requirement for modern language. 
Pre-Requisites: Successful completion of ASL 1401 

ART 1302 Survey of Art History 
This class is designed as a survey of the history of Western art from ancient through contemporary 
times, with emphasis on the major artists and works of art. It will also introduce some of the major 
methodologies used to approach topics in art history. Class time will be divided between slide 
lectures and in-class discussions over the readings.  
Pre-Requisites: None 
ART 1305 Introduction to Art History: Modern 
This course covers the history of visual art from the Renaissance to the present. It is taught with a 
European-American perspective, and includes painting, sculpture, architecture and other major 
areas of study. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
ART 1306 Drawing Media 
Basic drawing using graphite as the primary media. Will also include some or all of the following: 
charcoal, ink, metal point, monoprint, and oil sticks. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
ART 1308 Introduction to Photography 
Basic photography course with emphasis upon technical skill development, camera use and 
operation, digital operation methods and techniques.  
Pre-Requisites: None 
ART 1315 Art Theory and Practice 
A survey which includes study of art history, art criticism, aesthetics, and studio production, 
including study and use of all principles and elements of art in a variety of media, practicing critical 
evaluation of art production in progress; and development of knowledge and skills for personal 
growth. 
 
Pre-Requisites: None 
ART 2310 Glass – Fusing and Slumping 
An introduction to the sculptural qualities of glass through fusing and slumping processes. Class 
content will emphasize the process of ideation and design utilizing surface, translucency, and 
 
 
transparency. May be repeated for credit with instructor permission.  
Pre-Requisites: None. Course Fee: $45 
ART 2320 Ceramics 
Study of hand building techniques, clay bodies, and glazes using low fire clay. May be repeated for 
credit. 
 
 
Pre-Requisites: None. Course Fee: $45 
ART 3308 Color 
This color course offers a new interdisciplinary model connecting diverse experiences and practical 
tools to navigate the complex network of color codes we inhabit. Exploration of color theories 
includes the practical use of color in its many different everyday engagements.  
 
Pre-Requisites: None 
ART 3312 Painting 
Study of oil painting techniques, color theory, design application, and styles of various well-known 
artists. May be repeated for credit.  
 
 
Pre-Requisites: None. Course Fee: $45 
ART 4306 Art as Vocation  
This course prepares you in professional concerns of aesthetics, studio practices, exhibitions, and 
working with art institutions. Emphasis will be placed on developing an audience, marketing art, 
planning programs/events, financial planning, writing proposals/grants, and art industry 
management. Readings will explore artistic vocation with a Biblical, historical, theological, and 
contemporary perspective.  
 
Pre-Requisites: Successful completion of any 6 credit hours of ART  
 
ART 4312 Painting II 
In this course you will continue to increase your skills in oil painting. You will have the opportunity 
to develop your ideas concerning genres of landscape, still life and the figure, while exploring and 
expanding your interests in abstraction, representation, collage and digital applications.  
Pre-Requisites: Successful completion of ART 3312 
 
BIO 1101-1106 Field Biology 
BIO 1101-1106 are a series of mini-course field experiences to study the ecosystems of selected 
areas of Texas; some courses require good physical conditioning due to strenuous hiking activity. 
Field Biology may be repeated for credit under each separate number; the same number course 
may not be repeated for credit. Up to three of these one-hour courses in any combination may be 
used as a non-lab Natural Science within the core. These courses require a special course fee to 
cover travel and special equipment. Fulfills one (1) credit hour of Experiential Learning 
Pre-Requisites: Consent of instructor. Course Fee: $150 
 
 
BIO 1101 Field Biology East and Southeast Texas
BIO 1101-1106 are a series of mini-course field experiences to study the ecosystems of selected
areas of Texas; some courses require good physical conditioning due to strenuous hiking activity.
Field Biology may be repeated for credit under each separate number; the same number course
may not be repeated for credit. Up to three of these one-hour courses in any combination may be
used as a non-lab Natural Science within the core. These courses require a special course fee to
cover travel and special equipment. Fulfills one (1) credit hour of Experiential Learning
Pre-Requisites: Consent of instructor. Course Fee: $150
BIO 1102 Field Biology Rio Grande Valley
BIO 1101-1106 are a series of mini-course field experiences to study the ecosystems of selected
areas of Texas; some courses require good physical conditioning due to strenuous hiking activity.
Field Biology may be repeated for credit under each separate number; the same number course
may not be repeated for credit. Up to three of these one-hour courses in any combination may be
used as a non-lab Natural Science within the core. These courses require a special course fee to
cover travel and special equipment. Fulfills one (1) credit hour of Experiential Learning
Pre-Requisites: Consent of instructor. Course Fee: $150
BIO 1103 Field Biology Southwest Texas
BIO 1101-1106 are a series of mini-course field experiences to study the ecosystems of selected
areas of Texas; some courses require good physical conditioning due to strenuous hiking activity.
Field Biology may be repeated for credit under each separate number; the same number course
may not be repeated for credit. Up to three of these one-hour courses in any combination may be
used as a non-lab Natural Science within the core. These courses require a special course fee to
cover travel and special equipment. Fulfills one (1) credit hour of Experiential Learning
Pre-Requisites: Consent of instructor. Course Fee: $150
BIO 1104 Field Biology Panhandle and Northwest Texas
BIO 1101-1106 are a series of mini-course field experiences to study the ecosystems of selected
areas of Texas; some courses require good physical conditioning due to strenuous hiking activity.
Field Biology may be repeated for credit under each separate number; the same number course
may not be repeated for credit. Up to three of these one-hour courses in any combination may be
used as a non-lab Natural Science within the core. These courses require a special course fee to
cover travel and special equipment. Fulfills one (1) credit hour of Experiential Learning
Pre-Requisites: Consent of instructor. Course Fee: $150
BIO 1105 Field Biology Central Texas
BIO 1101-1106 are a series of mini-course field experiences to study the ecosystems of selected
areas of Texas; some courses require good physical conditioning due to strenuous hiking activity.
Field Biology may be repeated for credit under each separate number; the same number course
may not be repeated for credit. Up to three of these one-hour courses in any combination may be
used as a non-lab Natural Science within the core. These courses require a special course fee to
cover travel and special equipment. Fulfills one (1) credit hour of Experiential Learning
Pre-Requisites: Consent of instructor. Course Fee: $150
BIO 1106 Field Biology Guadalupe Mountains
BIO 1101-1106 are a series of mini-course field experiences to study the ecosystems of selected
areas of Texas; some courses require good physical conditioning due to strenuous hiking activity.
Field Biology may be repeated for credit under each separate number; the same number course
may not be repeated for credit. Up to three of these one-hour courses in any combination may be
used as a non-lab Natural Science within the core. These courses require a special course fee to
cover travel and special equipment. Fulfills one (1) credit hour of Experiential Learning
Pre-Requisites: Consent of instructor. Course Fee: $150

BIO 1401 Principles of Biology
General concepts of biology with emphasis on man in God's world. This course meets the core 
natural science requirement for non-science majors. Students should be co-enrolled in the 
laboratory part of the course, BIO 1401L. 
Pre-Requisites: None. Course Fee (BIO 1401L): $45 
BIO 1402 General Zoology 
The anatomy, physiology, behavior and ecology of major animal groups. Students should be co-
enrolled in the laboratory part of the course, BIO 1402L.  
Pre-Requisites: None. Course Fee (BIO 1402L): $85 
BIO 1403 Cellular and Molecular Biology 
Modern concepts of cellular functions at the molecular level. This course meets the core natural 
science requirement. Students should be co-enrolled in the laboratory part of the course, BIO 
1403L.  
Pre-Requisites: Successful completion of CHE 1341 and 1141, or CHE 1431, with a grade of ‘C’ or higher. 
Course Fee (BIO 1403L): $85 
BIO 2403 General Botany 
The structure, function, reproduction, taxonomy and ecology of plants. Students should be co-
enrolled in the laboratory part of the course, BIO 2403L. 
Pre-Requisites: None. Course Fee (BIO 2403L): $75  
BIO 2411 Anatomy & Physiology for Healthcare I 
Introduction to the study of human anatomy and physiology for healthcare majors. Begins with an 
overview of the chemical basis of life and reviews cellular structure, function and metabolism. 
Course continues with coverage of tissues and five systems (skin and the integumentary system, 
skeletal system including joints, muscular system, cardiovascular system, and respiratory system) 
and how they are interconnected, with a particular focus on health. This course may not be used to 
meet either prerequisites or requisites in majors from the School of Natural and Applied Sciences. 
Students should be co-enrolled in the laboratory part of the course, BIO 2411L.  
Pre-Requisites: Completion of high school Biology and Chemistry or equivalent; preferred completion of 
CHE 1341 and 1141. Course Fee (BIO 2411L): Varies by course modality. 
 
 
BIO 2412 Human Anatomy Physiology for Healthcare II 
A continuation of the study of human anatomy and physiology for healthcare majors. The course 
will cover the remaining six systems (nervous system including somatic and special senses, 
endocrine system, lymphatic system, digestive system, urinary system, and reproductive system) 
and how they are interconnected, with a particular focus on health. This course may not be used to 
meet either prerequisites or requisites in majors from the School of Natural and Applied Sciences. 
Students should be co-enrolled in the laboratory part of the course, BIO 2412L. 
Pre-Requisites: Successful completion of BIO 2411 Human Anatomy and Physiology for Healthcare.

BIO 2413 Microbiology for Health Sciences
The Microbiology for the Health Sciences class provides an overview of the microbial world. Topics 
include the basic characteristics of fungi protozoans, bacteria, and viruses. Special emphasis is 
placed on topics and applications that relate to human health. This course is intended as a 
prerequisite for entry into the nursing program. This course may not be used to meet either 
prerequisites or requisites in majors from the School of Natural and Applied Sciences. 
Pre-Requisites: None; Anatomy & Physiology I or Cellular & Molecular Biology strongly suggested. Course 
Fee: $85  
BIO 3302 Tropical Biology 
A study of the biology and ecology of tropical ecosystems that includes a substantial field 
component offered during a semester break or summer. This course also includes a study of 
environmental concerns and conservation efforts in tropical ecosystems. The field component 
requires extensive physical exertion and “roughing it.” Additional fee for course paid at time of 
registration.  Fulfills Experiential Learning requirement.  
Pre-Requisites: Consent of the instructor  
BIO 3303 Native Plants 
Identification, natural history, economic importance, and ecology of plants native to Central Texas.  
Pre-Requisites: None 
BIO 3310 Nutrition 
A study of the nutrients and other substances in foods and the body's handling of them. Nutrient 
requirements associated with various life stages and the impact of various disorders and diseases 
upon nutrition will also be explored.  
Pre-Requisites: Completion of a college level laboratory science course  
BIO 3350 Biopsychology 
An introduction to the structure and function of the nervous system and the relationship between 
psychological processes and the brain in humans and other animals. Cross-listed with PSY 3350. 
Pre-Requisites: PSY 1311 or PSY 1311H. BIO 1403 and BIO 3412 strongly suggested  
BIO 3370 Ecology of the Pacific Northwest 
A study of the unique wildlife, ecological relationships, and environmental concerns in a variety of 
aquatic and terrestrial habitats of the U.S. Pacific Northwest.  The course includes substantial 
 
 
independent work throughout the semester and culminates with a field experience typically held in 
Oregon, Washington, and California that requires substantial hiking, outdoor data collection, and 
journaling. Additional fee for course paid at time of registration. Fulfills Experiential Learning 
requirement.  
Pre-Requisites: Consent of instructor  
BIO 3401 General Microbiology 
The structure, physiology, culture, and control of bacteria and other microbes. Students should be 
co-enrolled in the laboratory part of the course, BIO 3401L. 
Pre-Requisites: BIO 1403 with a grade of ‘C’ or higher. Course Fee (BIO 3401L): $85  
BIO 3403 General Ecology 
A study of those factors which affect the abundance, biodiversity and distribution of organisms. 
Includes ecological theory, mathematical modeling, and natural history and field techniques. 
Students should be co-enrolled in the laboratory part of the course, BIO 3403L This course is cross-
listed with ESC 3403/ESC 3403L. 
Pre-Requisites: BIO 1402 or BIO 2403 with a grade of ‘C’ or higher. Course Fee (BIO 3403L): $75  
BIO 3404 Genetics 
An introduction to classical, molecular, developmental and population genetics with an emphasis 
on genetic analysis. Students should be co-enrolled in the laboratory part of the course, BIO 3404L. 
Pre-Requisites: BIO 1401 or BIO 1403 with a grade of ‘C’ or higher. Course Fee (BIO 3404L): $75  
BIO 3406 Animal Behavior 
An introduction to the study of animal behavior. Cross-listed with PSY 3406.  
Pre-Requisites: Any Natural Science course with a grade of ‘C’ or above. Course Fee: $75 
BIO 3411 Human Anatomy and Physiology I 
An introduction to the study of human anatomy and physiology. Beginning with a quick overview of 
the chemical basis of life and a review of cells and cellular metabolism. The remainder of the course 
will cover tissues and five systems (skin and the integumentary system, skeletal system including 
joints, muscular system, cardiovascular system, and respiratory system). Students should be co-
enrolled in the laboratory part of the course, BIO 3411L. 
Pre-Requisites: BIO 1403 with a grade of ‘C’ or higher. Course Fee (BIO 3411L): $85  
BIO 3412 Human Anatomy and Physiology II 
A continuation of the study of human anatomy and physiology. The course will cover the remaining 
six systems (nervous system including somatic and special senses, endocrine system, lymphatic 
system, digestive system, respiratory system, urinary system, and reproductive system) and related 
topics.  Note: Students who have already completed BIO 2401 Human Anatomy and Physiology are 
not allowed to take this course for credit unless approved by the Coordinator of the Biology 
Department. Students should be co-enrolled in the laboratory part of the course, BIO 3412L. 
Pre-Requisites: BIO 3411 with a grade of ‘C’ or higher. Course Fee (BIO 3412L): $85 
BIO 3420 Developmental Biology  
An introduction to both classical and modern developmental biology including molecular and 
genetic analysis of development. Students should be co-enrolled in the laboratory part of the 
 
 
course, BIO 3420L. 
Pre-Requisites: BIO 1403 with a grade of ‘C’ or higher. Course Fee (BIO 3420L): $75 
BIO 3430 Biochemistry 
An overview of the macromolecules and small molecules that are the key to all living systems.  
Topics covered include protein structure and function, enzyme mechanisms, kinetics and 
regulation, membrane structure and function, bioenergetics, hormone action, intermediary 
metabolism, including pathways and regulation of carbohydrate, lipid, amino acid, and nucleotide 
biosynthesis and breakdown. Students should be co-enrolled in the laboratory part of the course, 
BIO 3430L. This course is cross-listed with CHE 3430/CHE 3430L. 
Pre-Requisites: BIO 1403 with a grade of ‘C’ or higher, and credit or concurrent enrollment in  CHE 2401. 
Course Fee (BIO 3430L): $85  
BIO 4330 Exercise Physiology 
This class is a study of the physiological responses of the body to exercise. Emphasis is on the 
application of the physiological principles deemed most important for understanding physical 
training. Note: This course does not count for core physical education/wellness requirements. 
Pre-Requisites: Grade of ‘C’ or higher in BIO 3411.  
BIO 4410 Biological Science Research 
A research course in which students will work as a team to complete research in an area of the 
biological sciences as set forth by the instructor. Students will learn how to critically read scientific 
papers and interpret data. All aspects of proposal writing will be explored during this course. The 
course will culminate with presentation of the students and groups research findings in both oral 
and written formats. Fulfills Experiential Learning requirement.  
Pre-Requisites: Biology majors with senior standing or by permission of instructor. Course Fee: $85  

BADM 1303 Intro to Population Health 
This course introduces students to the study of population health and what it means to live a long 
and healthy life. It includes examining the factors that can influence health and wellness as well as 
the various fields all connected to health. The course is interdisciplinary. It covers a broad range of 
issues including health communication, environmental health, infectious diseases, social health, and 
how to improve your community as well as your own life. This is an exciting eye-opening course 
that any student interested in his/her well-being or the well-being of others can take. Cross-listed 
with PUBH 1303.  
Pre-Requisites: None  
BADM 1310 Intro to Business and Entrepreneurship 
This introductory course is designed to help students advance their knowledge of both business 
and entrepreneurship. This course helps students to develop their critical thinking skills in solving 
contemporary business issues. The course looks at various entrepreneurial ventures and business 
disciplines from a variety of perspectives to provide a foundation for business development. 
Students will be introduced to a variety of careers as well as practical and professional skills. 
Pre-Requisites: None  
 
 
BADM 2310  Global Business and Communication
This course introduces the modern business enterprise with an emphasis on the interdependence of
the business functions in a global environment. Topics include the cross-border impacts of culture, 
communication, politics, and law on trade, investment, marketing, management, and accounting 
and financial systems. 
Pre-Requisites: None  
BADM 3311 Principles of Management 
Course is a survey of management philosophy, theories, and practices. Topics include management 
functions of planning, decision making, organizing, staffing, communicating, motivating, leading, 
and controlling. This course will also consider organizational behavior, international management 
and the global economy. This course has a writing component. 
Pre-Requisites: None  
BADM 3314 Essentials of Global Public Health 
Examines the main functions of public health; disease prevention and health promotion. Students 
will learn the history and philosophy of public health, its core values and functions across the globe 
and in society. Students will examine the factors that impact health and how productivity is 
influenced by health outcomes since prevention is more cost effective than cure. Students will learn 
about working in both clinical care settings as well as institutions that promote population health. 
Case studies will be used. Cross-listed with PUBH 3314. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
BADM 3315 Comparative Health Care Systems 
Examines the healthcare delivery system of the United States, its fundamental characteristics and 
organization as well as differences in the healthcare systems of other countries. Students will learn 
about the various agencies involved in health and access to healthcare will be reviewed. Students 
will have a better understanding of the composition of health workers in the United States and other 
countries. Innovative technologies and best practices will be studied. Cross-listed with PUBH 3315. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
BADM 3321 Business Law 
Background and role of law in business and society. Specific commercial law topics addressed 
include Uniform Commercial Code, business torts, property, contract sales, debit/creditor relations, 
and agency. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
BADM 3323 Globalization, Trade and Health Policy 
Examines the increasing interdependence of the world with greater connectivity affecting the speed 
of access to information. Key focus will be on the dimensions of globalization including trade in 
food, pharmaceutical products, tobacco as well as healthcare personnel and the shift in patterns of 
disease. Case studies will be used. Cross-listed with PUBH 3323. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
 
 
BADM 3330 Project Management 
This course emphasizes Project Management skills involved in work planning, control and 
evaluation to achieve objectives for both simple and complex projects. The course will give 
students hands-on experience project planning, participating and running their own project. 
Pre-Requisites: BADM 3311 
BADM 3335 Data Analytics  
This course covers data management, exploratory data analysis and visualization, descriptive 
statistics, and inferential statistics. T-tests, ANOVA, Chi-Square tests, simple regression, multiple 
regression, interaction/moderation, confounding, and logistic regression are all covered at a pace 
that assumes some previous knowledge of statistics. All of the topics will be addressed through a 
student selected research question that can be answered using a large dataset. A statistical 
programming language (R, SAS, or SPSS depending on the instructor) will be used, along with 
Zotero and GitHub for document and code management. 
Pre-Requisites: MTH 2301, or another introductory statistics course 
BADM 3340 Human Resource Management 
An introduction to human resource management. Topics include employment, placement and 
personnel planning, training and development, compensation and benefits, health, safety and 
security; employee and labor relations. This course has a writing component. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
BADM 3341 Training and Development 
This course explores methods utilized to train and develop employees in ways that positively affect 
organizational outcomes and success. 
Pre-Requisites: BADM 3340 
BADM 3350 Principles of Marketing 
Practices and market structure, marketing functions and strategies, institutions, pricing, demand 
creation, industrial and consumer, costs and marketing legislation. This course has a writing 
component. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
BADM 3351 Selling and Sales Management 
Professional selling principles and practices for industrial and consumer goods. Includes 
identification and qualification of customers, developing and delivering high quality presentations, 
persuasive theories and techniques, ethics of selling, and pre/post sales services. Policy matters, 
product planning, distribution policies and pricing, sales promotion, organization and management 
of territories and the sales force, control of sales operation. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
BADM 3352 Integrated Mkt. Communications  
This course studies all elements of promotion and integrated marketing communications. Students 
gain knowledge of the major promotion and communication tools organizations use, how 
promotion is planned, budgeted, and used in the marketing program, and how to analyze 
promotion alternatives as they relate to the organization's marketing objectives and market 
 
 
segments served. 
Pre-Requisites: None.  
BADM 3353 Consumer Behavior  
This course focuses on the analysis and interpretation of the behavior of individuals as buyers and 
consumers of goods and services. Students will learn to evaluate and interpret the psychological, 
economic, and socio-cultural factors and trends that influence purchase and consumption of goods 
and services. 
Pre-Requisites: None.  
BADM 3354 Entrepreneurship  
The Entrepreneurship course introduces the tools, skills, and judgment needed for a long and 
meaningful life as an entrepreneur. The course considers evaluating opportunities, launching a 
business, growing the business, and finally harvesting the profits. Students will stand in the shoes of 
an entrepreneur and make tough decisions, squeezed by the demands of your customers on one 
side (customers) and the need to make and deliver your product cheaply enough (operations) on 
the other. The course will focus on businesses that, with vision, hard work and luck can be 
developed into substantial enterprises. This course will focus on entrepreneurs, on business plans 
and on businesses that are appropriate for sophisticated angel and/or professional (especially 
venture capital) investors. 
Pre-Requisites: BADM 3360 
BADM 3360 Finance  
The course provides a working knowledge of the tools and analytical conventions used in 
managerial finance. The emphasis is on establishing an understanding of the basic elements of 
financial theory to be used in the application of analytical reasoning to finance problems. This class 
is designed for the general business student, but is a sufficiently rigorous introduction to this 
material that it is also suitable for students who are considering additional study in either Finance or 
Accounting. 
Pre-Requisites: ACC 2301 (or an equivalent statistics class) 
BADM 3361 Money, Banking, and Credit  
The course will cover the role of financial markets in the economy; the determination of interest 
rates; the role of financial intermediaries and financial intermediation; the role of the central bank in 
monetary policy; and the macroeconomics of monetary policy and interest rates.  
Pre-Requisites: BADM 3360 
BADM 3371 Management Information Systems  
Course provides students with a fundamental understanding of information technology in 
contemporary business environments and presents core MIS principles with which every business 
student should be familiar. Students will also study real cases that are associated with IS 
applications in order to understand the issues in IS disciplines and the changing role of the IS 
professional. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
 
 
BADM 3372 Digital and Social Media Marketing 
Designed to give students a high-level strategic perspective of how digital media is used to achieve 
business objectives, as well as practical hands-on experience creating and managing digital 
marketing campaigns. All marketers are increasing their digital media spending -- creating demand 
for students entering the workforce with digital media skills. By the end of the course, students will 
be able to walk into any company with an online presence and improve their use of the internet 
Pre-Requisites: BADM 3350 
BADM 3375 Negotiations and Conflict Management  
The Negotiations course introduces students to the theory and practice of negotiation specific to 
business. Negotiation is the art and science of securing agreement between two or more 
independent parties. The course focuses on understanding the behavior of individuals, groups, 
cultures, and organizations in the context of competitive situations. Students will develop analytical 
and interpersonal skills necessary for successful negotiations. Business relevant cases and situations 
will be used. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
BADM 3380 Production and Ops. Management  
The course includes the strategic, tactical, and operational issues that arise in management of 
production and service operations; product and process design, facilities planning, quality 
management, materials management, operations planning and scheduling, and emerging 
technologies in production and service management. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
BADM 3398 Nat’l/International Travel 
A travel course to immerse the student in real-world contexts where students can observe and 
analyze communication practices in various settings.  
Pre-Requisites: Consent of Instructor. Course Fee: Varies by travel course. 
BADM 4302 Global Public Health Practicum 
Students will be engaged in practicums in organizations in the United States with a health focus 
(healthcare delivery or population health); or organizations that are regional or international in 
scope that promote global health. In the future opportunities for practicums will be created for 
practical experiences working in other countries and in select international organizations (public 
and private). Fulfills experiential learning requirement. Cross-listed with PUBH 4302. 
Pre-Requisites: Junior or Senior level status and completion of lower-level BBA requirements. 
BADM 4310 Business Internship  
Students are expected to graduate in the calendar year that this course is completed. Provides 
students with job searching skills, on-the-job experience and training related to academic education 
and long-term goals. May be repeated once for credit as an elective, but only three credit hours will 
count toward any Business Management major. An upper-level course for business majors only; 
graded on a pass/no pass basis. Students must meet all of the internship requirements during the 
semester in which they are enrolled in the internship. Students may enroll in this course any time 
during the semester prior to the “last day to withdraw from a class with a W” as published in the 
 
 
official academic calendar. Fulfills experiential learning requirement. 
Pre-Requisites: BADM 3311 
BADM 4310P Business PEP Internship  
The Business Present Experience Internship course offers seasoned professionals, C-Suite 
professionals, and business owners who are advanced in their career an alternative course to the 
traditional internship course and model. Students approved for the course are presently working 
and are not a good fit for the traditional internship experience. Advanced-career working adults can 
apply for this option and complete it at their own pace over the semester while using their present 
job to satisfy both experiential learning credit and the degree internship requirement. The course 
involves a 360 evaluation process and reflection upon past and current career trajectory. Eligibility 
and academic approval required. 
Pre-Requisites: Eligibility and academic approval.  
BADM 4312 Strategic Management  
This course provides student with advanced level learning and critical thinking skills in the areas of 
strategic planning, implementation and control. Integrated learning will take place using the various 
business disciplines, applying a general management point of view. An overview of historical 
thought in strategic management will provide a basis for students to think about and form their own 
theories and management styles. Students will apply their learning through case studies and class 
projects. 
Pre-Requisites: BADM 3311 
BADM 4319 Immigration Violence Disasters and Health 
Issues that impact vulnerable populations in the United States and other countries including the 
socioeconomic, behavioral, biological, environmental and other factors that impact human health 
and contribute to health disparities. Immigration, the impact of violence, natural and man-made 
disasters, terrorism and the organizations that respond to these issues will be examined. Cross-
listed with PUBH 4319. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
BADM 4321 Public Health Organizations, Ethics, and Law 
Examines public health organizations that are local, national and international in focus, how they 
operate and the role they play in promoting health and preventing disease as well as those 
organizations not typically associated with health such as the United Nations, World Trade 
Organization, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and Dell. Cross-listed as PUBH 4321. 
Pre-Requisites: Junior or Senior level standing 
BADM 4300 Marketing Capstone 
This course is an integration of all marketing elements in a strategic marketing framework. The 
course will provide practical knowledge regarding marketing strategy from planning, formulating, 
and executing strategic marketing campaigns. The topics covered in this course include strategic 
marketing planning, marketing ethics, marketing research, competitive advantage, segmentation, 
branding, positioning, marketing mix (4 Ps), marketing implementation, and customer loyalty. 
Pre-Requisites: BADM 3350 
 
 
BADM 4331 Organizational Behavior and Development 
Most organizations focus their efforts on improving two aspects of human behavior: (1) job 
performance—the degree to which individuals perform the behaviors needed for the organization 
to achieve its goals; and (2) organizational commitment—the degree to which employees remain 
loyal to the organization rather than seeking employment elsewhere. This course will guide you 
through a model that seeks to explain these two areas of organizational behavior, while 
interweaving and maintaining a fixed view on developing the organization as a whole. 
Pre-Requisites: BADM 3340 
BADM 4333 Market Research 
This course will provide an introduction to market research as a business decision-making tool. 
Students will learn how market research can help them understand consumer attitudes and 
preferences to make business decisions and how to transform research findings into actionable 
business recommendations. Students will learn essential skills including: determining research 
design, techniques for conducting interviews, quantitative questionnaire design, sampling 
procedure and statistical projections, data analysis, and dashboard visualizations. Students will 
work with a real-world client on a research project including defining the business problem, develop 
a research plan, collect and analyze data and present findings and implications.  
Pre-Requisites: BADM 3350 
BADM 4341 Human Resource Mgmt Internship 
Focuses on providing students with meaningful work experiences in Human Resource Management 
(HRM) similar to those which are normally found in organizations. Emphasis of the internship 
program is to provide interns an exposure to a wide variety of opportunities including as much 
‘hands-on” experience as possible. Students are expected to graduate in the calendar year that this 
course is completed. Incompletes are not allowed in this course. Students may enroll in this course 
any time during the semester prior to the “last day to withdraw from a class with a W” as published 
in the official academic calendar. The course may be repeated once for credit as an elective, but 
only three credit hours will count toward any Business Management major. Fulfills experiential 
learning requirement. 
Pre-Requisites: BADM 3340  
BADM 4351 Advertising Management  
Through projects and texts, students will develop an understanding of the creation of effective 
advertising, media planning and budgeting, and advertising strategy as it relates to the overall 
marketing mix and strategic plan of the organization, with special emphasis on advanced 
copywriting and layout, for print and broadcast media. Cross listed with COM 4351 
Pre-Requisites: BADM 3350 
BADM 4352 Internship in Marketing 
Provides students with job searching skills, on-the-job experience and training related to academic 
education and long-term goals. May be repeated once for credit as an elective, but only three credit 
hours will count toward any BBA concentration. An upper-level course for business majors only; 
graded on a pass/no pass basis. Students must meet all of the internship requirements during the 
semester in which they are enrolled in the internship. Students may enroll in this course any time 
during the semester prior to the “last day to withdraw from a class with a W” as published in the 
 
 
official academic calendar. Fulfills experiential learning requirement. 
Pre-Requisites: BADM 3350 
BADM 4361 Investments  
Topics covered include financial markets, securities trading, evaluation of the risk/return trade-off, 
efficient portfolio formation, fixed-income security valuation and interest-rate risk, and an 
introduction to derivative securities. The course develops the student’s expertise in investment and 
portfolio management, including the ethical issues involved. 
Pre-Requisites: BADM 3360 and MTH 2301 (or an equivalent statistics class)  
BADM 4363 International Financial Management  
The course covers international monetary systems, exchange rate determination, use of currency 
derivatives in hedging and risk management, currency swaps, modern direct investment, and 
international capital budgeting. 
Pre-Requisites: BADM 3360 
BADM 4364 Corporate Finance  
Topics include the net present value and internal rate of return criteria for capital budgeting 
decisions; other criteria for such decisions, the cost of capital; capital budgeting under uncertainty; 
the lease-or-buy and make-or-buy decisions; and financing fixed assets; including theory of the debt 
to equity trade-off and dividend policy. 
Pre-Requisites: BADM 3360 
BADM 4367 Finance Internship 
Students are expected to graduate in the calendar year that this course is completed. Provides 
students with job searching skills, on-the-job experience and training related to academic education 
and long-term goals. May be repeated once for credit as an elective, but only three credit hours will 
count toward any the Finance concentration. Graded on a pass/no pass basis. Students must meet 
all of the internship requirements during the semester in which they are enrolled in the internship. 
Students may enroll in this course any time during the semester prior to the “last day to withdraw 
from a class with a W” as published in the official academic calendar. Fulfills experiential learning 
requirement. 
Pre-Requisites: BADM 3360 
BADM 4369 Financial Modeling in Excel 
This course is the capstone for the finance concentration. Students will learn to model both financial 
statements and portfolios in this class. This is an advanced spreadsheet engineering course 
designed for future finance professionals who will need to be able to apply the material that they 
have previously learned in their more theoretical finance courses to their employers' or clients' 
finances. 
Pre-Requisites: BADM 3360 
BADM 4380 Business and Community  
Intended for students who are excelling in academic skills and professional skills, engaged, 
motivated and internally driven. Admittance is granted by recommendation from the faculty and 
student purpose essay. This course will focus on the role of ethics and social responsibility in 
 
 
businesses as they serve the community in which they exist. Students will learn practical lessons 
from speakers and in working on research for the Ethics in Business Award. Classes will involve a 
mix discussion, guest speakers and experiential learning. 
Pre-Requisites: Instructor approval required 
BADM 4390 Special Topics in Business  
This course provides students with advanced level learning and critical thinking skills in the areas of 
selected specific topics of business. Integrated learning will take place using the various business 
disciplines. Students will apply their learning through reading, experience, and class projects. 
Business students will receive credit toward their Business concentration as deemed appropriate by 
the COB faculty. 
BADM 4398 Program Management and Health Evaluation 
Examines health programs and the use of evidence to support the practice of health. Using theories 
and case studies, students will complete a critical analysis of the public health program of choice 
integrating lessons learned, best practices and the theories studied. This is a capstone course in 
which a research paper will be expected. Cross-listed with PUBH 4398. 
 
CHE 1341 Chemistry I 
Study of the laws and theories of chemistry, stoichiometry, atomic and molecular structure, 
chemical bonding, properties of solutions, kinetic-molecular theory, and periodicity of the elements 
Pre-Requisites: Math Placement score of 2 or higher, or successful completion of MTH 0320 Intermediate 
Algebra 
CHE 1141 Chemistry I Laboratory 
Laboratory investigation of the laws and theories of chemistry, stoichiometry, atomic and molecular 
structure, chemical bonding, properties of solutions, kinetic-molecular theory, and periodicity of the 
elements. 
Pre-Requisites: Enrollment in or completion of CHE 1341. Course Fee: $85 
CHE 1342 Chemistry II 
A continuation of Chemistry I covering kinetics, equilibria, thermodynamics, oxidation-reduction, 
acids and bases, and an introduction to organic chemistry. 
Pre-Requisites: CHE 1341 and MTH 1351 with a minimum grade of ‘C’ in both, or minimum grade of ‘C’ in 
CHE 1341 and Math Placement score of 3  
CHE 1142 Chemistry II Laboratory 
A continuation of General Chemistry I laboratory covering kinetics, equilibria, thermodynamics, 
acids and bases and an introduction to organic and biochemistry 
Pre-Requisites: Enrollment in or completion of CHE 1342. Course Fee: $85  
 
 
CHE 1400 Introduction to Chemistry 
Descriptive chemistry with an emphasis on principles and the importance of chemistry for modern 
life. This course is a prerequisite to CHE 1341 for students who have not had high school chemistry. 
This course may be used to meet the core natural science requirement, but cannot be used as a 
prerequisite for CHE 1342. Not open to those who have already earned credit for CHE 1341. 
Pre-Requisites: Math Placement score of 2 or higher  
CHE 1431 General Chemistry for Healthcare Professionals 
This course is intended as a pre-requisite for entry into the nursing program.  Fundamental 
principles of inorganic chemistry; metric measurements, matter and energy, atomic structure, 
chemical nomenclature, chemical bonding, chemical reactions, stoichiometry, gas laws, properties 
of liquids, solids, solutions, acids and bases with emphasis on their physiological importance and 
their application to nursing and other health-related professions. This course may meet the core 
laboratory natural science requirement. Students should be co-enrolled in the laboratory part of the 
course, CHE 1431L. 
Pre-Requisites: Math Placement score of 2 or higher, or successful completion of MTH 0320. Course Fee   
CHE 2401 Organic Chemistry I 
Introduction to the basic concepts of organic chemistry and the synthesis and reactions of organic 
molecules. Students should be co-enrolled in the laboratory part of the course, CHE 2401L. 
Pre-Requisites: CHE 1142 and 1342 with a minimum grade of ‘C’ in both. Course Fee (CHE 2401L): $85 
CHE 2403 Organic Chemistry II 
A continuation of the study of basic concepts of organic chemistry with emphasis on aromatic 
compounds and spectroscopy. Aspects of biological molecules are considered. Students should be 
co-enrolled in the laboratory part of the course, CHE 2403L. 
Pre-Requisites: CHE 2401 with a minimum grade of ‘C’. Course Fee (CHE 2403L): $75  
CHE 3301 Inorganic Chemistry 
 The descriptive chemistry of transition metals including coordination complexes, organometallic 
catalysis, and bioinorganic chemistry, along with bond theory and symmetry. 
Pre-Requisites: CHE 1142, 1342, and MTH 1351 with a minimum grade of ‘C’ in each course  
CHE 3401 Quantitative Analytical Chemistry 
Theory and practice of qualitative chemical analysis. Theory and practice of volumetric, 
gravimetric, pH, colorimetric and chromatographic quantitative chemical analyses. Students should 
be co-enrolled in the laboratory part of the course, CHE 3401L. 
Pre-Requisites: CHE 1142 and 1342 (or 1402) and MTH 1351 (or Math Placement score of 3), with a 
minimum grade of ‘C’ in each course. Course Fee (CHE 3401L): $75  
CHE 3402 Environmental Chemistry 
A study of the chemical principles and reactions that govern the behavior of both natural 
environmental systems and anthropogenic compounds important to the quality of the environment. 
Sampling methods, instrumentation and data analysis will be emphasized. Students should be co-
enrolled in the laboratory part of the course, CHE 3402L. Cross-listed with ESC 3402/3402L.  
 
 
Pre-Requisites: CHE 1142 and 1342 (or 1402) and MTH 1351 (or Math Placement score of 3), with a 
minimum grade of ‘C’ in each course. Course Fee (CHE 3402L): $75  
CHE 3404 Instrumental Chemical Analysis  
Analysis of chemical compounds using instrumental techniques including: infrared and ultraviolet 
spectrophotometry, nuclear magnetic resonance, and gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. 
Pre-Requisites: CHE 1142 and 1342 (or 1402), CHE 3401, and MTH 1351 or math placement at a higher 
level with a minimum grade of ‘C’ in both courses 
CHE 3430 Biochemistry 
An overview of the macromolecules and small molecules that are the key to all living systems.  
Topics covered include protein structure and function, enzyme mechanisms, kinetics and 
regulation, membrane structure and function, bioenergetics, hormone action, intermediary 
metabolism, including pathways and regulation of carbohydrate, lipid, amino acid, and nucleotide 
biosynthesis and breakdown. Students should be co-enrolled in the laboratory part of the course, 
CHE 3430L. This course is cross-listed with BIO 3430/CHE 3430L. 
Pre-Requisites: BIO 1403 with a grade of ‘C’ or higher, and credit or concurrent enrollment in  CHE 2401. 
Course Fee (CHE 3430L): $85 
CHE 4301 Physical Chemistry I 
A statistical mechanics approach to gas behavior, thermodynamics and kinetics. Course can be 
taken before or after CHE 4302 (Physical Chemistry II). 
Pre-Requisites: PHY 1402 and MTH 2402 with a minimum grade of ‘C’ in both courses 
CHE 4201 Physical Chemistry Lab 
Laboratory exercises in physical chemistry covering electromagnetism, vibrational and rotational 
spectra, molecular interactions, and gas behavior. 
Pre-Requisites: PHY 1402 and MTH 2402 with a minimum grade of ‘C’ in both courses. Course Fee: $75 
CHE 4302 Physical Chemistry II 
A quantum mechanical approach to atomic structure, spectroscopy and surfaces. Course can be 
taken before or after CHE 4301 (Physical Chemistry I).  
Pre-Requisites: PHY 1402 and MTH 2402 with a minimum grade of ‘C’ in both courses  
 
CHI 1401 Mandarin Chinese I 
An introduction to Mandarin Chinese for beginners, providing practice in listening, speaking, 
reading, and writing. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
CHI 1402 Mandarin Chinese II 
Continued introduction to Mandarin Chinese imparts further communication skills for daily use in 
these areas: listening, speaking, reading, and writing. 
Pre-Requisites: CHI 1401 
 
 
CHI 2311 Mandarin Chinese III 
Continuation of Chinese II, helps students to move from the beginning to the intermediate level of 
the language.  Students will continue to learn essential skills of listening, speaking, reading, and 
writing for daily communication.  
Pre-Requisites: CHI 1402 
CHI 2312 Mandarin Chinese IV 
Intermediate course in Mandarin Chinese prepares students for advanced Chinese; it offers 
advanced communication skills in listening, speaking, reading, and writing. 
Pre-Requisites: CHI 2311 
COM 1300 Fundamentals of Communication  
Designed to help students perceive and experience the multi-faceted presence of communication in 
life, and gain self-confidence and basic proficiency expressing themselves in different contexts 
using a variety of media.   
Pre-Requisites: None 
COM 2100 Communication Practicum I 
Open to any student, this is a lower-level course to formally engage student in the practice of 
communication. Students will use practicum experience for creating featured building blocks for 
portfolio creation as part of the Communication Capstone course. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
COM 2301 Human Communication Theory  
A careful and systematic discussion of communication theories and their application to life. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
COM 2303 Mass Media History and Theory  
Survey of mass media theories, emphasizing the impact of printing, film making, and broadcasting 
in society. Research on mass media effects including an examination of emerging media 
technologies.  
Pre-Requisites: None 
COM 2308 Writing for the Media and Public Relations   
The student will learn fundamentals of writing for different media outlets and publics and will 
practice writing artifacts such as news reports, editorials, press releases, scripts, advertising copy, 
public statements, social media promotions, and magazine feature articles. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
COM 2312 Focused Listening  
An in-depth look at how communication technologies and other factors contribute to our 
distractions or ability to focus whether sitting in silence, engaging in self-reflection, or 
communicating with others. Analysis and practice of focused listening to reclaim attention, silence, 
 
 
and authentic conversation. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
COM 2314 Communication Technology 
A survey of communication technologies. The course includes an exploration of the factors 
surrounding the adoption of new technology. The course will also challenge the student to consider 
the sociological impact of technology and technological determinism. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
COM 2317 Cinema and Religion  
A course designed to enable students to recognize mythic structures in contemporary film and 
compare and contrast them to the central themes of Christianity and the Lutheran Ethos, including 
original sin, mercy, grace and redemption.  NOTE:   Lengths of films vary, and it is important to 
examine each in its entirety. The student should be prepared to participate in a 45 minute 
discussion after the end of each film shown, regardless of length.   
Pre-Requisites: None. Course Fee $50 
COM 2319 Digital & Media Literacy  
In this course students will explore the current media landscape from a critical perspective, 
examine its effects on social institutions and interpersonal relationships, and evaluate the role of 
media literacy in forging a healthier communication climate. Students will learn to engage media 
critically, thereby becoming better informed citizens.   
Pre-Requisites: None 
COM 3304 Group Dynamics  
Theory and practice in group communication: goal setting, problem solving, listening, feedback, 
and leadership. Cross-listed as PSY 3304. 
Pre-Requisites: COM 1300. 
COM 3308 Persuasive Communication  
Theory and practice of personal and public persuasion with an emphasis on how to change 
attitudes, understand purchasing behavior, and increase influence.  
Pre-Requisites: None 
COM 3310 Public Relations  
An introduction to the basics of public relations including best practices, case studies, and ethical 
concerns. It includes a study of the application of new media communication to the art of public 
relations. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
COM 3320 Media Law and Ethics 
Development of and rationale for constitutional protections, legal regulations, and ethical 
responsibilities of the mass media in the United States 
Pre-Requisites: None 
 
 
COM 3325 Interpersonal Relationships  
Investigation into the communication and psychology of family dynamics, friendships, and romantic 
partners. One goal of this course will be to understand our own relationships and seek to improve 
them.   Cross listed with PSY 3325 
Pre-Requisites: PSY 1311  
COM 3331 Organizational Communication  
A study of communication theories and their application for organizations.  Students will develop 
leadership skills in identifying and resolving communication barriers that inhibit efficient 
organizational performance. 
Pre-Requisites: None  
COM 3335 Intercultural Communication  
Course explores communicating from one culture to another and will include worldview, religion, 
values, language, nonverbal communication, context and other topics related to becoming a 
competent communicator in cross-cultural situations.  The course will require the student to spend 
time in a culture different from their own. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
COM 3340 Visual Communication Design  
Explore major theoretical and practical approaches to the creation and analysis of visual images. 
This course will help students develop their visual literacy skills by teaching them to critically 
evaluate and responsibly construct visual arguments. Students will hone their visual literacy skills 
by developing a basic understanding of the physical and cognitive processes of visual 
communication, the elements of visual language, and the principles of visual organization that can 
affect perception. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
COM 3350 Conflict Resolution  
Systematic and critical understanding of communication theory and research focused on conflict 
across various contexts.  Application of communication strategies as practical tools for the analysis, 
management, and resolution of conflict within a broad range of complex interactions. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
COM 3360 Topics in Communication  
Examination of particular trends, contemporary challenges, developing contexts, and emerging 
technologies relevant to the study of communication and not already a central focus of the existing 
courses in the Communication major.  While the topics will vary, each will provide a focused 
compliment (depth) to other courses that provide a more general perspective (breadth).  This 
course may be repeated for credit when topic is different. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
COM 3370 Health
A fascinating study of communication in the field of health; focusing on the origins and theories of
health communication, and exploration of the complexities inherent in both verbal and nonverbal 
communication, and health messaging. Additional focus will be on several contemporary areas within the field of health communication research and practice. Cross-listed as PUBH 3370. Pre-Requisites: None
COM 3398 National/International Studies  
A travel course to immerse the student in real-world contexts where students can observe and 
analyze communication practices in various settings.  
Pre-Requisites: Consent of instructor. Course Fee: Varies by travel course.  
COM 4301 Digital Journalism and New Media Communication  
In an effort to remain relevant, news organizations have had to embrace emerging technologies and 
social media as a means of delivering content and engaging audiences. This course studies the 
practice of digital journalism through visual storytelling techniques. Students not only learn the 
basics of digital audio, video, and image production and editing but also explore topics such as how 
to engage online audiences, how to write and optimize content for search engines, and how to 
measure performance across various platforms. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
COM 4310 Communication Internship  
Supervised experience working with communication professionals in production, public relations, 
or other communication-related fields.  Fulfills Experiential Learning requirement. 
Pre-Requisites: Junior or Senior Level Standing 
 
COM 4340 Visual Production & Design 
Introduces students to a range of creative software for graphic design, visual layout, and audio and 
video editing. In this course students will study the creative, technical and production elements 
required to produce visuals for a variety of print and digital media. Students will learn to create 
visual communication materials and marketing collateral including flyers, new packages, podcasts 
and ads. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
 
COM 4350 Communication Capstone 
This course assists students in transitioning from their Communication major to a being a 
professional in the communication field, and is required of all graduating Communication majors. 
Students will complete on-campus projects in the three concentrations offered alongside the 
Communication major: interpersonal communication, public relations and advertising, and visual 
communication. Additionally, students will utilize the knowledge and skills learned in other courses 
to build their network, working with a professional mentor, and explore job opportunities. 
Pre-Requisites: Senior level/standing (90+ completed hours). 
COM 4351 Advertising Management  
Through projects and texts, students will develop an understanding of the creation of effective 
advertising, media planning and budgeting, and advertising strategy as it relates to the overall 
marketing mix and strategic plan of the organization, with special emphasis on advanced 
copywriting and layout, for print and broadcast media. Cross listed with BADM 4351. 
Pre-Requisites: BADM 3313, BADM 3350 
 
 
 
 
CIS 1300 Technology of the Digital Age 
This course is an introduction to digital computing, including study of how computers organize, 
transmit, and process information. Students will consider the ethical, cultural, and legal issues 
surrounding technology, as well as concepts and tools underlying the web and computer programs. 
This course satisfies the Technology component of the CTX Common Experience.  
CSC 1401 Introduction to Computer Science I 
The course introduces a broad overview of computer sciences topics: data storage, computer 
architecture, networking programming concepts, algorithms, and security.  Translate problems into 
algorithms and implement using Python with basic Python programming skills pertaining to 
variables, data types input/output, control flow, sequences and functions.   
Pre-Requisites: Eligible for Lower College Entry Level Math. Course Fee: $75 
CSC 1402 Introduction to Computer Science II  
In this course program design, write, test and debug using Python. Program design includes 
complex data structure like lists, sets, dictionaries, and libraries.  Write scripts for productivity and 
advanced structured programs using control statements, functions, modules, file I/O, exceptions, 
and string data types.  Review and implement Python programming using object-oriented 
programming. 
Pre-Requisites: CSC 1401 or consent of instructor. Course Fee: $75  
 
CSC 1410 Introduction to Geographic Information Systems 
Introduction to geographic information systems (GIS) and global positioning systems (GPS) for use 
in data analyses in the sciences and social sciences. Units on basic GIS and cartographic design, 
internet mapping, cell phone applications, and GPS data collection. This course satisfies the 
Common Experience Technology requirement, however it does not fulfill the Common Experience 
Natural Science with Lab requirements. Cross-listed with ESC 1410. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
CSC 2305 Discrete Structures  
This course is an analysis of the basic structures that form the foundations of mathematics and 
computer science including statements, sets and subsets, number sets, sequences, relations, 
orderings, partitions, functions, graphs, and trees.  Structures defined through induction and 
recursion, including introduction to the solutions of recurrence relations are addressed.  Emphasis 
will be on formal logical and combinatorial proof.  Cross-listed with MTH 2305 Discrete Structures. 
Pre-Requisites: CSC 1401 with a grade of “C” or higher.  Also MTH 1352 with a grade of ‘C’ or higher or 
math placement at Upper College Entry Level  
CSC 2306 Business of Software Development 
This course explores the business context and financial considerations of software development 
and infrastructure decisions for a software company.  Additional topics include an overview of 
different business models for SaaS, Mobile, and On-Premise solutions as well as partnership models 
to develop and sell software products. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
 
 
CSC 2403 Data Structures & Algorithm Analysis  
A course in data structures and algorithms. Topics include linked lists, stacks, queues, priority 
queues, binary trees, search algorithms, sort algorithms, graph algorithms, Recursion, and algorithm 
efficiency analysis. 
Pre-Requisites: Must have completed or be co-enrolled in CSC 1402. Course Fee: $75 
CSC 3303 Computer Architecture  
An introduction to the architectural features of single-processor (Von Neumann or SISD) 
computers. 
Pre-Requisites: None. Course Fee: $75 
CSC 3304 Networking: Theory and Applications 
Understanding networks topologies, protocols, hardware and software. A hands-on approach to 
security, protection and management. Distributed applications and migrating different platforms are 
also discussed. 
Pre-Requisites: CSC 3302 and CSC 3303 or consent of instructor. 
CSC 3305 Database Design and Analysis 
Principles for the design and management of database systems. Data and storage models, relational 
and hierarchical data models will be studied. Other topics include: normalization forms, canonical 
schema representations, data integrity and file security techniques. 
Pre-Requisites: CSC 1402 or consent of instructor. CSC 2305 is recommended.  
CSC 3306 Human Computer Interaction 
This course will introduce the human factors area of computer science examining success (and 
failures) and current work in the subject area. 
Pre-Requisites: CSC 1402 or consent of instructor  
CSC 3307 Artificial Intelligence 
An introduction to the basic concepts and techniques of artificial intelligence using the 
programming language LISP. Topics covered include natural languages, vision systems, search 
strategies and control, with an emphasis on representation. 
Pre-Requisites: CSC 1401 and CSC 2403 or consent of instructor  
CSC 3308 Computer Graphics  
An introduction to the generation and manipulation of graphical images on computer displays. 
Topics include representation of curves and surfaces, 2D and 3D transformations, hidden edge and 
surface elimination, and shading. 
Pre-Requisites: CSC 1402, MTH 2402, and MTH 3311 or consent of instructor. 
CSC 3309 Numerical Analysis 
Algorithms of numerical analysis are covered. Topics include floating point arithmetic, 
approximation, numerical integration and differentiation, solution of nonlinear equations, and 
solution of ordinary differential equations. Programming assignments will give experience in 
applying selected algorithms. 
Pre-Requisites: CSC 1402 and MTH 2402 or consent of the instructor. Cross-listed with MTH 3309. 
 
 
CSC 3310 Topics in Computer Science 
Special topics in computer science that are new or unique that are not covered in existing courses. 
Possible topics include: computer design, Java programming, parallel and distributed computing.  
May be repeated for credit when topics differ. 
Pre-Requisites: Adjusted according to topic.  
CSC 3311 Programming Language Concepts  
A comparative study of programming languages covering their history, development, and design 
criteria; formal definition of syntax and semantics; concepts and constructs; similarities and 
differences between languages; major language paradigms to include examination of object-
oriented, functional, and concurrent languages; exception handling, modularization, scoping, etc.  
Students program in at least one language they have never used before.  
Pre-Requisites: CSC 2403. Course Fee: $75 
CSC 3312 Introduction to Data Science 
This course provides an introduction to Data Science and Data Analytics using Python 
programming language and supporting libraries to integrate aspects of computer science with a 
variety of data preparation and statistical analysis techniques.  Perform, interpret and evaluate 
analytic inquiries to address explorative or hypothetical outcomes. Specific techniques involve tests 
of inter-variable association, correlation, regression, and clustering. 
Pre-Requisites: CSC 1401 and CSC 1402 and MTH 2301 or BADM 2301, or other introductory statistics 
course.  
CSC 3315 Systems 
This course provides a foundational understanding of core software systems and exposure to the 
utilization of LINUX command line through a cloud-based server. In particular, topics include 
operating systems, networking and communications, parallel and distributed computing, and 
systems fundamentals. 
Pre-Requisites: CSC 2305 and CSC 2403 
CSC 3317 App Development 
The intent of the course is to provide a rotating course that would teach a specific computer 
language, providing students with exposure to additional programming languages. The specific 
language would vary periodically. Possible projects may be mobile development (iOS or Android), 
Java, or Java Script. 
Pre-Requisites: CSC 2403 and CSC 3311, or consent of the instructor.  
CSC 3319 Cryptology  
Applications of abstract algebraic and number theoretic concepts to the science of secure 
cryptography. Topics include historical ciphers, public-key cryptography, signed messages, secure 
protocols, and cryptanalysis, especially as these deal with electronic communications. Cross-listed 
as MTH 3319 
Pre-Requisites: CSC/MTH 2305 and one of: CSC 1401, MTH 3313, or MTH 3315 
 
 
CSC 3320 Theory of Computation 
This course introduces the theory of computability, including important results from study of 
automata and formal languages. The course begins with the study of automata and their 
relationship to regular, context free and context sensitive languages. Notions of decidability and 
undecidability are discussed and this is related to complexity analysis. 
Pre-Requisites: CSC 2403 or consent of instructor  
CSC 3330 Information Security 
This course provides an overview of information security and assurance, including technical, 
procedural, and policy considerations.  In particular, topics include:  threats, vulnerabilities and 
countermeasures; authentication and authorization; modern cryptography; protection against 
malicious code and other attacks; security for networks; secure software issues; privacy; and 
emerging information security challenges. 
Pre-Requisites: CSC 2305 and CSC 2403. 
CSC 3331 Cloud Computing & Open Source Software 
This course provides an understanding of cloud computing principles and infrastructure 
components to inform architecture and engineering decisions. Additionally, this course explores 
various Open Source software and frameworks and approaches to use and combine them for new 
solutions. CTX's Speaking Center workshops (e.g., impromptu speaking and presentations, team 
dynamics workshops) and coaching will be integrated into the course. 
Pre-Requisites: CSC 2305 and CSC 2403 
CSC 3410 Geospatial Technologies  
Introduction to geographic information systems (GIS) and global positioning systems (GPS) for use 
in environmental analyses and mapping. Units on cartographic design; internet mapping; cell phone 
applications and add-ons; GPS and drone navigation and data collection. Laboratory will focus on 
GIS applications. Cross listed with ESC 3410. 
Pre-Requisites: CIS 1300 or 1401 
CSC 4301 Senior Design/Independent Study 
A working study/project led by an instructor. Projects consist of design and development of 
computer science related hardware or software systems for local businesses or any other 
commercial organization, but within the capacity of a senior student to complete within a term. 
Pre-Requisites: Senior level computer science student or consent of instructor. 
CSC 4310 Computer Science Internship 
Students will participate in an on-the-job computer science work experience under the direct 
supervision of professionals in a corporation or government agency. A senior level course for 
computer science majors only. Graded on a pass/no pass basis.  Fulfills Experiential Learning 
requirement. 
Pre-Requisites: Junior or senior standing  
CSC 4311 Experiential Learning Capstone I 
This is the first of a two-course series. This series is designed to provide students “real world” 
experience with the Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC) by developing a project for a local 
 
 
technology organization. Projects may be a R&D, automation, or value-add initiative for the partner 
organization. During this series students will apply both the technical and communication skills that 
have been developed while pursuing the interdisciplinary Computer Science major. This course 
provides students with the opportunity to gain the desired experience with the additional guidance 
and support from a faculty member overseeing the project development and delivery.  
Pre-Requisites: CSC 1401, CSC 1402, CSC 2403, CSC 2305, CSC 3303, CSC 3311, CSC 3330 and senior 
status as a computer science major 
CSC 4312 Experiential Learning Capstone II 
This is the second of a two-course series. In this course, students continue the project started in 
CSC 4311 with a focus on the design and implementation of the project. This series is designed to 
provide students “real world” experience with the Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC) by 
developing a project for a local technology organization. Projects may be a R&D, automation, or 
value-add initiative for the partner organization. During this series students will apply both the 
technical and communication skills that have been developed while pursuing the interdisciplinary 
Computer Science major. This course provides students with the opportunity to gain the desired 
experience with the additional guidance and support from a faculty member overseeing the project 
development and delivery.  
Pre-Requisites: CSC 4311 
 
CRIJ 1301 Introduction to Criminal Justice 
This course is a general overview of the criminal justice system including a description of the major 
agencies: police, prosecution, courts, and corrections, and an analysis of their interdependence in 
the criminal justice process.  This course introduces the core working philosophies of the criminal 
justice system from the crime control and due process models of justice and an understanding of 
the agencies that follow those methodologies.  
Pre-Requisites: None 
CRIJ 2313 Corrections, Probation, & Parole  
Provides an overview of the major facets of the American correction system, a historical look at our 
penal system to the innovations of Parole and Probation as well as other community based 
corrections systems and their overall impact on the criminal justice system.  The success or failures 
of rehabilitation efforts and other programs, juvenile probation and juvenile boot camps will be 
discussed. 
Pre-Requisites: CRIJ 1301 
CRIJ 2328 Policing Systems and Practices 
An extensive overview of the policing systems used in America.  Looks at our criminal justice 
system from its roots in the British system, the Code of Hammurabi, Mosaic Laws, London 
Metropolitan Police Department and Bow Street Runners as precedents to our modern system of 
criminal justice agencies which emerged in New York, Boston, and Philadelphia.  Examines 
different models or styles of policing, from the watchman, legalistic, and service styles and examine 
the recent innovations such as Community Policing and Intelligence Led Policing and their 
 
 
relevance in today’s policing agencies. 
Pre-Requisites: CRIJ 1301 
CRIJ 3300 Faith and Justice 
Explores the interaction of our country's retributive justice system with our faith's call for justice, 
including examination of justice themes as applied to economic, immigration, trafficking and 
slavery, peacemaking, social, restorative, environmental, prison ministry, civil and voting rights, and 
related justice efforts. 
Pre-Requisites: CRIJ 1301 
CRIJ 3301 The Faithful Lawyer 
Explores the conflict among ethical, moral, and faithful conduct for attorneys licensed by the state, 
the outcomes expected by public and private clients, the vocational stress produced by professional 
demands and boundaries, and our faith's call to do justice, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with 
our God. 
Pre-Requisites: CRIJ 1301 
CRIJ 3302 Criminal Law 
Designed to provide a basic concept of criminal law and to provide legal ground work for those 
who seek to enter the criminal justice system. This course will focus on the impact of statutes and 
case law on criminal justice system practitioners; included are the 4th, 5th, 6th, 8th and 14th 
Amendments as they affect the accused, the convicted, and the employees working in the criminal 
justice system as well as issues of arrest, search and seizure, admittance of evidence and the rights 
of the accused. Serves as a legal update of current changes in the law.  
Pre-Requisites: CRIJ 1301 
CRIJ 3304 Criminal Investigations 
examination of criminal investigation fundamentals including the establishment of a crime scene 
perimeter, unified command, and various methods of crime scene searches, collection and 
preservation of evidence, interviews, interrogation, case preparation, and the familiarization with 
specific instrumentation in crime detection and evidence selection for evidentiary value.  This 
course will also introduce areas of administrative law and its impact on the function of 
bureaucracies and public agencies.  
Pre-Requisites: CRIJ 1301 
CRIJ 3305 Forensic Science and Criminalistics 
Explores forensic science from the biological, chemical, and criminalistics perspective, including 
application from the crime scene to the court process; uses laboratory methods of instruction; 
examines evidence, court procedures, legal and ethical issues, and the role of forensic science in 
the field of criminal justice; and distinguishes appropriate techniques based on crime typology. 
Pre-Requisites: CRIJ 1301 
CRIJ 3306 Management in Law Enforcement 
A study of management functions in a modern criminal justice organization, the internal and 
external environmental factors affecting organizational efficiency, and the application of 
quantitative and behavioral science. The function of the leader and principles of management are 
 
 
viewed from an integrative perspective, including line and staff interactions and relationships. 
Theories of management, authority and responsibility, issues of centralization and decentralization, 
planning, organizing, staffing, directing and controlling will also be studied in the course. 
Pre-Requisites: CRIJ 1301 
CRIJ 3309 Gangs & Organized Crime 
Examines both gangs and organized criminal groups.  Traces the origins and historical development 
of the activities known as "organized crime”.  Focuses on American gangs, both youthful street 
gangs and militaristic prison gangs with strict hierarchy. Topics include the history of gangs, gang 
and gang member characteristics, gang life, and strategies of gang control. The link between youth 
street gangs, prison gangs, and other deviant collectivities will be explored.  
Pre-Requisites: CRIJ 1301 
CRIJ 3310 Juveniles in Criminal Justice 
An in-depth study of the juvenile justice system. Topics covered are the development of delinquent 
behavior, victimology, initial handling and proper referrals, preventive police techniques, special 
police problems with juveniles, juvenile law, and related juvenile justice agencies.  Plea bargains, 
juvenile probation, restorative vs. rehabilitative models and other best practices in juvenile justice 
will also be discussed. 
Pre-Requisites: CRIJ 1301 
CRIJ 3311 Criminology 
Explores issues such as crime causation and the involvement of the criminal justice and corrections 
systems in these issues.  Provides an analysis of the major criminological theories from the 
predominant “schools” of criminological thought; including the classical theories and rational 
choice; positivism and trait theories, psychoanalytic theories, social structure, social process, and 
social bonds theories.  Particular focus upon the evolution of the theories from the classical and 
positivism schools of thought to the modern choice and trait theories, as well as the evolution of the 
sociological theories. Cross-listed with SOC 3311.  
Pre-Requisites: CRIJ 1301 
CRIJ 3312 Criminal Profiling 
Explore the interwoven biological, psychological and social antecedents and correlates of criminal 
behavior. Psychological issues and their relation to criminal and anti-social behavior will be studied.   
An overview of profiling techniques; provides a definition of the modus operandi and signature 
aspects of serial crimes with a focus on serial rape, arson, and murder investigations and the tactics 
and techniques of using methods of both inductive and deductive reasoning to solve cases which 
pose the greatest threat to both law enforcement and the public. 
Pre-Requisites: CRIJ 1301 
CRIJ 3313 White Collar Crime 
Explores domestic and international white collar crime, agencies tasked with investigating and 
prosecuting white collar crime, applicable criminal laws, underlying sociological and criminological 
theories, the criminals who commit such crimes, and victim impact. 
Pre-Requisites: CRIJ 1301 
 
 
CRIJ 3314 Ethics in Criminal Justice  
Presents ethical issues that arise in the three major areas of criminal justice: police, courts, and 
corrections as case studies with discussion of their application. General philosophical theories of 
ethics from both historical as well as biblical accounts will be discussed and an elaboration provided 
about the codes of ethics that operate to control the institutional and personal behavior of police, 
courts and correctional systems. 
Pre-Requisites: CRIJ 1301 
CRIJ 3316 Victimology and Victim Rights 
This course has the dual purpose of looking at the impact of crime upon victims and on our legal 
system, and conducts a brief overview of the crime victim role, criminal-victim relationships (either 
passive or active), and societal reaction to victimization, including crisis-intervention centers, court 
related victim/witness services, restitution and compensation.  
Pre-Requisites: CRIJ 1301 
CRIJ 3320 Homeland Security 
Designed to introduce the student to the scope of issues facing the American public, the private 
sector and law enforcement on securing the country against threats posed by domestic and 
international terrorist groups, students will be given an overview of different terrorist and extremist 
groups to understand their goals, objectives and modus operandi. Threats to American interests 
abroad will be analyzed.  Emphasis will be given to prevention, preparedness, and response. The 
roles of local, state and federal agencies in homeland security and critical infrastructure and key 
resource (CIKR) protection are examined. 
Pre-Requisites: CRIJ 1301 
CRIJ 3322 Roots of Terrorism 
Understanding terrorism as a political crime. Focus is on the historical aspect of terrorism and how 
the use of terrorism as a tool of the weak has evolved from its use by the Jews in Roman times, by 
radical ancient Muslims, and then to its current contextual use by the French, Russian, Irish, and 
Basque movements and finally the modern radical Islamic terrorist groups.  Various methods of 
attack from ancient poisons to modern bombing techniques culminating with the aircraft used 
during the attacks of 9/11 will be compared and contrasted to symmetrical and other asymmetrical 
forms of combat.  
Pre-Requisites: CRIJ 1301 
CRIJ 3330 Sociology and Psychology of Terrorism 
This course helps the student in understanding terrorism as a political crime. The focus includes an 
examination of the sociological and psychological aspects of terrorist behavior; it includes portions 
on the different tactics of terrorism recruitment and attacks as well as the social psychology and 
religious aspects of terrorist group recruiting and formation to give the student a well-rounded 
understanding of the use of terrorism as a tool or tactic. 
Pre-Requisites: CRIJ 1301 
CRIJ 3335 – Social Science Methods 
This course focuses on the use of quantitative and qualitative research methodology that is most 
commonly utilized by social science practitioners. It will emphasize the use of techniques and 
 
 
ethical constructs that are typically employed by those working in social science fields. Cross-listed 
with POLS 3335. 
Pre-Requisites: CRIJ 1301.  
CRIJ 3377 – Gender & Crime 
Gender disparities in contemporary patterns of crime, victimization, and incarceration will be 
explored. Focus will be on key concepts, major theories, and empirical research studies around 
gender and crime. 
Pre-Requisites: CRIJ 1301 
CRIJ 3388 – Race and Punishment  
The social construct of race has played a central part in the inception and dramatic expansion of the 
U.S. criminal justice system over the past 50 years.  This course will explore the causes and 
consequences of this expansion of the carceral state.  The course will examine how race shapes, 
and is shaped by the carceral state by investigating how racialized social systems create inequalities 
in the delivery of punishment historically. 
Pre-Requisites: CRIJ 1301 
CRIJ 4305 Crime Mapping & Intelligence 
An analysis of intelligence techniques and serves as a broad overview of military and crime analysis 
techniques and methodologies.  The fundamental (steps of the analytic process) and philosophies 
beginning with traditional Military Intelligence and the movement that has led to Intelligence Led 
Policing will be discussed.  Uses of analysts and systems to assist in investigations as they examine 
crime patterns and resolve community crime problems will be discussed.  Analytical techniques 
including link diagrams, telephone tolls, and visual investigations will be discovered along with a 
theoretical and practical introduction to the benefits of crime mapping and the spatial analysis of 
crime. 
Pre-Requisites: CRIJ 1301 
CRIJ 4350 Criminal Justice Capstone 
Examines the emerging trends in policing, from Homeland Security and Intelligence Led Policing to 
Crisis Intervention and Community Policing, and balances the theoretical goals of the police with 
their realistic expectations.  Culminates in the development and production of a senior-level 
research paper grounded in relevant criminal justice literature regarding one of those topics. 
Emphasis is placed on the integration of knowledge acquired in previous courses and its practical 
application to problem sets provided throughout the class as projects.  
Pre-Requisites: CRIJ 1301 
 
CAI 6320 Curriculum Theory 
Examines major curriculum philosophies that have influenced educators within the last century. 
Students will analyze four educational visions (Scholar Academic, Social Efficiency, Learner 
Centered and Social Reconstruction). Students will reflect on their personal educational 
philosophies. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
 
 
CAI 6321 Strategies for Professional Development 
Designed to engage students in the examination of current research and trends in professional 
development for campus and district instructional staff. Students will have the opportunity to learn 
about development, implementation and evaluation of campus and district-level professional 
development and will explore adult learning strategies and motivation. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
CAI 6322 Curriculum Design 
Examines the impact of 21st Century Standards on the development, implementation and 
evaluation of state and local curricula. 
Pre-Requisites: CAI 6320 
CAI 6323 Research IV - Proposal 
Focuses upon preparation of the dissertation proposal which will include selection of topic, 
development of problem statement and research hypotheses/questions, initial review of literature, 
design of study, and significance and limitations of study. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
CAI 6324 Assessment of Student Learning 
Provides students with the tools to develop, maintain, and evaluate an effective student learning 
assessment process. Exploration of the assessment process will include: how to write appropriate 
learning objectives, the utilization of learning goals, formative and summative assessment, the 
differentiation of testing formats and what they really assess, the utilization of rubrics for improved 
instruction and feedback, and an understanding of the values of writing ethical assessments to meet 
the needs of all students. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
CAI 6325 Contemporary Issues 
Explores the issues in curriculum and instruction which are current as well as those that continue as 
ongoing issues in education. Topics such as teacher accountability, a centralized curriculum, equity 
and access, high-stakes testing, and culturally responsive teaching are among the topics to be 
explored. This will be an evolving course driven by the issues that affect educators. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
CAI 6351 Program Evaluation 
Examines different theoretical models of evaluation and will evaluate an educational program by 
constructing and administering instruments, analyzing the data gathered, determining the worth of 
the program, writing an evaluation report, and presenting the report to the personnel of the 
program evaluated, including presentation for the class. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
CAI 6352 Supervision & Leadership 
Examines research related to the effective supervision of curriculum and instruction at the school, 
district, and system levels 
Pre-Requisites: None 
 
 
CAI 6335 Practicum I 
The first of two semesters of fieldwork of the Ed.D. Curriculum & Instruction program, wherein 
students will spend time with one or more mentors in a campus or central office setting and record 
hours in each of the applicable program objectives. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
CAI 6336 Practicum II 
The second of two semesters of fieldwork of the Ed.D. Curriculum & Instruction program, wherein 
students will spend time with one or more mentors in a campus or central office setting and record 
hours in each of the applicable program objectives. 
Pre-Requisites: None 

ECE 3320 Early Childhood Education Curriculum Methods and Materials  
This course will examine organization, materials, curriculum, and methods in preschool, 
kindergarten, and primary education.  Techniques in working with primary age students will be 
emphasized. Therefore, course meetings and learning experiences are interactive and participatory. 
Fieldwork at a local school in an early childhood setting is required as part of this course. 
Pre-Requisites: Admission to the Teacher Ed Program  
 
ECO 2301 Introduction to Macroeconomics  
Macroeconomics is the social science that studies the way societies, in the aggregate, allocate 
scarce resources to unlimited wants.  Topics of the course include introductions to: supply and 
demand, Gross Domestic Product, inflation, recession, unemployment, aggregate private 
investment, government fiscal policy, monetary policy, international trade, and the effects that each 
of these have on the nation's economy in the classical, Keynesian, and monetarist frameworks. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
ECO 2302 Introduction to Microeconomics 
Microeconomics is the social science that studies the ways individual economic agents allocate 
scarce resources to unlimited wants. Topics of the course include introductions to: supply and 
demand, elasticity of supply and demand, consumer behavior, firm behavior, competition, 
monopoly, oligopoly, and monopolistic competition, resource markets, market failures, antitrust 
policy, and issues of economic equity. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
 
 
 
EDU 1201 Intro to Education 
An introduction to the roles and responsibilities of the teacher, the characteristics of America’s 
schools and curriculum, and selected issues facing today's teachers. Observation/activities will 
focus on the child as learner, teaching strategies, management procedures, classroom climate, and 
roles of the teacher. Fieldwork required. Required of all education major.  Fulfills Experiential 
Learning requirement. Requires time log and reflections to be submitted when applying for 
admission into the Teacher Education Program 
Pre-Requisites: None. Course Fee: $55 
EDU 2304 Children’s Literature 
A survey of the evolution of children's literature, and the exploration, analysis, and evaluation of 
significant literature for children's needs, interests, and capabilities. Emphasis is given to the study 
of the various genres of children's literature and styles of illustration. Suggestions are shared for 
elementary level storytelling, oral reading, and literacy projects. Extensive documented reading of 
children's books is required. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
EDU 2310 Intro to Exceptional Learners 
This course focuses on the foundation of special education. Students will be introduced to basic 
theories and concepts related to identification and classification of exceptional learners, legislation 
and litigation in special education, best practices for classroom instruction for exceptional learners, 
and factors that promote effective consultation and collaboration with families, educators, and other 
professionals. 15 hours of fieldwork required. 
Pre-Requisites: Grade of ‘C’ or higher in EDU 2201. 
EDU 2320 Teaching Culturally & Linguistically Diverse Students 
This course explores best practices in teaching culturally and linguistically diverse students. It is 
designed to build pre-service teachers’ understanding of the influences of culture and home 
language(s) on language development and prepare them to assess and address the linguistic 
strengths and needs of students. This course is required of all Education students. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
EDU 2323 Educational Technology 
This class is designed to familiarize students with the Technology Applications Standards and 
Competencies for Texas teachers and help prepare them to effectively use technology in planning 
and delivering instruction. Required of all education majors. Fulfills Technology requirement for 
teacher education students. 
Pre-Requisites: Admission to the Teacher Education Program 
EDU 2343 Educational Psychology  
Educational Psychology is designed to introduce psychological principles, theories, and 
methodologies to issues of teaching and learning in schools. Topics include learning theory, learner 
characteristics, intelligence, creativity, motivation, measurement and evaluation, and models of 
teaching for all learners. Examination of cognitive, social, moral development of students as they 
 
 
interact in the learning process also takes place. This course is required of all education students. 
Pre-Requisites: PSY 1311 Introduction to Psychology 
EDU 3261 Vocation of the Christian Educator 
The topics of this course center on the systemic development of the Lutheran tradition of education 
in America.  Emphasis will be placed on the present status of The Lutheran Church—Missouri 
Synod system of formal education as it has grown into the world’s second largest non-public system 
of education.  This course also emphasizes the tasks and function of the Christian educator in the 
role of commissioned minister status. Required of students seeking a Lutheran Teacher Diploma. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
EDU 3311 Teaching Strategies & Assessment  
Instructional techniques and strategies that emphasize practical application of the teaching/learning 
process to include writing of instructional objectives and lesson plans, delivery strategies, and 
grouping practices based on learning theory and learning styles as well as multiple intelligences.  
Includes formal and informal assessment, measurement and evaluation of curriculum, teaching 
strategies and student learning in the elementary classroom with an emphasis on the use of 
technology. 
Pre-Requisites: Admission to the College of Education 
EDU 3331 Teaching Physical Education  
Students will discover effective methods and techniques for teaching physical education while 
integrating the dimensions of wellness for healthy living. Major components of the course include 
writing instructional objectives and lesson plans, applying principles of organization and class 
management, and incorporating delivery strategies unique to physical education. Satisfies the 
Wellness requirement for the Common Experience. Cross-listed with KIN 3333. 
Pre-Requisites: Grade of ‘C’ or higher in KIN 2301 or KIN 2302, or Admission to the Teacher Education 
Program. 
EDU 3333 Teaching Religion 
This course is designed to prepare students for the teaching ministry. Emphasis will be the 
concepts, content, materials, and strategies necessary in teaching religion in the elementary, 
middle, secondary, and special education classrooms. Integration of the Christian faith into all 
aspects of parish and school ministry will be covered. Fieldwork in Lutheran schools affiliated with 
the Lutheran Church-Missouri Synod is required for all students seeking a Lutheran Teacher 
Diploma. Fieldwork in Christian schools is required for all students seeking a Christian Teacher 
Diploma. Fulfills Experiential Learning requirement. 
Pre-Requisites: Admission to the Teacher Education Program   
EDU 3340 Societal Relationships & Classroom Management  
This course will explore the vital and necessary interrelationships between the three elements 
present in the overall education of students or learners: school, home, and community. This course 
will also explore methods of effective classroom management strategies. This course is required of 
all education students. 
Pre-Requisites: SPED 3301  
 
 
EDU 4101 Teacher Education Seminar 
This course prepares teacher education students to meet the qualifications to enter their second 
fieldwork practicum. Students will prepare for and meet standards on their TexES pedagogy and 
content exams and complete all Texas teacher trainings required to be recommended for 
certification. Graded as Credit/No-Credit. 
Pre-Requisites: Admission to the Teacher Education Program (2).  
EDU 4601 Teacher Residency 
Teacher candidates will develop their teaching skills under the mentorship of a highly qualified 
teacher with the support of a university supervisor in a yearlong co-teaching placement using a 
gradual release model.  This course is taken in conjunction with the second practicum and repeated 
with clinical teaching. Graded as Credit/No-Credit. 
Pre-Requisites: Students must apply for residency and be approved by the program coordinator. Course Fee: 
$600 
EDU 4300 Secondary Content Methods 
Application of classroom management and instructional strategies specific to the individual content 
area. In addition to academic study in their content area, students will observe master teachers, 
develop, deliver, and reflect on lesson plans, build professional relationships, and collaborate with 
their cooperating teachers in preparation for clinical teaching. Fieldwork required. 
Pre-Requisites: Benchmark 3 (Methods Checkpoint) or Program Director approval. 
EDU 4301 Urban Immersion Seminar 
This two-week interactive immersion seminar is designed to expose students to diverse classroom 
settings in another city. Students will visit and lead in the classroom, arrange and participate in city 
excursions, share devotions, and reflect on their experiences. Students will engage in approximately 
40 hours of fieldwork experiences observing classes and will complete reflections, participate in 
discussions and complete assignments after the observations. Students who successfully complete 
the Urban Immersion Seminar may apply up to 25 of their field experience hours toward the 
required hours in one of their subsequent practicum classes: RDG 3326 or 4327 (Interdisciplinary 
Studies majors) or RDG 3342 or EDU 4300 (Education Content Curriculum majors). Graded as 
Credit/No-Credit. 
Pre-Requisites: Benchmark 3 (Methods Checkpoint). Course Fee: $700.  
EDU 4305 Mathematical Methods-Elementary 
Methods and strategies of teaching: logic, sets, relations, functions, operations, numeration systems, 
number theory, rational numbers, real numbers, informal geometry, measurement, probability, and 
statistics. Technology used to support math curriculum is explored. Fieldwork required. Fulfills 
Experiential Learning requirement. 
Pre-Requisites: Admission to the Teacher Education Program. Co-requisite courses: EDU 4307 and RDG 
4327.  
EDU 4307 Science & Health Methods-Elem  
Content and teaching methods for science and health in the elementary school. Application of child 
development theories in the teaching of science and health. Emphasis on active involvement of the 
child in inquiry. Extensive field experience required. 
 
 
Pre-Requisites: Admission to the Teacher Education Program. Co-requisite courses: EDU 4305 and RDG 
4327. Course Fee: $15 
EDU 4312 Methods of Social Studies 
Students discover geographic, historical, and culture content and strategies specific to designing 
and delivering effective social studies instruction for students in grades K-8. Technology and 
language arts are integrated across the ten themes of social studies through unit plans and 
activities. Fieldwork required. 
Pre-Requisites: Admission to the Teacher Education Program (Benchmark 2).  
EDU 41200 Clinical Teaching 
Under the coaching guidance of cooperating teachers and university supervisors, students develop 
proficiencies in each of the educator standards through directed observation, co-teaching, planning 
and delivering lessons, managing a classroom and reflecting on their experiences. Students will be 
assigned to a classroom which matches their anticipated certification level and content(s) and must 
participate a minimum of 70 full school days. Fulfills Experiential Learning requirement. 
Pre-Requisites: EDU 4101 and Admission to the Professional Semester. Course Fee: $600  
 
 
EDU 6310 Christian Values & Ethics 
A study of major ethical principles, especially a Christian influenced ethic, and how these principles 
apply to one's personal life, and the challenges facing the world, primarily as those challenges 
impact the area of education. Students will be challenged to use ethical principles to analyze and 
resolve real world ethical dilemmas. 
Pre-Requisites: None  
EDU 6311 Research I – Academic Writing 
This course will prepare the student to begin the dissertation required for the terminal degree. 
Emphasis will be placed on both academic conventions and technical form for the five-chapter 
dissertation or other similar product. Topics will include academic writing standards of mechanics, 
grammar, style, APA form, citation use and placement, dissertation topic, structure, IRB 
considerations, presentation, and defense. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
EDU 6312 Research II – Quantitative Research  
Presents core statistical concepts and methods that all social science majors, including education, 
must master in order to understand and do social research. The emphasis is on the use of concepts 
and tools of statistics in the analysis of social science data. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
EDU 6313 Multicultural Experiences 
A study of skills and techniques to diagnose and solve organizational problems and to influence 
actions of individuals, groups and organizations in a multicultural school community. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
 
 
EDU 6314 Grant Writing 
Develops the knowledge and skills involved in writing competitive grants for federal, state and 
private funds. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
EDU 6315 Research III – Qualitative Research 
Examines qualitative methods used in social science research, focusing primarily on applications in 
educational fields. Qualitative research follows an inductive process that involves the collection and 
analysis of non-numerical data to search for patterns, themes and holistic features that underlie 
behavioral patterns. The five common research design approaches will be explored: ethnography, 
grounded theory, case study, phenomenology, or narrative. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
EDU 6341 Digital Learning 
Explores the rapidly changing landscape of learning organizations in the 21st century. Students will 
explore learning in a globally and digitally connected world and how new learning trends such as 
problem-based learning, self-directed learning, and flipped classrooms are changing the way 
children and adults learn and the nature of educational systems. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
EDU 6380 Research V Dissertation 
Production of the dissertation, a formal document which demonstrates the candidate's ability to 
conduct research that makes an original contribution to theory or practice. The candidate must 
complete nine hours of this course; this course is repeatable until the student completes and 
defends the dissertation. Course Fee: $600 
EDU 6383 Research V Cumulative Research-Based Inquiry of Practice 
Production of the Cumulative Research-Based Inquiry of Practice (CRIP), a formal project which 
demonstrates the candidate’s ability to conduct research that makes an original contribution to 
education practice. The candidate must complete nine hours of Research V; this course is 
repeatable until the student completes and defends the CRIP. Course Fee: $600 
 
EDAD 5154 Practicum I 
Principal certification candidates will begin the process of preparing for their required certification 
exam in EDAD 5154. They will work to earn their release for the 268 Exam by demonstrating 80% 
mastery on practice assessments. Candidates will also draft preliminary plans for their three PASL 
Tasks in this course. Graded as Pass/No-Pass. 
Pre-Requisites: None. Course Fees: $85 
EDAD 5155 Practicum II 
Principal certification candidates will prepare for their internship semester in this course by 
planning their leadership activities in advance, to ensure they fulfill all TEA requirements and plan 
learning experiences that are aligned with the Principal Domains and Competencies outlined by the 
state of Texas. They will also continue to prepare for the implementation of their PASL Tasks in 
 
 
their internship semester to be completed on their respective campus. Graded as Pass/No-Pass. 
Pre-Requisites: None. Course Fee: $75 
EDAD 5156 Practicum III 
This course is a semester-long internship on the candidate’s respective campus, working in concert 
with a campus mentor and a university supervisor to earn 160 leadership hours. The internship is 
authentic and meaningful in the development of the intern as a future campus leader. This course 
must be passed and all requirements for the internship met successfully in order to fulfill TEA 
requirements for principal certification. Graded as Standard Letter.  
Pre-Requisites: None. Course Fee: $600 
EDAD 5322 Legal Foundations of Education  
A study of how recent trends and institutional changes in society have impacted the legal aspects of 
formal education. This class will provide research, class discussions, and activities which will 
increase students' knowledge of legislation, court precedents, tort and contract law, negligence and 
liability, societal issues, and how legal issues influence employment, academic/classroom, campus, 
and administration behavior. Emphasis will be on real problems educators face and on practical and 
legal responses to those problems. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
EDAD 5323 Evaluation and Assessment In Education  
This course considers a framework for building data literacy through core building blocks and 
campus applications. Connectors between data-based theory and relevant practice are emphasized. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
EDAD 5351 School Diversity Leader  
A course of study giving students an opportunity to develop and increase skills and knowledge in 
the areas of religion, ethics, conflict resolution, counseling, the historical influences on ethnic 
diversity interaction, community relations, and leadership of the school environment. It is necessary 
for the school administrator to be the force by which these groups cannot only coexist, but to share 
common goals and work together in a collaborative manner, so all students can be successful and 
be a productive force in the community, nation and world. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
EDAD 5352 School Resource Leader  
A course of study centered on the administrator's ability to efficiently manage and utilize the human 
resources, effectively utilize and manage the financial resources, and physical resources for the 
optimum benefit of students and the learning environment. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
EDAD 5353 School Professional Development and Continuing Education Leader  
A course of study centers on staff development and continuing education of the educational staff. 
Students will learn to develop a continuing educational program at the local campus and develop 
staff development training that will meet the needs and continued professional development of the 
staff at all levels of experience. AEL and TTESS training provided when taught on-ground. 
Pre-Requisites: None. Course Fee: $250 
 
 
 
EDL 6320 Program Analysis & Evaluation 
Provides school administrators the skills necessary to review, analyze, and evaluate current 
programs in the school system in which they operate. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
EDL 6321 Issues in District Leadership 
Explores a wide variety of issues that will confront district-level leaders including establishing 
collaboratively the vision and mission of a school district, appropriate staff and community 
communications, facilitating change, and proper use of data. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
EDL 6322 Organization & Public Relations  
Examines best practices for school communications, public relations, and branding; evaluates 
successful and unsuccessful bond and tax ratification elections; and considers options for dealing 
with a “communication crisis vortex.” 
Pre-Requisites: None 
EDL 6323 Research IV – The Proposal 
Focuses upon preparation of the dissertation proposal which will include selection of topic, 
development of problem statement and research hypotheses/questions, initial review of literature, 
design of study, and significance and limitations of study. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
EDL 6324 Leadership in the District 
Examines a broad view of leadership styles but with concentration on servant leadership as its main 
focus. The examination of servant leadership will acquaint the student with the advantages of 
approaching leadership from a shared rather than dominant position. The course will also have an 
emphasis on ethical behavior and leadership. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
EDL 6325 Advanced School Law 
Focuses on examination of current legal issues which impact the educational community, the 
process of policy development for school systems, as well as the agencies, courts, and legislative 
bodies which develop rules and regulations effecting educational systems. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
EDL 6351 Finance in Education 
Centers on the reality of managing budgets for a Texas public school district. Focus will be on 
acting with integrity, fairness, and competence in dealing with school revenue, expenditure 
allocations, construction finance, special program finance, and “business office” operations in order 
to promote success of all students. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
 
 
EDL 6352 Conflict Resolution 
Designed to provide a basic understanding of the nature of conflict from an educator's perspective 
and how it can be more effectively managed in our schools. Students will examine conflicts that 
arise between students, teachers, support staff, paraprofessionals, parents, administrators, school 
board members, community members, and anyone else who comes in the school setting. 
Strategies, processes, and skills for managing conflict will be presented and practiced throughout 
the course. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
EDL 6335 Practicum I 
The first of two semesters of fieldwork of the Ed.D. Educational Leadership program, wherein 
students will spend time with one or more mentors in a campus or central office setting and record 
hours in each of the applicable program objectives. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
EDL 6336 Practicum II 
The second of two semesters of fieldwork of the Ed.D. Educational Leadership program, wherein 
students will spend time with one or more mentors in a campus or central office setting and record 
hours in each of the applicable program objectives. 
Pre-Requisites: None 

EDTC 5315 Foundations of Innovative Design 
This course will explore the systematic approach to innovation and creative problem-solving from 
an interdisciplinary perspective. Students in the course will explore the fundamentals of different 
design models, including educational technology frameworks, and how design thinking and 
creativity can be used to enable innovation, curriculum, and training development. This course 
looks at how individuals and organizations use creativity and design skills to identify and choose 
opportunities that enable innovation. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
EDTC 5317 Innovative Design and Delivery of Learning 
This course focuses on best practices and the implementation of blended learning to improve 
learning and outcomes. Students in this course will develop an actionable outline for a blended 
learning course targeting an instructional area of their choice to be deployed in a training and/or 
instructional setting that addresses such topics as competency-based learning, personalized 
learning, Universal Design for Learning (UDL), computer-based learning, differentiation, adaptive 
learning, and eLearning. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
EDTC 5319 Artificial Intelligence, Virtual Reality, and Immersive Learning 
This course explores the history and relevance of artificial intelligence, virtual reality, and 
immersive virtual experiences to enhance learning. Students in this course will identify and research 
relevant virtual technologies to apply to their specific environment (educational, corporate, medical, 
 
 
etc.) and begin creating virtual models to impact learner engagement. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
EDTC 5321 Learning and Leadership with Data Analytics 
This course focuses on gathering, analyzing, and using data to inform decision making to increase 
learning. Students in this course will identify potential, relevant data repositories, apply data data 
analytic processes, pinpoint potential trends and predictions, and combine visual elements to 
communicate trends, outliers, and patterns in data to better inform learning designers and 
marketing. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
EDTC 5323 Assessing Performance with Technology 
This course explores research and best practices as it relates to using technology to help evaluate 
learner success through both formative and summative evaluation models in a digital world. 
Students in this course will apply appropriate evaluation frameworks to analyze and develop 
authentic, formative, and summative assessments that provide measures of student success in 
digital environments.  
Pre-Requisites: None 
EDTC 5325 Supporting Diverse Populations with Instructional Technology 
This course focuses on identifying and addressing learner demographics and characteristics that 
impact learning outcomes. Students in this course will develop a proposal that identifies strategies 
and a variety of digital tools that support the achievement of learning objectives by diverse 
populations.  
Pre-Requisites: None 
EDTC 5327 Legal, Privacy, and Security Issues in Technology 
This course will explore the legal, privacy, and security issues in technology from an 
interdisciplinary perspective. Students in the course will explore laws, policies, and emerging trends 
and legislation related to the ethical and proper use of technology, access, and data. This course 
closely examines staff and student legal privacy, and security issues related to technology and 
raises awareness for how individuals and organizations can remain proactive relating to security 
issues. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
EDTC 5329 Special Topics: Innovation & Engagement Technologies 
This course focuses on the development and implementation of innovative technologies in an 
educational setting to positively impact the engagement and comprehension of the audience as 
they develop content mastery. The course also examines educational psychology as it relates to 
educational technology. 
Pre-Requisites: Successful completion of EDTC 5315, 5317, 5319, 5321, 5323, 5325, 5327, and MED 5305, 
5308. 
 
 
 
ENG 1316 Academic Research and Writing  
Introduction to academic composition, research, and information literacy skills. Fulfills the 
Concordia Common Experience Curriculum Written Communication requirement. 
ENG 1317 Introduction to Literature 
This is the entry level course in literature. Emphasis on analyzing the literary components of each of 
four literary forms: poetry, short story, novel, and drama. Critical interpretive skills demanded by 
each genre are learned and practiced through discussion and composition. Writing assignments, 
including analytical essays and tests, will constitute at least 75% of the course grade. Fulfills the 
English Literature requirement in the Concordia Common Experience curriculum. 
Pre-Requisites: Completion of ENG 1316 with a minimum grade of “C.” 
ENG 1371H Honors Writing as Self-Discovery 
Writing as self-discovery that leads to a passion for writing about issues external to self. This course 
incorporates elements of creative nonfiction, academic composition, research, and information 
literacy skills. 
Pre-Requisites: Admission to the Honors Program 
ENG 1318 Technology for the Humanities 
Introduction to current technological tools appropriate to the Humanities. Cross-listed with HIS 
1318. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
ENG 2301 Survey of Classicism 
Major masterpieces of classic Greek and Roman literature with a grounding in mythology. 
Pre-Requisites: ENG 1317 or ENG 2371H 
ENG 2303 American Literature  
The course will present a selection of major canonical authors of American Literature from the 
colonial time period until the mid-twentieth century. Oppositional voices will be introduced in 
relation to the Canon. The historical and cultural setting for each literary work will likewise be 
evaluated for its ideological significance.  
Pre-Requisites: ENG 1317 or ENG 2371H 
ENG 2305 Survey of British Literature 
This course introduces students to the British literary tradition, from the earliest recorded poems to 
the twenty-first century. Features all literary genres.  
Pre-Requisites: ENG 1317 or ENG 2371H 
ENG 2307 Survey of British Literature  
A survey of the development of western literary criticism from Greek and Roman to twentieth 
century theories. Students read, analyze, and discuss each critical theory; formal and informal 
 
 
critical responses to specified literary texts using each of the critical theories studied. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
ENG 2371H Honors Great Texts: Classic and Contemporary 
Analysis of selected important texts across genres from the Western tradition and significant texts 
across genres from non-Western traditions in order to understand then in their historical, 
sociological, and cultural contexts and to evaluate their influence on selected contemporary texts. 
Pre-Requisites: Honors Program 
ENG 2350 Digital Humanities Theory and Praxis 
Theory and practice in the developing field of digital humanities. This course required students to 
survey and choose theoretical applications for a demonstrable DH project that can transfer to the 
practicum course and offers professional DH applications. 
Pre-Requisites: None. 
ENG 3301 The Novel- British  
An overview of the history and development of the form. Specific novel techniques explored in 
class discussions and analyzed in short papers. 
Pre-Requisites: ENG 1317 or ENG 2371H 
ENG 3302 Drama  
A survey of dramatic literature in which students read, analyze, and respond critically to 
representative plays from each of the major dramatic periods: Greek, Roman, Medieval, 
Renaissance, Restoration, Romantic/Realistic, and Modern.  Students learn distinguishing 
characteristics of each major period’s dramatic form. 
Pre-Requisites: ENG 1317 or ENG 2371H 
ENG 3303 Short Story 
Development of the short story. Style, form, interpretation and evaluation of short fiction. Topical, 
current social and emotional issues discussed in relation to goals of short fiction. 
Pre-Requisites: ENG 1317 or ENG 2371H 
ENG 3305 Poetry 
An intensive study of the major poetic forms. Emphasis on reading, explicating, and interpreting 
selected poems. Students will complete two papers, two tests, a variety of written exercises, and a 
comprehensive final exam.  
Pre-Requisites: ENG 1317 or ENG 2371H 
ENG 3308 The Novel-American 
An overview of the history and development of the genre. Specific novel techniques explored in 
class discussions and analyzed in short papers. 
Pre-Requisites: ENG 1317 or ENG 1371H 
ENG 3310 English Internship 
Supervised on-the-job experience in publishing or other professional-writing sectors, including 
nonprofit organizations. Over the course of one semester, students provide at least 150 hours of 
 
 
service and produce a writing portfolio. May only be used once to fulfill ENG credit; may be 
repeated once for elective credit.  Fulfills Experiential Learning requirement. 
Pre-Requisites: Junior or Senior standing 
ENG 3311 Advanced Writing  
The study of clear, graceful, and stylistic essay writing in functional, pragmatic, real-life situations. 
Pre-Requisites: ENG 1317 or ENG 2371H 
ENG 3312 Business and Technical Writing 
Advanced writing skills to meet the challenge of communication in the job market. 
Pre-Requisites: ENG 1317 or ENG 2371H 
ENG 3314 Creative Writing  
Many types of writing will be examined, with an emphasis on short stories and free verse poetry.  
In-class writing exercises will be used to learn various techniques and aspects of creative writing.  
Students will be expected to produce a portfolio of two original pieces of fiction and four original 
poems, critique the writing of others, and prepare a manuscript for publication or submission to a 
literary contest.  
Pre-Requisites: ENG 1317 or ENG 2371H 
ENG 3318 Writing for Publication  
This course requires students to write a variety of non-fiction compositions suitable for publication 
in a professional university or public magazine, journal or newsletter. Writing assignments will 
address investigative articles; reviews of texts, culture and events; editorial perspectives; and the 
interview article. Students will learn correct composition strategies for each of these perspectives. 
Students will be required to submit their compositions to appropriate print forums for publication 
and the response of the publication department if available to their submission. Students will submit 
a portfolio of their three best compositions as the final exam requirement. 
Pre-Requisites: ENG 1317 or ENG 2371H 
ENG 3323 Shakespeare 
Reading and interpreting of major Shakespearean plays, emphasizing the playwright’s artistic 
development, social context, and use of characterization and imagery.  
Pre-Requisites: ENG 1317 or ENG 2371H 
 
ENG 3332 Teaching Writing with Adolescent Literature 
A survey of the evolution of adolescent literature, which teaches strategies for exploring, analyzing, 
and discussing various genres, as well as how to craft meaningful writing assignments in response 
to these texts. Students are introduced to theoretical foundations of and best practices for individual 
and classroom-based writing instruction. Extensive reading is required. Pre-Requisites: Successful 
completion of any 2000-level English course. 
ENG 3341 Hispanic Writers of the U.S 
Writings by and about Hispanic writers of the United States. All of the readings will be made 
available in English and the class will be taught in English. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
 
 
ENG 4201 Senior Thesis I 
The first required course in the two-part capstone sequence for English majors. Culminating 
portfolio must be completed satisfactorily before student may move on to Senior Thesis II. Graded 
as "Credit" or "No Credit." 
ENG 4101 Senior Thesis II 
The second required course in the two-part capstone sequence for English majors. Requires 
completion and formal presentation of substantive final writing project.  
ENG 4301 English Special Topics 
It requires close examination and exploration of the chosen topic through reading, discussing, and 
composing critical responses to key texts. 
Pre-Requisites: Successful completion of any 3000 level English literature class  
 
ESC 1102L Introduction to Environmental Science Lab 
Laboratory and field investigation of the scientific and socioeconomic principles underlying the 
environmental sciences. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
ESC 1102H Honors Introduction to Environmental Science Lab 
Laboratory and field investigation of the scientific and socioeconomic principles underlying the 
environmental sciences. 
Pre-Requisites: Admission to the Honors Program 
ESC 1201 Fall Texas Master Naturalist Certification 
For students who wish to earn course credit in the Fall semester for beginning verification as a 
Texas Master Naturalist through the Balcones Canyonlands Chapter at Concordia University Texas. 
Training courses will be taught by CTX faculty and by professionals from the conservation field. To 
receive credit for the Fall offering, students must complete at least half of the certification 
requirements (20 hours basic training, 4 hours advanced training and 20 hours of service). 
Pre-Requisites: None. Course Fee: $85 
ESC 1202 Spring Texas Master Naturalist Certification 
For students who wish to earn course credit in the Fall semester for beginning verification as a 
Texas Master Naturalist through the Balcones Canyonlands Chapter at Concordia University Texas. 
To receive credit for the Spring offering, students must complete the second half of the certification 
requirements (20 hours basic training, 4 hours advanced training and 20 hours of service). Total for 
certification is 40 hours basic training, 8 hours advanced training, and 40 hours of service achieved 
through Fall and Spring course work. 
Pre-Requisites: ESC 1201. Course Fee: $85 
 
 
ESC 1302 Intro to Environmental Science  
An overview of the Earth’s geological, hydrologic, atmospheric, and biological environments. 
Discussions of the physical, social, economic, and political implications of human modification of 
the environment. An application of the scientific method to solve complex environmental problems. 
Concordia Preserve tour required. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
ESC 1402 Intro to Environmental Science  
This is an online-only, combined version of ESC 1302 and ESC 1102L. An overview of the Earth’s 
geological, hydrologic, atmospheric, and biological environments. Discussions of the physical, 
social, economic, and political implications of human modification of the environment. An 
application of the scientific method to solve complex environmental problems. Concordia Preserve 
tour required. Co-requisite laboratory course ESC 1402L required. 
Pre-Requisites: None. Course Fee (ESC 1402L): $75 
ESC 1410 Introduction to Geographic Information Systems 
Introduction to geographic information systems (GIS) and global positioning systems (GPS) for use 
in data analyses in the sciences and social sciences. Units on basic GIS and cartographic design, 
internet mapping, cell phone applications, and GPS data collection. This course satisfies the 
Common Experience Technology requirement, however it does not fulfill the Common Experience 
Natural Science with Lab requirements. Cross-listed with CSC 1410. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
ESC 3303 Environmental Law  
The origins, politics, policies, and enforcement of environmental law.  
Pre-Requisites: None 
ESC 3306 Natural Resources Conservation 
Ecological, political, and economic factors that influence decisions relating to natural resources, 
land-use, and sustainable development; appraisal of alternative strategies to cope with conservation 
issues in the areas of water, energy, forests, range, fisheries, wildlife, and soils. Discussions of 
conservation history, laws, and ethics. 
Pre-Requisites: Any Common Experience natural science lab course  
ESC 3308 Environmental Education 
Prepares students to implement environmental education opportunities in formal and non-formal 
education settings. Topics include concepts and philosophy of effective environmental education, 
education and environmental law/regulations, environmental issues, curriculum alignment and 
integration and effective environmental education methodologies. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
ESC 3330 Environmental Modeling  
Design and application of modeling techniques using system dynamics and computer software.  
Prerequisites:  MTH 1351 or math placement at a higher level and 6-8 credit hours of natural 
science and/or math beyond the core requirements.  This course may not be used to satisfy natural 
 
 
science requirements. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
ESC 3340  Wildlife Management 
Principles of managing wildlife populations and habitat with special consideration given to 
management in urban environments.  Students will apply specific management techniques to 
improve and maintain habitat on the Concordia campus, Concordia Preserve, and the Balcones 
Canyonlands Preserve system.  Field trips may be required.    
Pre-Requisites: ESC1302 or BIO1402 or BIO2403 
ESC 3350 Watershed Management 
Principles of managing watersheds to improve hydrology, water quality, range, wildlife habitat, and 
aesthetics.  Includes units on soils, policy, planning, economics, and public relations.  Field trips 
may be required 
Pre-Requisites: Any Common Experience natural science lab course 
ESC 3402 Environmental Chemistry 
A study of the chemical principles and reactions that govern the behavior of both natural 
environmental systems and anthropogenic compounds important to the quality of the environment. 
Sampling methods, instrumentation and data analysis will be emphasized. Cross-listed as CHE 
3402. Students should be co-enrolled in the laboratory part of the course, ESC 3402L. 
Pre-Requisites: CHE 1142 and CHE 1342 (or CHE 1402), MTH 1351 (with a minimum grade of “C” in both 
courses), or math placement at a higher level. Course Fee (ESC 3402L): $75 
ESC 3403 General Ecology  
A study of those factors which affect the abundance, biodiversity and distribution of organisms. 
Includes ecological theory, mathematical modeling, natural history and field techniques.  Cross 
listed as BIO 3403. Students should be co-enrolled in the laboratory part of the course, ESC 3403L. 
Pre-Requisites: BIO 1401or BIO 1402 or BIO 2403 or consent of instructor. Course Fee: $75 
ESC 4310 Environmental Science Internship 
Students will participate in an on-the-job environmental work experience under the direct 
supervision of professionals in a corporation or government agency Graded on a Pass/No Pass 
basis. Fulfills Experiential Learning requirement. 
Pre-Requisites: Junior or Senior level standing 
ESC 4360 Special Topics  
A detailed exploration of specific topics in environmental science and conservation.  Topics will 
vary by semester and may include:  invasive species, GIS, climate change, environmental health 
and safety, Christian perspectives on environmental issues, and multiple topics relating to 
conservation in urban environments.  Each offering will be discussion-based and reading-intensive.  
Field trips may be required. May repeat once when topic varies. 
Pre-Requisites: Any Common Experience natural science lab course; Junior or Senior classification 
 
 
ESC 4361 Conservation Project 
For advanced students who wish to design and implement a conservation-themed project on 
campus or in the community. Project design will be done in collaboration with the instructor, other 
faculty, CTX staff, and/or ESC partners, and final plans must be approved by all stakeholders prior 
to implementation. May be repeated once in the following semester to allow project completion. 
May not substitute for ESC major requirements. 
Pre-Requisites: Junior or Senior standing 
ESC 4411 Research in the Environmental Sciences  
Student will pursue an environmental topic or issue through library, field and laboratory 
investigations as well as data collection, analysis and a final presentation consisting of a written 
paper and a poster/seminar session.  
Pre-Requisites: Junior or Senior standing. Course Fee: $75 
 
FA 2301 Honors Arts Experience of Austin 
This course introduces students in the Honors Program to the myriad arts institutions, events, and 
opportunities in Austin. Students will attend professional and university music and theatre events as 
well as visiting art galleries and museums. 
Pre-Requisites: Admission to the Honors Program 
 
FA 2310 Fine Arts Methods 
Students preparing for the Texas certification exams (particularly the EC-6 Core Subjects exam) 
require competencies in the Fine Arts (Music, Art, and Theatre); this course is designed to prepare 
students for this portion of the exam in coordination with their other Fine Arts courses at 
Concordia. In addition, students will learn methods and strategies to integrate Fine Arts paradigms 
and projects into all parts of their curricula. 
Pre-Requisites: None. Course Fee: $50 
 
FRE 1401 French I 
Introductory French imparts communication skills for daily use in these areas:  listening, speaking, 
reading, and writing.  Instruction emphasizes linguistic and cultural accuracy. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
 
FRE 1402 French II 
Continued introductory French imparts further communication skills for daily use in these areas: 
listening, speaking, reading, and writing.  Instruction emphasizes linguistic and cultural accuracy. 
Pre-Requisites: FRE 1401 
 
 
 
GRG 1311 Principles of Geography 
A geographic overview of basic Physical Systems (landforms, climate, vegetation...) and Human 
Systems (cultural geography, political geography, medical geography, geography of sports...) and 
their interactions at international, national, and local levels. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
 
GER 1401 German I  
Introductory German imparts communication skills for daily use in these areas: listening, speaking, 
reading and writing.  Instruction emphasizes linguistic and cultural accuracy. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
GER 1402 German II  
Continued introductory German imparts further communication skills for daily use in these areas:  
listening, speaking, reading, and writing.  Instruction emphasizes linguistic and cultural accuracy. 
Pre-Requisites: GRE 1401 
GER 2311 German III 
Intermediate German imparts advanced communication skills for daily use in these areas:  listening, 
speaking, reading, and writing.  It emphasizes advanced skill in linguistic and cultural accuracy. 
Pre-Requisites: GRE 1401 and GRE 1402 or equivalent background 
GER 4321 German IV  
This course offers students further reading of authentic German texts and viewing of German filmic 
literature (unmodified, original readings and original German-language film) and practice in 
discussion of the topics these artifacts treat; that is, students will extend and enforce their 
knowledge of vocabulary, grammar, and culture. This advanced level of instruction also offers 
strategies in learning, so students can proceed in their acquisition of language independently. 
Finally, this reading, viewing and conversation course imparts critical thinking and the ability to 
develop a sound written thesis. 
Pre-Requisites: GRE 1401, GRE 1402, and GRE 2311 or equivalent background 
 
GLG 3301 Geology  
The earth from the perspective of physical and historical geology. Not available for audit.  
Pre-Requisites: Three credit hours of a physical science. 
 
 
 
GRE 2311 Greek I  
Fundamentals of Greek using Koine and Classical approaches. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
GRE 2312 Greek I 
Continuation of GRE 2311, with reading in Greek New Testament. 
Pre-Requisites: GRE 2311 
GRE 3313 Greek III  
Reading in the New Testament and Hellenistic Greek with correlated grammar review. 
Pre-Requisites: GRE 2312 
GRE 3314 Greek IV 
Readings in the New Testament and in Classical Greek with survey of comparative grammar. 
Pre-Requisites: GRE 3313 
GRE 4215 Advanced Greek Readings  
For those who have satisfactorily completed the basic Greek grammar courses. Selections will be 
drawn from the New Testament, the Greek Old Testament (the Septuagint) and other Greek 
literature. May be repeated for credit when readings are varied 
Pre-Requisites: GRE 3314.  
 
HCA 3300 Health Care Org. and Delivery  
This course presents an overview of the healthcare system and the role healthcare organizations 
have played and will continue to play in the future.  It provides an analysis of the organizational 
structure of healthcare organizations and other healthcare agencies.  An examination is made of the 
administrative and management elements necessary for policy determination, decision making and 
control to achieve institutional goals and objectives.  
Pre-Requisites: None 
HCA 3312 Management Essentials in Healthcare Admin  
This course provides the student with the foundational concepts of management with functional 
applications in the healthcare setting. 
Pre-Requisites: HCA 3300 
HCA 3330 Information Tech in Healthcare  
This course examines the rapidly changing role of computers and information systems as key 
decision support and critical operations facilitation resources in the management of healthcare 
organizations. The course establishes a framework for understanding the requisite elements of a 
properly chosen, effectively implemented, and efficiently utilized healthcare information system. As 
 
 
technological software changes, students will learn about the most up-to-date systems that are 
being utilized to effectively and efficiently manage and operate healthcare organizations. 
Pre-Requisites: HCA 3300 
HCA 3360 Principles of Healthcare Finance  
This course provides foundational instruction in the practices and responsibilities of the finance 
function in the healthcare organization and a beginning look at an administrator’s role in the use of 
financial information. 
Pre-Requisites: HCA 3300 
HCA 4340 Legal Aspects of Healthcare Admin  
This course presents an overview of the legal issues important to the health administrator, and 
provides students with a basic working knowledge of health law. Students are provided with the 
basic elements of health law and its application to the real world. 
Pre-Requisites: HCA 3300 
HCA 4370 Healthcare Economics  
Built upon both financial management principles and theories of economics, this senior level study 
of healthcare economics provides a framework for the healthcare manager to analyze the 
healthcare marketplace and assess potential for profitability. 
Pre-Requisites: ECO 2301 or ECO 2302, or permission of Program Director  
HCA 4410 Healthcare Admin Practicum 
Capstone course for the student majoring in Healthcare Administration. The student is provided 
actual managerial experience in a healthcare setting. The course is project-oriented, and requires 60 
hours of time over a 15-week term dedicated to the practicum setting. Prerequisites: Course taken 
in last year of degree program.  Fulfills Experiential Learning requirement. 
Pre-Requisites: HCA 3300 or approval of the program director; upper level standing  
 
HEB 3401 Biblical Hebrew I 
The script, vocabulary, and structure of Biblical Hebrew. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
HEB 3402 Biblical Hebrew II 
Continuation of HEB 3401. 
Pre-Requisites: HEB 3401 
HEB 4201 Hebrew Bible Readings 
Continued practice in reading and translating sections of the Hebrew Bible, with review of 
grammar. This class may be repeated for credit. 
Pre-Requisites: HEB 3402 
 
 
 
HIS 1301 U.S. History to 1877 
A survey of U.S. history from European colonization to 1877, relating events of the past to current 
areas of American life. Emphasis on the origins and development of economic, social, and cultural 
trends. May be used to fulfill History requirement in the Concordia Common Experience 
curriculum. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
HIS 1302 U.S. History from 1877  
A survey of U.S. history from the Reconstruction Era to the present. Emphasis on economic cycles, 
political issues, social and cultural change, and emergence of the United States as a world power.  
May be used to fulfill History requirement in the Concordia Common Experience curriculum. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
HIS 1312 Human Geography  
A study of the cultural, political, and economic geographies of the regions of the world. The course 
introduces students to the systematic study of patterns and processes that have shaped human 
understanding, use, and alteration of Earth's surface. Students employ spatial concepts and 
landscape analysis to examine human social organization and its environmental consequences. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
HIS 1318 Technology for the Humanities 
Introduction to current technological tools appropriate to the Humanities. Cross-listed with ENG 
1318. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
HIS 2301 Historical Methods 
An introduction to the discipline and field of history, including what it means to “think historically,” 
historical research and writing, historiography, and careers in the history field. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
HIS 2303H Honors United States History  
An introduction to the discipline and field of history, including what it means to “think historically,” 
historical research and writing, historiography, and careers in the history field. 
Pre-Requisites: Admission to the Honors Program 
HIS 2306 Race and Ethnic Relations 
Emphasis on race and ethnic relations as a national concern with emphasis on these concerns in the 
Southwest. Cross-listed as SOC 2306. 
Pre-Requisites: SOC 1301 or HIS 1301 or HIS 1302 
HIS 2311 World History to 1500 
A survey of the political, philosophical, social, cultural, and economic trends throughout the world 
to about 1500 focusing on the rise of civilizations, the development of political and legal systems, 
 
 
religion and philosophy, economic systems and trans-regional networks of exchange. Emphasis is 
on comparative history and the study of cross-cultural encounters. May be used to fulfill History 
requirement in the Concordia Common Experience curriculum. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
HIS 2312 World History from 1500  
A survey of the political, philosophical, social, cultural, and economic trends throughout the world 
after about 1500 focusing on maritime exploration and transoceanic empires, nation/state 
formation and industrialization, imperialism, global conflicts and resolutions, and global economic 
integration. Emphasis is on comparative history and the study of cross-cultural encounters. May be 
used to fulfill History requirement in the Concordia Common Experience curriculum. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
HIS 3301 History of Mexico  
An overview and analysis of the history of Mexico from the pre-Columbian period to the present, 
including the civilizations of pre-Columbian Mexico, Spanish exploration, the establishment of 
nationhood, the modernization of Mexico, the Mexican Revolution, and the major political, 
economic, and social movements following the Revolution. Emphasis will be given to the 
development of Mexican cultural and national identity. Prerequisite: Three credit hours of history. 
Pre-Requisites: Three (3) credit hours of history 
HIS 3302 Introduction to Policy History  
An introduction to the interdisciplinary field of policy history noting the application of historical 
perspectives to public policy studies and contemporary policy issues. Students are introduced to 
basic policy history issues and methodologies. 
Pre-Requisites: Three (3) credit hours of history 
HIS 3304 The History and Culture of the Mexican American 
An analysis of the history and culture of Mexican Americans in the United States over the past two 
centuries, focusing particularly on the U.S.-Mexican War, the emergence of Mexican American 
identity, the evolution of thinking about race in the early twentieth century U.S., the growth of 
Mexican American communities in Texas, immigration policy, labor, and present-day border issues. 
The course will also explore the unique cultural traditions of Mexican Americans in religion, values, 
music, and folklore. Cross-listed as SOC 3304.  
Pre-Requisites: Three (3) credit hours of history or SOC 1301 
HIS 3306 Introduction to Public History  
An introduction to public history surveying the major topics in the field through readings, 
discussion, and guest lectures. Students will learn about the history of public history, employment 
opportunities for public historians, and public historical issues. Emphasis will be placed on the 
application of theories of public history to real-world situations. 
Pre-Requisites: Three (3) credit hours of history 
HIS 3308 Asian History and Culture 
This course provides an overview and analysis of the history of the Asian continent.  It examines 
the interaction among peoples of different genders, national origins, races and cultures, and how 
 
 
such interaction has shaped Asian societies.  
Pre-Requisites: Three (3) credit hours of history 
HIS 3311 Texas History  
An overview and analysis of political, social, economic, and cultural developments of Texas from 
the era of Spanish colonization to the present including an examination of the roots and 
development of “Texan” identity.   
Pre-Requisites: Three (3) credit hours of history 
HIS 3314 Traditions and Values of Classical Civilizations  
An historical and thematic approach to the contributions of the classical Greek and Roman worlds 
to Western civilization. 
Pre-Requisites: Three (3) credit hours of history 
HIS 3320 Latin American Seminar 
Research in current issues and topics in Latin American studies. 
Pre-Requisites: HIS 3304 
HIS 3321 International Relations Since 1919 
An analysis of world events since 1919 that affected relations between nations including wars; 
peace negotiations; economics, intellectual, and social crisis; and attempts at international 
cooperation. 
Pre-Requisites: Three (3) credit hours of history 
HIS 3341 The Civil War Era  
An analysis of the major events leading to the outbreak of the American Civil War, wartime politics 
in both the Union and Confederacy, military aspects of the war, and the economic, social, and 
political aspects of the Reconstruction Era. 
Pre-Requisites: Three (3) credit hours of history 
HIS 3342 The American West  
An overview and analysis of the history and geography of the American frontier from the colonial 
period to the late nineteenth century; the frontier experience and its impact on the nation; and the 
political, social, economic, geographical, and urban developments within the Great Plains, Mountain 
West, and Pacific West after 1900. 
Pre-Requisites: Three (3) credit hours of history 
HIS 3343 Post-World War II America  
An analysis of the cultural, social and political history of the United States from the end of World 
War II to the end of the Cold War. 
Pre-Requisites: Three (3) credit hours of history 
HIS 3344 American Environmental History  
An examination of three centuries of changing American attitudes and actions toward the natural 
environment, the rise of the conservation movement, and the development of an ecological 
 
 
perspective and the environmental movement. 
Pre-Requisites: Three (3) credit hours of history 
HIS 3352 History of the Middle Ages 
This course will investigate the history of Europe and the Near East from the dissolution of the 
Roman Empire to the start of the Renaissance. It will study the political, economic, social, and 
cultural development of the three successor civilizations of the ancient world: Byzantium, Islam, and 
Western Christendom, with particular emphasis on the Christian West. It will look at how these 
civilizations developed and interacted in both peace and war. 
Pre-Requisites: Three (3) credit hours of history 
HIS 3354 History of Christianity 
An overview of the history of Christianity from the New Testament era to the present. The course 
will focus on the central persons, ideas, issues, and events that have shaped the Christian Church 
and its worship, doctrine, ethics, organization, and mission. Cross-listed as REL 3354.  
Pre-Requisites: REL 1301 
HIS 4201 Senior Thesis  
The Capstone course for history majors comprised of a personally designed research program that 
culminates in a journal quality research paper.  NOTE:   Students who complete the thesis 
requirements in HIS 4201 will receive a letter grade.  Students who plan to complete the thesis 
requirements in HIS 4101 Senior Thesis Continued will receive an “Administrative Incomplete” 
which will be removed when HIS 4101 is completed and a grade is assigned. 
Pre-Requisites: HIS 2301 Historical Methods and at least six hours of upper-level HIS coursework 
HIS 4101 Senior Thesis Continued 
This course allows a student to complete the research, writing, and presentation of the Senior 
Thesis, HIS 4201. This course may be taken only once. If a student receives an "F" for HIS 4201 and 
No Credit for HIS 4101, that student will have to retake HIS 4201. Graded as "Credit" or "No 
Credit."    NOTE:  This course allows a student to complete the research, writing, and presentation 
of the Senior Thesis, HIS 4201.  This course may be taken only once.  The letter grade assigned to 
this course will replace the “Administrative Incomplete” in HIS 4201, Senior Thesis. 
Pre-Requisites: HIS 4201 
HIS 4310 History Internship 
Supervised on-the-job experience and involvement at one of Austin's museums, libraries, archives, 
agencies or businesses. Interns will work with professionals in the history field. Prerequisites: Junior 
or senior standing, 3.00 GPA in the major, 2.50 cumulative GPA and a grade of C or better in HIS 
2201 Historical Methods, and at least six hours of upper-level HIS coursework. May be repeated 
once for credit as a history elective.   Fulfills Experiential Learning requirement. 
Pre-Requisites: Junior or Senior standing, 3.0 GPA in major, 2.5 cumulative GPA, and HIS 2301 
HIS 4360 Topics in History  
A seminar style examination, discussion, and analysis of a historical issue, time period, person, or 
group. 
Pre-Requisites: Six (6) credit hours of history 
 
 
 
IL 5311 Leading Instructional Improvement 
The ability to improve student outcomes at the campus or district level is paramount for school 
leaders in today’s world. School improvement is guided by the State of Texas through the use of the 
Effective Schools Framework (ESF). It is important for aspiring leaders to become familiar with the 
State’s ESF process and to develop the knowledge and skills required to implement the Effective 
Schools Framework on their own campuses or within their respective districts. Pre-Requisites: None 
IL 5312 Academic Coaching 
Academic coaching is essential for school reform; it is imperative to teach the efficacy of, and 
outcomes associated with, effective coaching. The course will: 1) define academic coaching, 2) 
demonstrate implementation; 3) identify effective outcomes that will improve teacher performance 
and increase student learning. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
IL 5313 Developing Organizational Capacity 
This course is designed to take a practical approach to exploring individual and organizational 
strategies designed to simulate adult learning and build capacity in schools and districts through the 
coaching process to achieve higher levels of performance. In addition, this course is aimed at 
promoting understanding of how to improve performance results through individual and 
organizational accountability.  
Pre-Requisites: None 
IL 5322 Legal Foundations of Education 
A study of how recent trends and institutional changes in society have impacted the legal aspects of 
formal education. This class will provide research, class discussions, and activities which will 
increase students' knowledge of legislation, court precedents, tort and contract law, negligence and 
liability, societal issues, and how legal issues influence employment, academic/classroom, campus, 
and administration behavior. Emphasis will be on real problems educators face and on practical and 
legal responses to those problems. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
IL 5351 School Diversity Leader 
A course of study giving students an opportunity to develop and increase skills and knowledge in 
the areas of religion, ethics, conflict resolution, counseling, the historical influences on ethnic 
diversity interaction, community relations, and leadership of the school environment. It is necessary 
for the school administrator to be the force by which these groups cannot only coexist, but to share 
common goals and work together in a collaborative manner, so all students can be successful and 
be a productive force in the community, nation and world. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
 
 
 
KIN 1132 Racquet Sports (Skill)  
Basic rules and fundamental skills of badminton, racquetball, and tennis taught through 
participation. May not be repeated for credit. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 1133 Basketball/Softball (Skill)  
Basic rules and fundamental skills of each activity taught through participation. May not be 
repeated for credit. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 1134 Bowling/Archery (Skill)  
Basic rules and fundamental skills of each activity taught through participation. Students must pay 
bowling fees. May not be repeated for credit. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 1136 Golf/Volleyball (Skill)  
Basic rules and fundamental skills of each activity taught through participation. Students must pay 
golf fees. May not be repeated for credit. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 1137 Introduction to Martial Arts (Skill)  
An activity course designed to develop and enhance movement skills in Judo, Karate, and Tai 
Kwon Do. May not be repeated for credit. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 1139 Table Tennis/Pickle Ball (Skill)  
Addresses the five components of skill-related fitness. The development of agility, speed, quickness, 
coordination and power are necessary for a balanced fitness regimen. Student participation is key 
to the success of any skill-based activity course, as repetition is the cornerstone of acquiring sports 
skills. The skill components of table tennis and pickle ball are transferable and reinforce the 
learning of the skill component. May not be repeated for credit. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 1140 Intercollegiate Golf – Women  
Credit awarded to those who participate in the entire season of intercollegiate golf. May be 
repeated for credit. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 1141 Intercollegiate Basketball – Men  
Credit awarded to those who participate in the entire season of men's intercollegiate basketball. 
May be repeated for credit. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
 
 
KIN 1142 Intercollegiate Tennis – Men  
Credit awarded to those who participate in the entire season of men's intercollegiate tennis. May be 
repeated for credit. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 1143 Intercollegiate Baseball – Men  
Credit awarded to those who participate in the entire season of men's intercollegiate baseball. May 
be repeated for credit.e  
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 1144 Intercollegiate Golf – Men 
Credit awarded to those who participate in the entire season of intercollegiate golf. May be 
repeated for credit. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 1145 Intercollegiate Cross Country – Men 
Credit awarded to those who participate in the entire season of intercollegiate cross country. May 
be repeated for credit. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 1146 Intercollegiate Cross Country – Women  
Credit awarded to those who participate in the entire season of intercollegiate cross country. May 
be repeated for credit. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 1147 Men’s Intercollegiate Track & Field  
Activity course designed to provide students with the opportunity to develop and/or improve their 
existing psychomotor skill abilities in the events of track and field.  Students will practice the 
movement patterns of the various events and become competent in the execution of those skills.  
Additionally, students will be exposed to instructional methodologies used in the teaching of track 
and field.  
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 1157 Women’s Intercollegiate Track & Field 
Activity course designed to provide students with the opportunity to develop and/or improve their 
existing psychomotor skill abilities in the events of track and field.  Students will practice the 
movement patterns of the various events and become competent in the execution of those skills.  
Additionally, students will be exposed to instructional methodologies used in the teaching of track 
and field. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 1151 Intercollegiate Basketball – Women  
Credit awarded to those who participate in the entire season of women's basketball. May be 
repeated for credit. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
 
 
KIN 1152 Intercollegiate Tennis - Women 
Credit awarded to those who participate in the entire season of women's tennis. May be repeated 
for credit. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 1153 Intercollegiate Softball - Women 
Credit awarded to those who participate in the entire season of women's softball. May be repeated 
for credit. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 1154 Intercollegiate Soccer – Women 
Credit awarded to those who participate in the entire season of intercollegiate soccer. May be 
repeated for credit. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 1155 Intercollegiate Soccer – Men 
Credit awarded to those who participate in the entire season of intercollegiate soccer. May be 
repeated for credit. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 1156 Intercollegiate Volleyball – Women 
Credit awarded to those who participate in the entire season of women's volleyball. May be 
repeated for credit. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 1176 Wt. Training & Conditioning (Fitness) 
An activity course designed to develop and enhance muscular strength and endurance. May be 
repeated for credit. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 1177 Aerobic Walking (Fitness)  
Addresses the components of health-related fitness. The development of cardiovascular endurance, 
muscular endurance, body composition and flexibility are necessary for a balanced fitness regimen. 
Student participation is key to the success of any activity course, and walking is a classic learning 
environment for the appreciation of fitness as improvement is rapid and the basic movements 
necessary to master the activity are pre-existing. May be repeated for credit. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
 
KIN 1200 Scuba 
The scuba class provides familiarity with the knowledge, skills, and equipment necessary to obtain 
Open Water Certification with Scuba Schools International (SSI). Pre-Requisites: None. Course Fee: 
$500. Maximum number of students limited to 8. 
 
KIN 1235 Introduction to Fencing 
 
 
Basic rules and fundamental skills of fencing taught through participation. Students will learn 
fundamental attacks, defenses, and tactics with the foil. This course may not be repeated for credit. 
Pre-Requisites: None. Course Fee: $50. Maximum number of students limited to 15. 
KIN 1301 Personal Wellness  
This course is designed to promote a healthy lifestyle derived from proper physical activity and 
informed lifestyle choices. Major topics of emphasis include an overview of the principals of 
wellness, stress management, nutrition and weight management, and concepts and principals of 
physical fitness. With the assistance of related laboratory experiences, students will be provided the 
opportunity to evaluate their current state of wellness in each of the topic areas and plan 
appropriate lifestyle change strategies.  May be used to fulfill Kinesiology requirement in the 
Concordia Common Experience curriculum. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 1302 First Aid and Safety  
Safety in prevention of injuries; first aid treatment, including CPR, emergency care and treatment of 
injury with special emphasis on playground and school injuries. Note: Does NOT count for core 
physical education requirements. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 2301 Personal and Community Health  
Personal health problems, venereal disease, AIDS, birth control, cancer, heart diseases, nutrition, 
fitness, mental health, family living, and community and consumer health. Prerequisite: Sophomore 
standing or consent of instructor. Note: Does NOT count for core physical education requirements. 
Note: If a student presents a medical doctor's letter that precludes participation in activity courses, 
KIN 2301 will be allowed in lieu of the three one hour KIN courses in the core. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 2302 Introduction to Physical Education  
Overview of the foundations of physical education and various careers available in this field. Note: 
Does NOT count for core physical education requirements. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 2303 Theory & Application of Physical Fitness  
A study of the various theories of human physical fitness and their application in forming 
conditioning protocols. An acceptable fitness profile, through in-class conditioning, is to be 
developed and fitness testing field experience is required. Note: Does NOT count for core physical 
education requirements. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 2330 Prevention & Treatment of Movement Injuries 
This class covers the methods and techniques for the treatment and prevention of injuries related to 
participation in physical activities. Emphasis is placed on injury management procedures, 
knowledge of movement injuries and conditioning, and taping and bracing procedures. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
 
 
KIN 3311 Musculoskeletal Anatomy and Biomechanics  
The musculoskeletal system: application of basic mechanical principles in human movement. Note: 
Does NOT count for core physical education requirements. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 3313 Motor Development and Learning  
An introduction to the theories of motor learning and skills acquisition. Does NOT count for core 
physical education requirements. Physiological development of the child in relation to physical 
performance. Note: Does NOT count for core physical education requirements. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 3315 Org & Admin of Physical Ed & Sport 
Principles, practices, and procedures in organizing and administering physical education/athletic 
programs; staffing, facilities, budgeting, equipment, and safety. Note: Does NOT count for core 
physical education requirements. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 3316 Evaluation in Physical Ed and Sport  
Principles of measurement and evaluation, elements of statistical techniques appropriate to physical 
education, criteria for test selection, construction and evaluation of human performance in the 
cognitive and motor domains. Note: Does NOT count for core physical education requirements. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 3331 Coaching Team Sports 
An introduction to team sports-history, psychology, rules, skills, equipment, instructional 
techniques, safety principles, adaptations for the physically disabled and competitive programs. 
Note: Does not count for core physical education requirements. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 3332 Coaching Individual Sports 
An introduction to individual sports-history, psychology, rules, skills, equipment, instructional 
techniques, safety principles, adaptations for the physically disabled and competitive programs. 
Note: Does NOT count for core physical education requirements. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 3333 Methods of Teaching Phys Ed 
Students will discover effective methods and techniques for teaching physical education while 
integrating the dimensions of wellness for healthy living. Major components of the course include 
writing instructional objectives and lesson plans, applying principles of organization and class 
management, and incorporating delivery strategies unique to physical education. Satisfies the 
Wellness requirement for the Common Experience. Cross-listed with KIN 3333. 
Pre-Requisites: Grade of ‘C’ or higher in KIN 2301 or KIN 2302, or Admission to the Teacher Education 
Program. 
 
 
KIN 3334 Exercise and Sport Psychology  
This class covers the psychological aspects of movement activities that underline performance. It 
also covers the intrinsic and extrinsic factors that must be recognized in order to understand, 
motivate, and evaluate human movement. Note: Does NOT count for core physical education 
requirements.  Cross listed with PSY 3334. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 3336 NASM Fitness Lifespan YES/SFS 
Students will learn to expand their knowledge to understand and serve youth/ senior populations 
by applying appropriate and relevant exercise selections with special considerations. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 3337 Applied Nutrition Coaching 
Students will learn all the latest information regarding nutrition, behavior change, and coaching, all 
while using cutting-edge technology—developed for proficiency, competency, and student success, 
in becoming a Certified Nutrition Coach. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 3340 Legal and Ethical Aspects of Sports Administration 
This course is an introduction to the study of legal and ethical issues that arise in sports 
administration. Students will learn the nature of ethical conduct and will practice decision making 
to solve legal and ethical challenges that arise in the industry of sports administration. The course 
will encourage students to evaluate ethical theories and their application to specific issues in sports, 
including fairness in competition, cheating, racial and gender equality, gambling, and violence.  
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 3345 Sports
An introduction and overview of sports communication including theoretical assumptions, sports
communication history and current models, the impact of sports communication in print and 
electronic media, and current socio-cultural and legal issues in sports communication. Students will 
critically assess the impact of sports communication processes on sport management organizations. 
Students will critically evaluate the communication efforts of sports administration organizations 
while learning how to develop their own communications in the field of sports administration. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
KIN 4310 Kinesiology Internship  
Provides students with the opportunity to demonstrate and gain experience building and using 
diagnostic skills, organization skills, group process skills, and program skills in a community, school 
or university setting. May be repeated once for credit.   Fulfills Experiential Learning requirement.  
Pre-Requisites: Junior or senior standing  
KIN 4330 Exercise Physiology 
This class is a study of the physiological responses of the body to exercise. Emphasis is on the 
application of the physiological principles deemed most important for understanding physical 
training. Note: Does NOT count for core physical education requirements. 
Pre-Requisites: Grade of “C” or higher in BIO 3411 
 
 
 
LAT 1301 Latin I  
This course covers the basic grammatical structure of the language. Readings include selections 
from the Vulgate and Medieval Church Latin. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
LAT 1302 Latin II  
This course continues with more advanced grammatical study. Readings include selections from 
Ecclesiastical Latin and passages from Ovid's Metamorphoses. 
Pre-Requisites: LAT 1301 
LAT 2311 Latin III  
A continuation of the study of Latin grammar with readings from Cicero, Vergil, Ovid, and from the 
Vulgate.  
Pre-Requisites: LAT 1302 
 
LDR 1100 Life & Leadership  
This course is designed to assist students in a successful adjustment to college life at Concordia 
University Texas. Required of all first-year undergraduate students at Concordia, students will 
engage in lessons and activities that provide opportunities for higher level success in academics, 
social interactions, institutional affinity and personal growth. Students will learn both practical skills 
like time management and healthy relationships, as well as dig into deeper concepts like Christian 
leadership, vocation, and diverse mindsets. Fulfills one of the Leadership requirements of the 
Concordia Distinctive. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
LDR 1100T Life & Leadership Transfer  
This course is designed to assist transfer students in a successful adjustment to college life at 
Concordia University Texas. Required of all first-year undergraduate students at Concordia, 
students will engage in lessons and activities that provide opportunities for higher level success in 
academics, social interactions, institutional affinity and personal growth. Students will learn both 
practical skills like time management and healthy relationships, as well as dig into deeper concepts 
like Christian leadership, vocation, and diverse mindsets. Fulfills one of the Leadership 
requirements of the Concordia Distinctive. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
LDR 2201 Leadership Theory 
This course will provide students a theoretical and practical understanding of leadership theories 
that will enable them to engage in leadership in healthier and more effective manners.  Through the 
use of individual and group projects, students will consider different leadership models and 
strategies, examine the role of followers, and develop a personal theory of leadership that can be 
 
 
used in various settings.  Fulfills one of the Leadership requirements of the Concordia Distinctive. 
Pre-Requisites: LDR 1100 or LDR 110T 
LDR 2116S / 2116T Student Leadership Practicum 
This course will provide students with an opportunity to experience a variety of directed and 
supervised leadership experiences. Students will select (or be selected to) a leadership program and 
be expected to fully engage in the required level of preparation and participation needed for the 
program or experience. Students will be directed by a Concordia faculty member, possibly in 
conjunction with an outside agency. Acceptable experiential leadership programs include, but are 
not limited to, the following: Student Government, Concordia Tradition Team Leaders, Texas Civic 
Ambassadors, Community Board Experience. This course is not intended for full-time employment 
or internship opportunities. Course number suffixes relate to different iterations of the leadership 
practicum. Students may repeat this course up to three times for credit.  
Pre-Requisites: None 
LDR 3301 Peer Leaders 
The purpose of this course is to develop student leadership by having current students serve as 
leaders in Life and Leadership freshmen classes at Concordia University Texas. Students apply and 
are selected to serve as Peer Leaders, to walk with incoming freshmen as they transition into 
college and work with an assigned instructor to help facilitate the class. This class provides students 
the opportunity to learn about specific leadership theories that they can use as they connect with 
and build positive influence and mentoring opportunities with freshmen. Class participants are 
required to attend trainings, Peer Leader class sessions, meetings of their assigned Life and 
Leadership section and other specific events or activities as assigned. This course can be 
substituted for LDR 2201 or taken as an upper-level elective. 
Pre-Requisites: LDR 1100 or LDR 1100T and Course instructor permission required.   
LDR 3311 Diversity, Equity & Inclusion in Leadership 
Students will explore diversity concepts, analyze equitability in leadership, and learn to cultivate an 
inclusive environment in their communities and workplaces. This course will define these concepts 
for students while simultaneously giving them a way to put these concepts into leadership practice.  
Pre-Requisites: LDR 2201 or LDR 3301 (or concurrent enrollment in LDR 2201 or LDR 3301) 
LDR 3312 Community & Volunteer Leadership 
Students will gain a deeper understanding of the importance of effective leadership in community 
and volunteer opportunities. This course will specifically explore ideas related to coalitional 
leadership, values based leadership, and motivational theories and examine how theories like these 
impact leadership at more local levels. 
Pre-Requisites: LDR 2201 or LDR 3301 (or concurrent enrollment in LDR 2201 or LDR 3301) 
LDR 3313 The Depths of Followership 
Popular culture elevates leaders while often ignoring or disparaging followers; yet followers serve 
critical roles in any organization or structure. In this course, students will learn about the 
significance of being an effective follower and how to develop skills of effective followership. 
Additionally, students will learn how to build dynamic relationships between followers and leaders 
and to connect followership skills to leadership skills for effective results. 
Pre-Requisites: LDR 2201 or LDR 3301 (or concurrent enrollment in LDR 2201 or LDR 3301) 
 
 
LDR 43XX Creating Lasting Change 
Change is widely recognized as a hallmark of effective leadership. However, creating change that is 
both successful and lasting is a significant challenge. In this course, students will learn the principles 
of change, learn to look at change through different styles of leadership, and build skills to help 
them work through the steps needed to create, foster and maintain positive change as change 
agents. 
Pre-Requisites: LDR 1100, LDR 2201 (or LDR 3301), and two of the LDR Minor Required courses 
(Community & Volunteer, DEI in Leadership, or Depths of Followership) 
LDR 4101C / 4101G / 4101E Leadership & Career  
Students will master the meaning of vocation as they explore individual competencies, and prepare 
professional instruments such as a resume, online profile, and supporting materials. Additionally, 
students will learn about diversity in the workplace, inclusivity and belonging, benefits and 
leadership at all levels. Students will connect what they have learned in their individual majors to 
transferable skills as they move toward meaningful work or graduate school. There are three 
variations of this course: LDR 4101C which is open to all students, LDR 4101G which is targeted 
toward students looking at graduate programs, and LDR 4101E which is restricted to Education 
majors due to the specific competencies in the course. 
Pre-Requisites: LDR 1100 or LDR 1100T and successful completion or concurrent enrollment in LDR 2201 
or LDR 3301, and upper-level standing (60+ hrs). 
 
MBA 5103 Leadership - Self 
Leadership Seminars are designed to provide a space for students to integrate course content, 
personal commitments, and real world experience to transform themselves as leaders. The 
Seminars enable students to do this with the support and input of their cohort peers. Each seminar 
covers an essential aspect or “site” of leadership and consists of relevant assessment and discovery 
tools, discussion, self-reflection, and integration of course material. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
MBA 5113 Leadership - Others 
Leadership Seminars are designed to provide a space for students to integrate course content, 
personal commitments, and real world experience to transform themselves as leaders. The 
Seminars enable students to do this with the support and input of their cohort peers. Each seminar 
covers an essential aspect or “site” of leadership and consists of relevant assessment and discovery 
tools, discussion, self-reflection, and integration of course material. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
MBA 5200 Data Analytics 
This course is designed to equip managers and leaders with the knowledge to understand, manage, 
and visualize the data, and apply the appropriate analysis tools to translate managerial, financial, or 
economics problems into timely business applications. This course will also examine data 
management, exploratory data analysis and visualization, descriptive statistics, inferential statistics, 
regression analysis, and data mining in the decision-making process of solving complex business 
problems.  
 
 
Pre-Requisites: Students may be required to take Peregrine Software before the course begins per admission 
criteria. 
MBA 5201 Marketing Management 
This course focuses on the marketing decisions made by businesses and organizations, covering the 
strategic role of marketing, marketing problems typically encountered in business, and the 
analytical concepts and techniques used in marketing. Students will understand marketing planning 
and strategy in the context of organizational plans as well as how to integrate the functional areas of 
business administration into a realistic approach to solving complex problems at the executive 
level. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
MBA 5202 Managerial Economics 
This course covers the economic forces that have a fundamental influence on a business’ 
profitability, growth, and sustainability. It provides the core economic concepts that guide 
managerial decision-making. Topics include Supply/Demand, Capital Markets, Consumer Theory, 
Structures of Markets, Trade-offs, Cost-Benefit Analysis, Forecasting and Budgeting. Prerequisites: 
Peregrine Software module may be required depending upon admission requirements. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
MBA 5207 Financial Accounting & Management 
This course covers the use of accounting data and processes in managing a business or an 
organization. In particular, it focuses on the concepts, processes, and models that provide 
information and control for managers, as well as the ways in which accounting supports and 
enables marketing and strategy decisions, performance, and operations management. Prerequisites: 
Peregrine Software module may be required depending upon admission requirements. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
MBA 5208 Organizational Ethics, Behavior and Change  
This course covers the ethical interconnection of worldviews, values, and behavior in an 
organization. The course analyzes the impact of ethical decisions on organizational stakeholders, as 
well as tools for creating and sustaining an ethical culture in understanding theoretical models and 
interplay of moral, legal, and social issues in managing one’s self, individuals, groups, and 
organizations in a complex environment where stakeholders often have competing interests. Topics 
include Leadership, Collaboration/Groups, Change, Culture, Resilience, and Organizational 
Learning. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
MBA 5216 Managing Operations and Supply Chain 
This course covers key operational aspects of a business: tactical and strategic decision-making, 
project management, lean operations, Six Sigma, TQM, and change management. Supply chain 
management topics include: business continuity planning, inbound logistics planning for 
environmental sustainability and corporate responsibility, and IT solutions for agile supply chain 
management. Course emphasizes the use of IT, social media, and the Internet for business 
processes and communication. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
 
 
MBA 5220 Business, Society and Public Policy  
This course examines current political, legal, and social forces acting on business and the ways in 
which business influences these forces. It focuses in particular on legislative and regulatory actions, 
policy making and implementation, and the interaction of the political-economic systems, public 
policy, and business. The course also examines the evolving relationship of business, government, 
and nonprofit organizations in America today, especially the rise of business-public-private-
nonprofit collaborations. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
MBA 5222 Leadership - Community 
Leadership Seminars are designed to provide a space for students to integrate course content, 
personal commitments, and real world experience to transform themselves as leaders. The 
Seminars enable students to do this with the support and input of their cohort peers. Each seminar 
covers an essential aspect or “site” of leadership and consists of relevant assessment and discovery 
tools, discussion, self-reflection, and integration of course material. Leadership Seminar III will help 
students understand the needs of their local community and explore how they can personally make 
an impact for the common good within their community. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
MBA 5225 Entrepreneurship and Innovation  
Principles and techniques of opportunity identification, new venture creation, innovation and 
sustainability. This course considers entrepreneurial innovation from concept to market. The course 
emphasizes social innovation and social entrepreneurship, including how principles of each benefit 
traditional businesses. Designed to support students’ venture creation in MBA Capstone. 
Pre-Requisites: Students must have completed the majority of the MBA program and successfully complete 
MBA 5207 and MBA 5312 before enrolling in this course. 
MBA 5306 Critical Thinking 
This course is designed to give new MBA students a common foundation in management concepts, 
analysis, and technologies. Students will improve their skills in self-awareness, reflection, listening, 
and making sound judgments. Students will learn how to research and write at the graduate level, 
prepare and analyze case studies, improve their speaking and presentation skills, along with 
working in teams. Students will also develop skills necessary to evaluate the assumptions, evidence, 
and inferences of what one thinks, reads and hears, and to present ideas in a logical, thorough, and 
persuasive manner. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
MBA 5310 Internship 
The internship provides students with the opportunity to apply the cumulative knowledge and skills 
in the MBA program to a real-world work environment. The internship involves the following steps: 
1) selecting a work site; 2) developing a contract that ensures both employer and student benefit; 3) 
fulfilling the contract activity through ongoing work; and 4) preparing a paper that summarizes the 
learning experience and outcomes. The expectation is for a minimum of 150 hours completed in 
this internship. The internship course does not warrant course substitutions or course transfers. 
Pre-Requisites: Students must successfully complete 6 credit hours of the MBA program and must have a 
minimum of a 3.0 GPA to be eligible. 
 
 
MBA 5312 Corporate Finance and Investments  
This course focuses on finance concepts and tools necessary for successfully running a business 
and making effective decisions. Emphasis placed on preparing students with the practical tools 
necessary for running a business. Topics include Debt/Equity mix, Cash Flow, Opportunity Cost, 
Risk-Return, Valuation of Assets/Projects. Students will participate in the investment stock market 
simulation StockTrak global trading software throughout the semester. 
Pre-Requisites: Peregrine Software module may be required depending upon admission requirements. MBA 
5207. 
MBA 5313 Organizational Processes in Consulting and Coaching 
This is an application course exploring the profession of management consulting and coaching. 
Designed to teach through understanding the art and science of internal and external management 
consulting/coaching, students are offered an opportunity to explore the relationship between 
theory and practice, and the continual changing nature of the consultation industry. Students must 
take this course in their last semester of the MBA-ODL program. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
MBA 5318 Principles of Corporate Training and Learning 
In this course students will examine critical processes associated with the planning, developing and 
implementing of training and education programs that build upon an organization's vision and 
mission. The processes will mesh proven methods with new trends that connect theories, models 
and strategies within organizational development. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
MBA 5319 Talent Management  
This course emphasizes the process between workforce engagement, motivation and development. 
Especially examined in this course is the role that talent management and motivation has in the 
realm of organizational learning and training. The course investigates into various motivational and 
talent management theories to help the student to understand the complexities and 
meaning/purpose of work - why do people work, and how effective motivation can lead to future 
employee success. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
MBA 5447 Capstone  
This course allows students to establish a link between their academic knowledge and practical 
applications by partnering with business and industry in their community. Students will plan, 
develop, and propose a capstone project with emphasis on management consulting or integrate 
their learning experiences throughout the program in the creation of a venture or project they might 
pursue once they have left the program. Designed to build off concepts and techniques taught in the 
Entrepreneurship and Innovation Course. 
Pre-Requisites: Students must have completed the majority of the MBA program and successfully complete 
MBA 5207 and MBA 5312 before enrolling in this course. Course Fee: $300 
MBA 5350H Healthcare Strategy and Business Planning  
This course will examine strategic planning processes and will focus on the key components of 
business planning in the healthcare management environment. Healthcare reform, ethical concerns 
 
 
and social justice are additional topics in managing the dual tracks of strategic and operational 
planning for today’s healthcare leader. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
MBA 5352H Ethical and Legal Issues in Healthcare Management 
This course presents an overview of the ethical and legal issues important to the healthcare 
manager, and provides students with a working knowledge of ethics and health law. Students will 
learn the contemporary elements of health law and its application to healthcare management with a 
range of topics from professional standards, patient rights, government regulation, negligence and 
malpractice and medical records. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
MBA 5354H Policy Trends and Considerations for the Healthcare Manager  
The purpose of this course provides students with an accurate understanding of the policy 
challenges in the U.S. healthcare care system today. The course will focus on the challenges of cost, 
quality, and access, the relationship between market failure and the passage of the Affordable Care 
Act (ACA), and the expected and potential impact of the ACA on the organization, structure, 
delivery and outcomes of the health care system. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
MBA 5356H Quality Methods for Healthcare Performance  
This course serves as a capstone course for students in their last semester that will examine 
methods and tools for managing quality in health facilities, physician practices, managed care and 
public health organizations. Topics will cover developments in quality assurance and improvement 
processes, risk management, the Affordable Care Act, and utilization management practices and 
trends. 
Pre-Requisites: None  
 
MED 5303G/5303E Curriculum Design and Practice  
Provides an intensive study of pedagogical approaches and materials for teaching in schools, such 
as state curriculum documents and the curricular recommendations of professional associations. 
Specific emphasis will be given to study of alternative approaches to curriculum theory, design, 
practice and evaluation. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
MED 5305G/5305E Educational Research  
Study of research methodology which explores various research modules, analyzes examples of 
research to identify models of acceptable and unacceptable research, and develops skills in using 
statistical techniques which enable the educator to be a reflective practitioner. 
Pre-Requisites: None. Course Fee (MED 5305E): $105 
 
 
MED 5308G/5308E Ethics and Leadership in Education 
All Master of Education students take Ethics and Leadership. This course is designed to promote 
deep and reflective thinking about important matters. Included will be important ethical issues in 
contemporary schooling such as cultural and religious diversity, professional conduct, student and 
parental rights, discipline, and technology. Students will evaluate their effectiveness as leaders. As a 
result of class activities, they will develop an awareness of personal leadership strengths, 
weaknesses, preferences, styles, and behaviors. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
MED 5309G/5309E Differentiated Instruction & Learning Theory 
Characteristics of effective teaching for all learning styles as well as major theories of learning will 
be studied. Recognizing the need to correlate the theoretical knowledge of learning and the ability 
to deliver the material in a manner that is relevant to the learner are essential for effective teaching. 
This course will provide students with an understanding of the various theories for learning and of 
differentiated styles of instructional delivery to correspond with various needs and abilities of 
learners. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
 
MPH 5300 Essentials of Health Behavior 
This graduate level course prepares students to understand how individual behavior impacts health 
while examining the social, political and economic factors that influence the 'big picture' on 
population health overall. This course is grounded in the practical everyday behaviors of both 
individuals and populations with a focus on the key theories of human behavior drawn from the 
social sciences as well as public health. It will examine the range of methods for changing behavior 
that can negatively impact your health and how to apply these methods to programs that promote 
healthy lifestyles and programs that prevent diseases.  
Pre-Requisites: None 
MPH 5301 Community Health 
This course examines population health from a community perspective. Communities can be 
different and diverse and include people from various cultures. This course examines the cultural 
values and practices that impact population health including how issues such as structural bias, 
social inequities and racism can undermine health especially at the community level. This course 
will engage students in understanding the strategies to identify stakeholders and build partnerships 
to influence health outcomes as well as to advocate for political, social and economic policies that 
will improve the health of populations in different communities.   
Pre-Requisites: None 
MPH 5302 Principles of Health Education 
Many people care about their health but may not know what to do to ensure they are living a 
healthy lifestyle. This graduate level course teaches students how to educate others (individuals, 
populations, communities and whole societies) on how to improve their health in the short term as 
well as the long term. This course provides a combination of tools that are designed to help 
populations increase their knowledge on healthy living. Through case studies and real world 
 
 
examples, current challenges, needs and barriers to health education will also be investigated while 
practical solutions and best practices for diverse populations are also addressed.    
Pre-Requisites: None 
MPH 5305 Global Health Systems 
This course examines the importance of population health in different parts of the world including 
how factors such as globalization can affect the global burden of disease. The course compares the 
organization, structure and function of healthcare systems across both national and international 
settings and introduces students to different health systems, their benefits as well as their 
challenges This course examines development, human rights, immigration issues, humanitarian 
emergencies and some of the more complex global health challenges facing our world along with 
great innovations and strategies and ideas that have been tried or are being tried to resolve them.    
Pre-Requisites: None 
MPH 5306 Essentials of Environmental Health 
This course focuses on the environmental factors that can impact a population's health and allows 
students to understand how ecology is connected to human health. The concept of ONE health is 
examined including the interaction and interconnectedness between human health, animal health 
and the health of ecosystems in order to maintain sustainable environments that will improve 
population health rather than harm it. Environmental concerns, issues related to climate change, 
urbanization, population density and changing demographics will also be included.    
Pre-Requisites: None 
MPH 5308 Public Health Economics and Management 
Students will learn about the economic factors that impact the health industry, how organizations 
use the basic principles and tools of budget and resource management to maintain their stability. 
Students will also learn about the economic factors that impact individual choices on lifestyle and 
health needs. In-depth cases will be studied including the ever-changing dynamics in the wider 
society that impact the supply and demand of different types of healthcare products, service and 
delivery methods.    
Pre-Requisites: None 
MPH 5309 Public Health
This course examines how communication theory, strategies, and implementation design impact
health outcome improvement. Students will learn to apply communication strategies in a variety of 
settings to impact health behavior change while evaluating successful and unsuccessful health 
communication campaigns. Students will be challenged to develop and use written and oral 
communication skills along with strategies of persuasion to impact individual, organizational, and 
community-level audiences. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
MPH 5310 Global Public Health Policies and Trends 
The main purpose of this course is to teach students that the making of public health policy is a 
complex multidimensional process. It will allow students to gain a deeper understanding of the 
policy making challenges in the U.S. healthcare care system as well as the challenges of 
international organizations in working with different countries to improve population health. The 
course will examine the importance of diverse groups being involved in the policy-making process 
 
 
and evaluate policies for their impact on population health in the United States as well as other 
countries. It will also examine the role of international organizations and the question of who 
governs the governing bodies in the international arena and how that impacts population health.    
Pre-Requisites: None 
MPH 5401 Principles of Epidemiology 
Students will study disease patterns in order to understand why diseases occur, who they impact, 
where they occur, when they occur and the factors that influence their growth, reduction in growth 
as well as how to prevent them from occurring in the first place. Students will learn the diverse tools 
used to study diseases and apply both quantitative and qualitative tools to list the major causes and 
trends for illness and or disease in the United States and other parts of the world. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
MPH 5402 Essentials of Biostatistics 
This graduate level course introduces students to the competencies related to evidence-based 
research in public health, particularly quantitative research and analysis. This course focuses on 
analyzing quantitative data using biostatistics, informatics, and computer-based programming 
programming software. Students will learn how to select quantitative collection methods 
appropriate for a given public health context and they will learn how to interpret results of 
quantitative data analysis for public health research, policy, or practice. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
MPH 5501 Global Public Health Ethics and Research 
In this course students will learn how to select methods to evaluate public health programs as well 
as interpret results of data analysis for public health research, policy or practice and discuss 
multiple dimensions of the policy-making process, including the roles of ethics and evidence. 
Students will also learn about the protection of human subjects (participants) in research and the 
ethical concerns that must be dealt with in a study design at the local, national and global levels. 
Case studies will be analyzed and students will be trained in ethical behavior, while conducting 
research (particularly qualitative studies) whether real or practice based (which would be a class 
based activity only) and well as how to respond to ethical concerns in study designs. Students will 
be trained to complete an IRB application and maintain ethical conduct throughout the duration of 
their real or simulated research study. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
MPH 5505 Public Health Leadership Practicum and Capstone 
This course focuses on applying the principles of leadership, governance and management to 
address population health needs. In this course students will learn strategies on creating a vision, 
how to empower others and how to foster collaboration for making strong decisions. Students will 
further learn how to negotiate and apply mediation skills to different types of settings and 
situations, organizational and/or community challenges that can occur in the practice of public 
health. As the practicum and capstone this course allows students to participate in experiential 
learning by working in a health or health-related organization of choice. This is a culminating 
course. Students will also design a population-based policy, program, project or intervention as part 
of their capstone/thesis paper. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
 
 
 
MTH 0313 Fundamentals of Mathematics 
This is a course to review basic academic skills in mathematics and elementary algebra with special 
emphasis on problem solving. This course does not satisfy the mathematics requirements for a 
degree and is graded on a Credit/No Credit basis. 
Pre-Requisites: Placement at the Lower Developmental Level 
MTH 0320 Intermediate Algebra  
This course is a review of the high school algebra courses.  It is designed to provide preparation for 
college entry math courses.  This course does not satisfy college mathematics requirements for a 
degree and is graded on a Credit/No Credit basis. 
Pre-Requisites: MTH 0313 or placement at the Upper Developmental Level  
MTH 1323 Quantitative Literacy 
This course includes a study in the uses of mathematics in society today.  Fundamental concepts of 
logic and mathematics are explored to develop students’ ability to think logically, quantitatively, 
and mathematically and to help them develop their problem solving abilities. Topics include logic, 
mathematics of finance, probability and statistics.  
Pre-Requisites: MTH 0320 or placement at the Lower College Entry Level. 
MTH 1330 Applied Finite Math 
This course includes application of arithmetic and algebra to business in order to solve supply and 
demand, break even, maxima-minima, and similar problems.  Other topics included are systems of 
equations solved by Geometric, Gauss-Jordan elimination, and inverse matrix methods.  Several 
applications of math of finance and basic concepts of probability are incorporated into the course. 
(Adult Degree Program use only.) 
Pre-Requisites: MTH 0320 or placement at the Lower College Entry Level  
MTH 1331 Finite Mathematics 
This course includes applications of algebra to business, matrices, linear programming, simplex 
method, and derivatives. 
Pre-Requisites: MTH 0320 or placement at the Lower College Entry Level  
MTH 1332 Applied Calculus 
Topics in this course include differential and integral calculus with emphasis on business, 
economics, life sciences, and social sciences applications. 
Pre-Requisites: MTH 1351 with a grade of C or higher.  
MTH 1341 Probability 
Topics include permutations, combinations, equally likely outcomes, conditional probability, 
independence and dependence, mathematical expectations, and binomial distributions. 
Pre-Requisites: MTH 0320 or placement at the Lower College Entry Level  
 
 
MTH 1351 College Algebra 
Topics in this course include the concept of functions and their graphs, with emphasis on 
polynomial, rational, exponential and logarithmic functions. The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra 
with application to zeros of polynomials and solutions to equations and inequalities using matrix 
arithmetic are incorporated into the curriculum. 
Pre-Requisites: MTH 0320 or placement at the Lower College Entry Level  
MTH 1352 Precalculus  
Algebra and trigonometry topics necessary for further study in Calculus I are addressed in this 
course. Topics include linear and quadratic functions, polynomial and rational functions, 
exponential and logarithmic functions, trigonometric functions, trigonometric identities, and 
applications of trigonometric functions to solutions of triangles, arithmetic of complex numbers, and 
the polar coordinate system.  
Pre-Requisites: MTH 1351  
MTH 1370H Honors Mathematics and Effective Thinking 
This course introduces students in the Honors Program to developments in modern mathematics. 
Topics include fractals, the fourth dimension, statistics, probability, and graph theory. Special 
emphasis will be placed on the elements of effective thinking. 
Pre-Requisites: MTH 0320 or placement at the Lower College Entry Level and membership in the Honors 
Program or permission of the instructor  
MTH 2301 Introduction to Statistics 
This course provides students with the methods and logic necessary to perform elementary 
statistical analysis. Topics may include descriptive measures, probability, sampling, theory of 
random variables, binomial and normal distributions, estimation and hypothesis testing, analysis of 
variance, regression and correlation, and nonparametric methods. 
Pre-Requisites: MTH 0320 or placement at the Lower College Entry Level  
MTH 2305 Discrete Structure 
This course is an analysis of the basic structures that form the foundations of mathematics and 
computer science including statements, sets and subsets, number sets, sequences, relations, 
orderings, partitions, functions, graphs, and trees.  Structures defined through induction and 
recursion, including introduction to the solutions of recurrence relations are addressed.  Emphasis 
will be on formal logical and combinatorial proof.   Cross-listed with CSC 2305 Discrete Structures. 
Pre-Requisites: CSC 1401 with a grade of “C” or higher.  Also MTH 1352 with a grade of ‘C’ or higher or 
math placement at Upper College Entry Level.  
MTH 2401 Calculus I  
This is the first course in single-variable calculus. It includes a review of basic functions, limits and 
continuity, definitions of derivatives and integrals, and differential rules.  Introduction to the 
Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Extreme Value Theorem, Rolle’s Theorem, and Mean Value 
Theorem are included. Applications of related rates, curve sketching (speed and acceleration), 
optimization, and introduction to numerical integration are incorporated into the course.  
Pre-Requisites: MTH 1352 with a grade ‘C’ or higher or placement at Upper College Entry Level  
 
 
MTH 2402 Calculus II  
This course is a continuation of MTH 2401, Calculus I.  Integration techniques include substitutions, 
integration by parts, partial fraction decomposition, and integration tables. Sequences, series, 
convergence, and Taylor’s Theorem are examined.  Applications to numerical integration, first-
order differential equations, and analytic geometry are incorporated into the course. 
Pre-Requisites: MTH 2401 with a grade of ‘C’ or higher  
MTH 3101 Problem Solving: Algebra, Geometry, and Trigonometry  
General problem solving techniques and specific problem solving strategies will be used in solving 
algebra, geometry, and trigonometry problems. 
Pre-Requisites: MTH 1352 with a grade of ‘C’ or higher or placement at Upper College Entry Level  
MTH 3102 Problem Solving: Number Theory  
General problem solving techniques and specific problem solving strategies will be used in solving 
number theory problems. 
Pre-Requisites: MTH 2401 with a grade of ‘C’ or higher.  
MTH 3103 Problem Solving: Combinatorics  
General problem solving techniques and specific problem solving strategies will be used in solving 
combinatorics problems. This is a level 3 course.  
Pre-Requisites: MTH  1352  with a grade of‘C’ or higher or placement at Upper College Entry Level 
MTH 3104 Problem Solving: Miscellaneous Problems  
General problem solving techniques and specific problem solving strategies will be used in 
miscellaneous problems including recreational problems. 
Pre-Requisites: MTH 1352 with a grade of ‘C’ or higher or placement at Upper College Entry Level  
MTH 3301 Mathematics for Teachers I 
Designed for students completing degrees that prepare students for teacher certification in one of 
the following areas: Core Contents (EC-6 or 4-8) or Math 4-8. Topics: number concepts and theory; 
patterns and relationships. Students will integrate problem solving, reasoning, manipulatives and 
technology throughout.  
Pre-Requisites: MTH 1351 with a grade of ‘C’ or higher  
MTH 3302 Mathematics for Teachers II 
This course is designed for students completing degrees that prepare students for teacher 
certification in one of the following areas: Core Contents (EC-6 or 4-8) or Math 4-8. Topics: 
proportional reasoning, geometry concepts, measurement, data, probability and statistics. Students 
will integrate problem solving, reasoning, manipulatives and technology throughout.  
Pre-Requisites: MTH 1351 with a grade of ‘C’ or higher  
MTH 3305 Mathematics for Teachers III  
This course is designed to develop and extend the mathematical content knowledge of prospective 
middle school and high school teachers.  Topics include problems in algebra, trigonometry, analytic 
geometry, calculus Euclidean geometry, probability, statistics, and discrete mathematics using 
technology. Graphing calculators and computers will be employed to illustrate and encourage 
 
 
conjecturing and problem solving with an emphasis on applications.  In addition, a brief survey will 
be made of major documents and resources pertinent to secondary mathematics teachers, such as 
the NCTM Standards, state standards, teaching certification, and math anxiety. Pre-Requisites: MTH 
3301 and MTH 3302 with a grade of ‘C’ or higher 
MTH 3309 Numerical Analysis 
Algorithms of numerical analysis are covered. Topics include floating point arithmetic, 
approximation, numerical integration and differentiation, solution of nonlinear equations, and 
solution of ordinary differential equations. Programming assignments will give experience in 
applying selected algorithms. Cross-listed with CSC 3309. 
Pre-Requisites: CSC 1402 and MTH 2402 with a grade of ‘C’ or higher  
MTH 3311 Linear Algebra  
This course includes systems of linear equations, vector spaces, linear transformations, 
representation of linear transformations by matrices, matrix algebra, and determinants. 
Pre-Requisites: MTH 2401 with a grade of ‘C’ or higher 
MTH 3313 Number Theory  
Divisibility, primes, congruences, quadratic reciprocity, Diophantine equations and simple 
continued fractions are examined in this course.  
Pre-Requisites: MTH 2401 with a grade of ‘C’ or higher  
MTH 3315 Abstract Algebra  
Topics in this course include the basic concepts of groups, rings, integral domains, fields, 
isomorphisms, and group homomorphism. 
Pre-Requisites: : MTH 2305 and MTH 3311  
MTH 3316 Geometry  
The extension of geometry concepts including the study of tessellations, transformations, 
isometrics, topology, and non-Euclidean geometries. 
Pre-Requisites: MTH 2401 with a grade of ‘C’ or higher  
MTH 3317 Ordinary Differential Equations 
Solutions to ordinary differential equations and initial value problems,  their existence and 
uniqueness are addressed with an emphasis on solution methods including the Laplace transform.  
Equations studied include first-order separable, linear, and exact equations; higher-order linear 
equations; and systems of linear equations. Also included is an introduction to series solutions, 
numerical solutions, and stability in nonlinear systems.  
Pre-Requisites: MTH 2402 with a grade of ‘C’ or Higher  
MTH 3325 Real Analysis  
Construction of the real numbers and rigorous study of their properties, including topological 
considerations, limits of sequences, continuity and differentiation of functions, the Riemann and 
Lebesgue integrals, and the topologies of function spaces. 
Pre-Requisites: MTH 3410 and MTH 2305  
 
 
MTH 3330 Mathematical Modeling 
This course is designed to provide students with an introduction to the entire mathematical 
modeling process. Students will be involved in creative and empirical model construction, in model 
analysis, and in model research.  
Pre-Requisites: MTH 2401 with a grade of ‘C’ or higher  
MTH 3341 Theory of Probability 
This course is an introduction to probability at the undergraduate level. Topics include probability 
spaces, random variables, basic discrete and continuous probability distributions, and conditional 
probability. Additional topics may include an introduction to multivariate distributions, generating 
functions, and statement of basic limit theorems of probability. 
Pre-Requisites: MTH 2402 with a grade of ‘C’ or higher  
MTH 3410 Calculus III  
This course includes multivariable calculus topics such as vectors, 3-D geometry, and vector-valued 
functions.  Differential and integral calculus of functions of several variables, vector fields and 
theorems including Fundamental Theorem for Line Integrals, Green’s Theorems, Divergence 
Theorem, and Stokes’s Theorem are also examined. Applications to optimization and modeling of 
motion are incorporated into the course.  
Pre-Requisites: MTH 2402 with a grade of ‘C’ higher  
MTH 3412 Advanced Calculus for Applications  
Topics for this course include infinite series, ordinary differential equations, partial differential 
equations, and Fourier series.  
Pre-Requisites: MTH 2402 with a grade of ‘C’ higher  
MTH 4101 Advanced Problem Solving  
General problem solving strategies and specific problem solving techniques will be used in solving 
advanced problems in undergraduate mathematics.  Classical problems as well as contemporary 
problems will be studied at the discretion of the instructor and the interests of the students.  
Pre-Requisites: MTH 3410, 3311, and 3317 with a grade of ‘C’ or higher  
MTH 4310 Cryptology  
Applications of abstract algebraic and number theoretic concepts to the science of secure 
cryptography. Topics include historical ciphers, public-key cryptography, signed messages, secure 
protocols, and cryptanalysis, especially as these deal with electronic communications. 
Pre-Requisites: MTH 3313 or MTH 3315 and CSC 1401  
MTH 4317 Partial Differential Equations 
This course introduces the students to the three basic boundary value problems.  It covers both the 
classic Fourier series method for solving the problems, as well as the more modern and flexible 
finite element method.  
Pre-Requisites: MTH 3317 with a grade of ‘C’ or higher  
 
 
MTH 4330 Complex Analysis 
This course is an introduction to analytic and harmonic functions and complex analysis 
Pre-Requisites: MTH 3410 with a grade of ‘C’ or higher  
MTH 4340 Topology 
This course is an introduction to the central concepts of topology: open and closed sets, continuity, 
compactness, and separation.  
Pre-Requisites: MTH 2305 with a grade of ‘C’ or higher.  
MTH 4390 Math Internship 
Students will participate in an on-the-job mathematics work experience under the direct supervision 
of professionals in a corporation or government agency. 
Pre-Requisites: Junior or Senior mathematics major and approval of the head of the mathematics 
department  
 
MIN 1101 Ministry Preparation  
A Pass/No Pass course required every term for pre-seminary students providing experience and 
training in personal development, reflecting and spiritual growth, relationship building, Bible study, 
ministry field experience, career options and related topics. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
MIN 1110 Organizational Ministry Leadership 
Students will explore, observe, and examine the complexities of organizational structure in 
traditional and nontraditional ministry. This course will present students with these different 
ministry structures, but then also teach students how to work effectively in these settings as they 
potentially develop into Ministry Executives, middle managers, and on the ground team leaders. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
MIN 1120 Team Ministry Leadership 
The Church is one foundation with Christ at the center who has gifted His Church to do the work of 
Ministry put before them. This course explores the gifts that Christ gives in professional Church-
workers as well as para-professionals, contract, and volunteer workers within the church. Together, 
these workers assemble a team that does Ministry together. This course will have students examine 
this team, learning how to communicate, collaborate, and commiserate with their teams in ministry 
in order to continue to spread the Gospel of Christ Jesus. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
MIN 1130 Leading in Diverse Ministry Contexts 
Students will examine urban, rural, small town, global, and school ministry contexts (learning 
structure) and learn how to serve, live, and thrive in said contexts (via practical application). This 
course will present students with these different ministry spaces and connect 
professionals/organizations who work in these settings as well. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
 
 
MIN 1140 Ministry Teaching 
Christ has given His Church the gift of Teaching. This important development of the Faith that He 
Himself implanted falls on the shoulders of those who minister to others via preaching, teaching, 
and gospel proclamation.  This course will explore ministry teaching from a Biblical Perspective, 
developing students as and exposing students to teaching in ministry settings. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
 
Applied Music Lessons – Initial Level (All Lessons Repeatable for Credit) 
1 credit (MUS X1XX) = 1 thirty-minute lesson each week  
2 credits (MUS X2XX) = 1 sixty-minute lesson each week  
Other requirements for credit include: 
● periodic group classes that students are required to attend throughout the semester 
● attendance at musical performances 
● written reports 
Course Fee: $100 per credit hour  
Pre-Requisites: None 
MUS 1110 Piano-Keyboard  
MUS 1111 Guitar  
Only Guitar lessons are available in a private or group setting. Lessons meet once a week where 
students learn the basic fundamentals of guitar in small groups. 
MUS 1112 Organ-Keyboard  
MUS 1115 Woodwind Lessons  
MUS 1116 Brass Lessons  
MUS 1117 Percussion Lessons  
MUS 1118 Strings 
MUS 1119 Voice Lessons  
MUS 1124 University Choir  
MUS 1128 Symphonic Winds  
MUS 1210 Piano-Keyboard  
MUS 1211 Guitar  
MUS 1212 Organ-Keyboard  
MUS 1215 Woodwind Lessons  
MUS 1216 Brass Lessons  
MUS 1217 Percussion Lessons  
 
 
MUS 1219 Voice Lessons  
MUS 1218 Strings  
Applied Music Lessons – Advanced Level (All Lessons Repeatable for Credit) 
Advanced students may pursue upper-level lessons.  These advanced students have already had 
significant instruction at the initial level.  Students may either register for half-hour (31XX) or one-
hour (32XX) lessons. 
Other requirements for credit include: 
● periodic group classes that students are required to attend throughout the semester 
● attendance at musical performances 
● written reports 
Course Fee: $100 per credit hour  
Pre-Requisites: Consent of instructor after successful completion of an upper-level jury. 
 
 
MUS 3110 Piano-Keyboard  
MUS 3111 Guitar  
MUS 3112 Organ-Keyboard  
MUS 3115 Woodwind Lessons  
MUS 3116 Brass Lessons  
MUS 3117 Percussion Lessons  
MUS 3119 Voice Lessons  
MUS 3118 String Lessons  
MUS 3210 Piano-Keyboard  
MUS 3211 Guitar  
MUS 3212 Organ-Keyboard  
MUS 3215 Woodwind Lessons  
MUS 3216 Brass Lessons  
MUS 3217 Percussion Lessons  
MUS 3219 Voice Lessons  
MUS 3218 String Lessons  
MUS 1124 University Choir  
The primary vocal ensemble of Concordia University Texas.  Concerts include a range of historic 
and modern repertoire in a variety of styles.  Membership determined by audition. Suggested 
concurrent enrollment in voice lessons. Repeatable for credit. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
 
MUS 1128 Symphonic Winds 
Students may participate in the Concordia Symphonic Winds (for winds, brass, string and 
percussion players) or Living Praise (travelling worship band), both by audition.  Suggested 
concurrent enrollment in instrumental music lessons. Repeatable for credit.  
Pre-Requisites: None 
MUS 1129 Vocal Ensembles  
Small vocal ensemble performing music from the standard chamber vocal literature. Membership is 
by audition only.  May be repeated for credit.. 
 
 
Pre-Requisites: Enrollment in private voice lessons and MUS 1124 University Choir required, or consent of 
instructor 
MUS 1131 Concordia Jazz Collective 
Open to all students with ability to perform on a standard jazz/band instrument with regular 
performances. May be repeated for credit. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
MUS 1332 Music Fundamentals 
Students learn basic concepts of notation, rhythm, melody, harmony and form through 
performance, composing, and listening. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
MUS 1333 American Popular Music  
Survey course of popular music in American culture from inception to present day. Styles for 
listening and study include: blues, jazz, rhythm and blues, rock and roll, country, punk, reggae, and 
disco. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
 
MUS 2115 Woodwind Methods  
An introduction to the study of woodwind instruments: flute, clarinet, saxophone and oboe. The 
fundamentals of playing each instrument will be emphasized and the student will learn effective 
teaching techniques for practical application in a teaching environment.  
Pre-Requisites: MUS 2334 or consent of instructor 
MUS 2118 Aural Skills I  
Building sight singing skill, aural awareness, and the ability to identify errors in rhythms and 
melodies.. 
Pre-Requisites: Students must be concurrently enrolled in MUS 2334 Music Theory I 
MUS 2119 Aural Skills II  
Continuation of MUS 2118. Expansion of sight singing skill, aural awareness, including two-part 
melodic dictation and ability to recognize chords in harmonic progressions in major and minor 
modes. 
Pre-Requisites:  Students must be concurrently enrolled in MUS 2335 Music Theory II.   
MUS 2120 String Methods  
An introduction to the study of string instruments: violin, viola, cello and double bass. The 
fundamentals of playing each instrument will be emphasized and the student will learn effective 
teaching techniques for practical application in a teaching environment. 
Pre-Requisites: MUS 2334 or consent of instructor 
MUS 2125 Percussion Methods  
An introduction to the study of percussion instruments: snare drum, bells, xylophone, bass drum, 
cymbals, drum set, and auxiliary percussion.  The fundamentals of playing each instrument will be 
emphasized and the student will learn effective teaching techniques for practical application in a 
 
 
teaching environment.  
Pre-Requisites: MUS 2334 or consent of instructor  
 
MUS 2130 Brass Methods  
An introduction to the study of brass instruments: trumpet, French horn, trombone, euphonium, 
and tuba.  The fundamentals of playing each instrument will be emphasized and the student will 
learn effective teaching techniques for practical application in a teaching environment. 
Pre-Requisites: MUS 2334 or consent of instructor  
 
MUS 2160 Composition Lessons 
The study and application of the musical techniques necessary to compose music from small to 
larger complex forms in a variety of styles 
Pre-Requisites:  MUS 2334 
 
MUS 2210 Diction for Singers I  
Provides students the tools to correctly sing in English, liturgical Latin, French, and German. 
Students will be introduced to the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) as a tool for translating 
musical texts. Learning will be guided by three types of assignments: written (IPA text translations), 
oral (speaking and reading musical texts) and applied (performances of selected repertoire in each 
of the languages being studied.) 
Pre-Requisites: None 
MUS 2214 Basic Conducting Techniques  
The study of beginning conducting technique, including the physical and technical skills of 
conducting, beginning score preparation, and aural skills necessary to conduct ensembles. 
Pre-Requisites: MUS 2334 
MUS 2250 Communication through Music and Art of World Culture  
The class will give an introduction to world culture through the aspects of music and art.  The 
meanings, social functions, aesthetic ideals, and behaviors associated with music and art vary 
greatly across the world’s cultures.  This class will expose students to music and art from Africa, 
Asia, Europe and the Americas.  The influences of art and music to a culture’s philosophies will be 
examined.  Images, instruments, folk songs, traditional songs, painting, sculptures, icons, expression 
of art and popular music will be explored. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
MUS 2260 Composition Lessons 
The study and application of the musical techniques necessary to compose music from small to 
larger complex forms in a variety of styles. 
Pre-Requisites: MUS 2334 
MUS 2333 Music Technology  
Techniques and resources for music notation, production and synthesis. Beginning with the 
understanding of the applicable models, students move to an understanding of current industry-
standard practices and their best fit within a musical program. 
Pre-Requisites: MUS 2334 or consent of the instructor 
 
 
 
MUS 2334 Music Theory I  
Principles of harmony: triads, part writing, non-harmonic tones, harmonization, seventh chords, 
secondary dominants and modulation taught through analysis and composition. Introduction to 
counterpoint through species counterpoint.  Melodic analysis.  
Pre-Requisites: MUS 1332, Theory Entrance Exam or consent of the instructor 
MUS 2335 Music Theory II  
Continuation of MUS 2334, including additional harmonic structures and chords and binary and 
ternary forms.  
Pre-Requisites: MUS 2334 
 
MUS 2340 History of Jazz  
A survey of jazz history from its origins to present day. Styles include ragtime, swing, bebop, cool 
jazz, hard bop, avant-garde, fusion, Latin jazz, and contemporary jazz. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
 
MUS 2350 Intro to World Music and Culture  
Examination of a variety of musical traditions from around the world. Course will be taught from an 
ethnomusicological perspective, focusing on music as an extension of artistic, cultural, economic, 
social, political and religious contexts.  
Pre-Requisites: None 
MUS 3120 Aural Skills III  
The third in a sequence of four Aural Skills classes - each one building upon the foundation of the 
previous classes. Students will continue to develop and increase aural comprehension and continue 
to develop their ability to sing with preparation and at sight constructions that are frequently found 
throughout their experiences in music. This course will cover more advanced musical forms such as 
Fugue, Invention, and Sonata Form; advanced chromatic melodies; 4-part chorale dictation and 
chromatic, borrowed and Neapolitan chords. 
Pre-Requisites: MUS 2119 
MUS 3121 Aural Skills IV  
The final class in a sequence of four Aural Skills classes - each one building upon the foundation of 
the previous classes. Students will be able to recognize and aurally analyze Twentieth Century 
Music Techniques; be able to sight-sing with accuracy of pitch more advanced prepared and 
unprepared heavily chromatic, whole tone, 12-tone and modal melodies; be able to hear, rhythm 
read and notate atonal music, mixed meter dictation, mirror rhythms, augmentation, diminution; 
play modes, whole tone, twelve tone scales on the piano; be able to recognize twentieth century 
writing techniques in the music of Debussy, Bartok, Messian and Stravinsky. 
Pre-Requisites: MUS 3120 
MUS 3223 Advanced Conducting Techniques  
A continuation of MUS 2214, studying advanced conducting techniques, especially asymmetrical 
and mixed meter, recitative, large scores, and continuing study of conducting technique and score 
preparation.   
Pre-Requisites: MUS 2214 
 
 
MUS 3230 Resources for Modern Worship  
This course examines contemporary expressions of worship, and prepares musicians to lead 
congregations into these forms of worship expression. Cross-listed as REDU 3230. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
MUS 3233 Piano Pedagogy 
A one-semester survey course that acquaints students with the fundamentals of piano teaching. 
Students will examine of the process of learning music and how it applies to the elementary - 
intermediate piano student. Students will explore current piano methods and materials for piano 
teaching and their practical applications; current issues related to independent studio management, 
lesson planning and other issues related to the teaching profession. Observation and directed 
teaching at local music studios in both private and group lesson settings. This is a course for music 
majors or minors with any of the music specializations. Fulfills Experiential Learning requirement. 
Pre-Requisites: MUS 2335 and MUS 3331 
MUS 3234 Vocal Pedagogy 
A one-semester survey course of vocal pedagogy. Students will create an understanding and 
awareness of vocal pedagogy to inform their teaching and performance practices. The analysis of 
vocal anatomy and function leads to application of appropriate vocal techniques for vocal health, 
production, and instruction. Students will study developmentally appropriate vocal techniques and 
best practices for elementary school, secondary school, and post secondary school in both 
ensemble and solo vocal applications. 
Pre-Requisites: MUS 2118 and MUS 2334 
MUS 3270 Performance Practice and Literature 
An upper-level music course combining general period performance practices from medieval 
through modern music, specific instrumental and vocal practices of certain historical periods, and 
guided research into standard practice and literature for each student’s chosen primary instrument. 
This course applies the fundamentals taught in applied music instruction and the music history 
sequence of classes. Students will apply these practices together in solo and ensemble settings. 
Pre-Requisites: MUS 2335 
MUS 3331 Music Pedagogy 
The purpose of this course is to provide future music educators with pedagogical techniques, 
methods, and literature of the most influential music educators of the 18th, 19th and 20th centuries. 
Students will study the methods and philosophies of Zoltan Kodaly, Karl Orff, Jaques Emile 
Dalcroze, and Shinichi Suzuki and learn how they shaped the world of music education through 
their innovative philosophies and methods in singing, rhythm, movement, improvisation, aural skills 
and composition. 
Pre-Requisites: MUS 2335 
MUS 3332 Orchestration  
Examining tonal resources of instrumental and vocal media; arranging and transcribing for a variety 
of styles and ensembles. 
Pre-Requisites: MUS 2335 
 
 
MUS 3336 Music Theory III  
Continuation of MUS 2335, including analysis and composition of various forms, including 
invention, fugue, and sonata.  Harmonic content includes extended chords and harmonic practice 
of the Romantic period. 
Pre-Requisites: MUS 2335 
MUS 3337 Music Theory IV  
Continuation of MUS 3336 and includes the study of harmonic practices from the Post-Romantic, 
Impressionistic, and Twentieth Century periods of music history and the use of extended and new 
harmonic practices. 
Pre-Requisites: MUS 3336 
MUS 3338 Composing and Arranging  
Composing and Arranging builds on the skills developed in Music Theory and Aural Skills.  
Students will study various compositional styles, compose original works, study various arranging 
techniques, and arrange music for a variety of instruments and ensembles. 
Pre-Requisites: MUS 2118, 2119, 2334, 2335, and 3336 
MUS 3342 History of Music I  
Music, composers and instruments of ancient, Medieval, Renaissance and Baroque eras. 
Pre-Requisites: MUS 2335 
MUS 3344 History of Music II)  
Music, composers and instruments of late Baroque, Classical, Romantic, and moderneras.  
Pre-Requisites: MUS 2335 
MUS 3356 Choral Methods  
Administering the adult choral program; conducting technique development; choral literature 
analysis and selection; service and program planning. 
Pre-Requisites: MUS 2335 and MUS 3223 
MUS 3362 Worship and Music  
Music and Worship explores the various musical influences on Christian Worship throughout 
history.  Particular attention will be given to hymns and music from the Lutheran tradition, 
especially as that tradition is represented in the Lutheran Service Book. At the same time, music 
from other Christian traditions will also receive significant attention in this course. At the end of the 
course, students will be able to assess and select musical resources appropriate to a worship 
context. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
MUS 4105 Music Recital  
One-hour public musical recital displaying student's ability to perform solo music in a variety of 
genre and historical styles. Must also register for two credits of private music instruction on 
corresponding musical instrument. 
Pre-Requisites: Consent of instructor. Course Fee: $100 
 
 
 
MUS 4110 Worship Internship  
A review of the principles for administering and managing a parish worship program and 
application of these principles in a supervised parish experience. Music majors will generally pursue 
this internship in the last year of attendance. Fulfills Experiential Learning requirement. 
Pre-Requisites: None. Course Fee: $250  
MUS 4112 Service Playing  
Service playing teaches the fundamentals of accompanying congregational song, including tempo, 
articulation, and phrasing.  Advanced students will also learn song introductions, improvisation, 
alternative harmonizations, and other aspects of arranging. Students may engage the course on 
their primary instrument and may also learn the skill on a secondary instrument.  Throughout the 
course, students will learn a variety of hymns, songs, canticles, and other music of the church. 
Pre-Requisites: MUS 2334; MUS 2335 and MUS 3336 also recommended, but not required. 
MUS 4212 Music in the Church  
Skills required of a church musician, studying liturgies and organizational practices of the Lutheran 
Church - Missouri Synod.  This course is required for those seeking a Director of Parish Music 
(DPM) certification.   
Pre-Requisites: MUS 1112 and consent of instructor 
 
J1 Courses 
NUR 3250 Pharmacology for Nurses I 
Evidence based practice is used to introduce the pharmacotherapeutic concepts.  These concepts 
are incorporated into nursing practice to improve patient care for adults with low to moderate-
acuity health problems. Emphasis is placed on principles of medication safety in the administration 
of medications and patient education.  Major drug classifications, through the use of prototypes, are 
used to facilitate student learning.  The impact of technology, economic, and regulatory forces as 
well as collaboration with the health team are discussed. Ethical/legal and cultural considerations 
are explored across the life span. 
Pre-Requisites: Successful completion of Pre-Nursing requirements and admission to the Professional 
Nursing Sequence. 
Co-requisites: All J1 courses. 

NUR 3325 Adult Health I Skills  
The Adult Health I Skills course allows the application of the knowledge, principles, concepts, and 
attitudes necessary to perform a health assessment and provide basic care for persons experiencing 
low to moderate acuity health problems. The course focuses on the ability of the student to 
accurately and safely perform the skills in accordance with current practice. 
Pre-Requisites: Successful completion of Pre-Nursing requirements and admission to the Professional 
Nursing Sequence. 
Co-requisites: All J1 courses. 

NUR 3330 Foundations of Professional Nursing 
This course is an introduction to the philosophy and theory of nursing, the nursing process, critical 
thinking, clinical judgment and professionalism.  The course enculturates the nursing student into 
professional behaviors, norms, comportment, and practice via: ethical and legal principles, 
regulatory agencies and professional organizations, Interdisciplinary relationships, bedside 
leadership/management, and roles of professional nurses. 
Pre-Requisites: Successful completion of Pre-Nursing requirements and admission to the Professional 
Nursing Sequence. 
Co-Requisites: All J1 courses. 

NUR 3336/S Adult Health Nursing I Practicum  
This course is a practicum in the clinical application of knowledge, skills, and attitudes necessary to 
provide safe, high-quality patient-centered care for adults experiencing low- to moderate-acuity 
medical-surgical health problems and behavioral health problems. 
Pre-Requisites: Successful completion of Pre-Nursing requirements and admission to the Professional 
Nursing Sequence. 
Co-requisites: NUR 3336S; all J1 courses. 

NUR 3535 Adult Health I Theory  
This course teaches the knowledge, skills, and attitudes necessary in the provision of nursing care 
for adults with low to moderate-acuity health problems and behavioral health problems. This course 
fulfills the Wellness requirement of the Concordia Common Experience curriculum. 
Pre-Requisites: Successful completion of Pre-Nursing requirements and admission to the Professional 
Nursing Sequence. 
Co-requisites: All J1 courses. 

NUR 3126/S Maternal/Newborn Practicum  
This course teaches students the application of the nursing process to provide quality, patient-
centered nursing care to meet the physiological and psychological needs of the childbearing family 
in the hospital setting and during patient scenarios. 
Pre-Requisites: Successful completion of all J1 courses. 
Co-requisites: All J2 courses.  

NUR 3251 Pharmacology for Nurses II 
This course is intended to develop the student’s ability to critically think by identifying medications 
for use in treating, whether for cure or maintenance, specific disease processes. The student will be 
able to identify the correct medication, indications and side effects, research findings and evidence-
based nursing practice regarding class, safety, efficacy, and monitoring of medications will be 
utilized. Additionally, major classifications of drugs; pharmacology and toxicology activity; clinical 
applications, and the role of the nurse in assessment, intervention, and patient education will be 
discussed. 
 
 
Pre-Requisites: Successful completion of all J1 courses. 
Co-requisites: All J2 courses. 

NUR 3320 Maternal/Newborn Theory 
This course provides relevant instructional learning experiences of the knowledge, skills, and 
attitudes necessary in the provision of quality, patient-centered nursing care to meet the 
physiological and psychological needs of the childbearing family during the antepartum, 
intrapartum, postpartum and newborn period in a variety of settings. 
Pre-Requisites: Successful completion of all J1 courses. 
Co-requisites: All J2 courses. 

NUR 3365 Adult Health II Theory 
This course teaches the knowledge, skills, and attitudes necessary in the provision of patient-
centered nursing care for adults with complex health problems. Emphasis is placed on application 
of the nursing process and critical thinking utilizing research-based nursing practice in the context 
of patient centered care for health restoration, health promotion and health maintenance. 
Pre-Requisites: Successful completion of all J1 courses.  
Co-requisites: All J2 courses. 

NUR 3366 Adult Health II Skills 
This skills course teaches the knowledge, skills, and attitudes necessary for the application of 
advanced skills required to care for persons experiencing complex health problems. The course 
focuses on accuracy and safety of skill demonstration. 
Pre-Requisites: Successful completion of all J1 courses. 
Co-requisites: All J2 courses. 

NUR 3386/S Adult Health Nursing II Practicum 
This course teaches the clinical application of knowledge, skills, and attitudes necessary to provide 
safe, high-quality patient-centered care for adults experiencing low- to moderate-acuity medical-
surgical and/or behavioral health problems. 
Pre-Requisites: Successful completion of all J1 courses. 
Co-Requisites: All J2 courses. 
 
NUR 4132/S Child and Family Nursing Practicum 
This course incorporates concepts of physical and behavioral health in order to enhance their ability 
to promote high-quality, safe, family-centered nursing care to pediatric clients and their families 
within a variety of healthcare settings. 
Pre-Requisites: Successful completion of all J2 courses. 
 
 
Co-requisites: All S1 courses. 

NUR 4310 Nursing Research 
This course provides an introduction to nursing research and research utilization through evidence-
based practice in the clinical practice of nursing.  Students will use critical thinking to apply 
research directly to patient care while learning to formulate clinical questions, search for and 
identify best evidence, and appraise that evidence for rigor and applicability to clinical problems. 
Basic principles of scientific inquiry, quantitative and qualitative research methods and research 
ethics are introduced in the context of clinically relevant research and translated to evidence-based 
practice. 
Pre-Requisites: Successful completion of all J2 courses. 
Co-requisites: All S1 courses. 
NUR 4332 Child and Family Nursing Theory 
This course develops the student’s ability to provide family-centered care to children, adolescents, 
and their families and to participate in strategies to improve the safety and quality of care.  Students 
will incorporate into nursing care the concepts of cognition and behavioral health in order to 
enhance their  ability to promote high-quality, safe, family-centered nursing care to children, 
adolescents, and their families within a variety of healthcare settings. 
Pre-requisites: Successful completion of all J2 courses. 
Co-requisites: All S1 courses. 

NUR 4357 Nursing Leadership and Management 
This course teaches the leadership and management principles applicable to the professional nurse 
as a Member of the Profession, Provider of Patient-Centered Care, Patient Safety Advocate and 
Member of the Health Care Team.  Emphasis is placed on the knowledge, judgment, skills and 
professional values of a nurse leader within a legal/ethical framework. 
Pre-Requisites: Successful completion of all J2 courses. 
Co-requisites: All S1 courses. 

NUR 4385 Adult Health III Theory 
This course teaches the knowledge, skills, and attitudes necessary in the provision of patient-
centered nursing care for adults with complex physical and mental health problems. Emphasis is 
placed on the application of the nursing process and critical thinking utilizing research-based 
nursing practice in the context of patient centered care for health restoration, health promotion and 
health maintenance. 
Pre-Requisites: Successful completion of all J2 courses. 
Co-requisites: All S1 courses. 

NUR 4386/S Adult Health III Practicum 
This course teaches the clinical application of knowledge, skills, and attitudes necessary to provide 
safe, high-quality patient-centered care for adults experiencing moderate-acuity medical-surgical 
and/or behavioral health problems. This course fulfills the Technology requirement of the 
 
 
Concordia Common Experience curriculum. 
Pre-Requisites: Successful completion of al J2 courses. 
Co-requisites: All S1 courses. 

 
NUR 4160 Community and Global Health Practicum 
 
This course teaches the knowledge, skills, and attitudes necessary in the provision of care for 
clients with health problems in the community setting. 
Pre-Requisites: Successful completion of all S1 courses.  
Co-requisites: All S2 courses. 

NUR 4280 Transition to Nursing Practice 
This course addresses role change from student to practicing registered nurse including team 
strategies for patient safety as well as concepts related to the nursing jurisprudence examination. 
Pre-Requisites: Successful completion of all S1 courses. 
Co-requisites: All S2 courses.  

 
NUR 4295 NCLEX Preparation and Review 
 
This course reviews key nursing content with separate, comprehensive units on medical-surgical, 
child health, childbearing and women’s health, and mental health/psychiatric nursing, followed by 
test questions written in NCLEX exam format. 
Pre-Requisites: Successful completion of all S1 courses. Course Fee: $375 
Co-requisites: All S2 courses.  

NUR 4360 Community and Global Health Theory 
This course teaches the knowledge, skills, and attitudes necessary in the provision of care for 
clients with health problems in the community setting. 
Pre-Requisites: Successful completion of all S1 courses.  
Co-requisites: All S2 courses. 


NUR 4370 Capstone Simulation and Practicum 
This course focuses on demonstration of quality and safety when providing care to multiple patients 
with complex health needs involving multi-system failure. Additionally, leadership, supervision and 
delegation strategies are emphasized. 
Pre-Requisites: Successful completion of all S1 courses. 
Co-requisites: All S2 courses. 

 
 
NUR 4389 Adult Health Nursing IV Theory 
This course builds on the knowledge, skills and attitudes necessary to provide patient-centered care 
nursing care for adults with complex physiologic, psychosocial conditions, and multi-system failure.  
Emphasis is placed on application of the nursing process and clinical reasoning using evidence-
based nursing practice in the context of patient-centered care for health restoration, promotion and 
maintenance. 
Pre-Requisites: Successful completion of all S1 courses. 
Co-requisites: All S2 courses. 

 
NUR 6301 Nursing Theory 
This course is designed to provide the essential information needed to understand and apply theory 
in practice, research, education, and leadership. This course provides a background of what theory 
is and how it is used in nursing in order to provide a foundation of knowledge for nursing practice. 
Pre-Requisites: Admission to the Doctor of Nursing Practice (DNP) Program. 
NUR 6302 Introduction to the Doctor of Nursing Practice Role & Scholarly Project 
This course provides an introduction to DNP roles and responsibilities as leaders, collaborators, 
scholars and advocates. DNP role expectations for theory, scholarship and involvement in 
healthcare policy and advocacy will be discussed along with various DNP roles and professional 
issues related to the DNP degree. 
Pre-Requisites: Admission to the Doctor of Nursing Practice (DNP) Program. 
NUR 6303 Academic Writing and Performing a Literature Review 
This course focuses on the skills and strategies necessary for articulating concepts and ideas in a 
scholarly manner. In this course, students will perform a comprehensive literature review, analyzing 
research and apply APA format and style rules for citing materials. 
Pre-Requisites: Admission to the Doctor of Nursing Practice (DNP) Program. 
 
PHL 3301 Survey of Western Philosophy  
Issues and problems of philosophy including the nature of reality, knowledge, and value. Selected 
study of major philosophers in the Western tradition. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
PHL 3302 Ethics in the Christian Tradition 
A study of ethical behavior and norms as developed in the Christian Tradition.  Attention is given to 
philosophical ethical theories, Christian ethical theories, and contemporary personal and moral 
issues as they related to those theories.  
Pre-Requisites: REL 1301 and REL 1311 
 
 
 
PHY 1401 Physics I  
Basic concepts of kinematics, dynamics, Newtonian physics, sound, and thermodynamics through 
lectures, laboratory experiences, and problem solving. Students should be co-enrolled in PHY 
1401L. 
Pre-Requisites: MTH 1351 with a grade of C or higher, or math placement at a higher level. Course Fee 
(PHY 1401L): $85 
PHY 1402 Physics II  
Basic concepts of electromagnetism, and electromagnetic radiation including optics through 
lectures, laboratory experiences, and problem solving. Students should be co-enrolled in PHY 
1402L. 
Pre-Requisites: PHY 1401 or equivalent with a grade of C or higher. Course Fee (PHY 1402L): $85 
PHY 1441 Conceptual Physics  
An introductory investigation of the fundamental concepts of physics. Topics include: Linear 
Motion, Force, Momentum, Energy, Rotational Motion, Gravity, Projectile and Satellite Motion, 
Solids, Liquids, and Gases. This course has a required laboratory component. 
Pre-Requisites: MTH 1351 with a grade of C or higher. Course Fee: $75  
PHY 4301 Topics in Modern Physics  
Special relativity, statistical mechanics, the photoelectric effect and quantum physics, and nuclear 
physics and radioactivity. 
Pre-Requisites: PHY 1402 with a grade of C or higher  

POLS 1303 American Government and Citizenship
This course encourages students to think about their government with insightful analysis while 
affirming fundamental concepts. Specifically, this course will focus on the U.S. Constitution and the 
Bill of Rights and emphasize the benefits, responsibilities and thoughtful perspective necessary for 
effective citizenship. Pre-Requisites: None 
 
POLS 2116/2216- Political Science Practicum  
This course provides students with the opportunity to experience mock governance in a 
competitive or collaborative environment. Students will select a program and fully engage in the 
required level of preparation, participation, and reflection. Acceptable mock governance programs 
include, but are not limited to, the following: Model Organization of American States, Moot Court, 
Texas Civic Ambassadors, Student Governance, Mediation and Academic Conference 
Presentations. Course can be taken for 1 or 2 credit hours and can be repeated for credit. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
 
 
POLS 2305 Texas State & Local Government 
This process-oriented class will focus on state and local governments with an emphasis on Texas. 
Specifically, this class will utilize field experiences to provide insight into political processes and 
issue advocacy.  
Pre-Requisites: Passage of, or concurrent enrollment in, POLS 1303, or instructor approval. 
 
POLS 2371H American Politics (Honors)
This course encourages students to examine the role of political institutions, both personally and in 
society, with an emphasis on the American political experience. In addition to focusing on 
fundamental concepts of American politics, the course will contain extensive readings and 
discussions about applicable social, economic, and political topics. Pre-Requisites: Acceptance into the 
Honors Program or instructor approval. 
POLS 3003 - Readings in Political Science  
In this variable-credit course (1-3 credits) students will work with a faculty member to select a 
range of required reading materials pertaining to a mutually agreed upon topic. Students will 
receive credit upon the complete reading of the selected materials, submission of a book review for 
each and discussion of those readings with the supervising faculty member. Pre-Requisites: Instructor 
approval. 
POLS 3321 – Public Policy  
This course provides students with the tools for understanding and appreciating modern policy 
frameworks. With a specific focus on economic and environmental policy, this course will work to 
develop student understanding the processes, motivations, and forms of agenda setting, policy 
implementation and policy evaluation. 
Pre-Requisites: Passage of, or concurrent enrollment in, POLS 1303 or POLS 2371H. 
POLS 3322 – Introduction to Law  
Provides a foundational examination of the law and American jurisprudence. Specifically, this 
course will examine the following areas of the law: torts, family law, property, criminal law, 
contracts, wills and estates, and legal research.   
Pre-Requisites: Passage of, or concurrent enrollment in, POLS 1303 or POLS 2371H. 
POLS 3323- Principles of Political Science  
Provides a thorough examination of political science as a discipline. The course will focus on 
providing students the basic structures of general government processes and social science 
research. Specifically, students will focus on the Political Science sub-disciplines of political process, 
political theory, international politics, political economy, comparative politics, political culture, 
political socialization, law, public policy, public administration and political science research 
methodology.  
Pre-Requisites: Passage of, or concurrent enrollment in, POLS 1303 or POLS 2371H. 
POLS 3301- Environmental Policy  
This course provides an in-depth examination of the politics surrounding conservation and 
environmentalism. While the specific topics and concepts for this class will evolve, the class will 
focus on issues pertaining to climate change, land and resource management, resource 
 
 
conservation, sustainable agriculture, population, sustainable development, and global and national 
environmental regulations.  
Pre-Requisites: Passage of, or concurrent enrollment in, POLS 1303 or POLS 2371H. 
POLS 3302- American Constitutional Law  
Provides an in-depth examination of the United States Constitution and the decisions of the U.S. 
Supreme Court.  Specifically, this course will examine Constitutional interpretation and how it has 
shaped American political culture.  This course will focus heavily on the historical, political, and 
analytical aspects associated with stare decisis, jurisprudence, and judicial interpretation in the 
United States.  
Pre-Requisites: Passage of, or concurrent enrollment in, POLS 1303 or POLS 2371H. 
POLS 3304- Special Topics in Political Science  
Various course concepts and themes will be offered in the area of political science, law, or political 
economy. Course may be repeated for credit when topics vary. 
Pre-Requisites: Passage of, or concurrent enrollment in, POLS 1303 or POLS 2371H. 
POLS 3332- American Political Institutions & Processes  
Provides a thorough examination of American political institutions, processes and behavior. 
Specifically, this class will provide an in-depth analysis of the presidency, bureaucracy, Congress, 
the Supreme Court, state legislatures, elections, pressure groups, and political parties. 
Pre-Requisites: Passage of, or concurrent enrollment in, POLS 1303 or POLS 2371H. 
POLS  3333- International Relations & Comparative Politics  
The focus of this course is the examination of the geopolitical realities and the governance 
structures of the modern world. Students will be introduced to a variety of global governance topics 
related to diplomacy, global governance institutions, human rights, cultural dimensions, and the use 
of hard and soft power. 
Pre-Requisites: Passage of, or concurrent enrollment in, POLS 1303 or POLS 2371H. 
POLS 3334- Political Philosophies and Ideologies  
The focus of this course is to provide an exploratory examination of the philosophical, ideological 
and theoretical foundations of modern Western political thought. This course will focus on a variety 
of social and political thinkers including, but not limited to, Plato, Machiavelli, Thomas Hobbes, 
Jean Jacques Rousseau, John Locke, John Stuart Mill, Adam Smith, Karl Marx, John Rawls and 
Robert Nozick. 
Pre-Requisites: Passage of, or concurrent enrollment in, POLS 1303 or POLS 2371H. 
POLS 3335 - Social Science Methods 
This course focuses on the use of quantitative and qualitative research methodology that is most 
commonly utilized by social science practitioners.  It will emphasize the use of techniques, and 
ethical constructs that are typically employed by those working in social science fields. Cross listed 
with CRIJ 3335. 
Pre-Requisites: MTH 2301 
 
 
POLS 3345 – Rights of the Criminally Accused 
This course will focus on the Constitutional rights of individuals who have been accused or 
convicted of crimes within the United States. Students will be introduced to a broad and critical 
understanding of American jurisprudence related to the 4th, 5th, 6th, 8th, 13th, and 14th Amendments, 
relevant case law, and substantive and procedural due process. 
Pre-Requisites: Satisfactory completion or concurrent enrollment in POLS 1303, or permission of the 
instructor.  
POLS 4136- Political Science Undergraduate Thesis  
Students will work with a faculty member to propose, research, and write and defend a publication-
grade research paper. Course may be repeated for credit. 
Pre-Requisites: None. 
POLS 4335-Political Science Leadership Capstone  
This course is intended for upper-level students who are nearing completion of their degree. For 
this particular course, students will be expected to demonstrate a high level of proficiency in basic 
fundamental Political Science concepts, understand and articulate research goals through a thesis 
proposal, learn about leadership from select community change agents, and apply their 
accumulated knowledge and skill set to solving a designated community problem. 
Pre-Requisites: Passage of, or concurrent enrollment in, POLS 1303 or POLS 2371H. 
 
PSY 1311 Introduction to Psychology  
Scientific study of human behavior with emphasis on basic psychological functions. 
Pre-Requisites: None. 
PSY 2300 Careers and Vocation in Psychology 
This course uses a comprehensive approach to considering careers in psychology through the 
Lutheran lens of vocation.  Guided activities and projects will be used to assist in identifying 
students’ needs, values, wants, interests, and abilities.  Opportunities and resources will also be 
used to explore career paths related to psychology and to identify the skills and experiences 
required to be competitive in those industries. 
Pre-Requisites: PSY 1311 
PSY 2301 Life-Span Development  
Physical, cognitive, social, emotional and personality development of the individual from "womb to 
tomb," with the principal focus being on these developmental stages in childhood and adolescence 
within the context of the complete life span.  
Pre-Requisites: PSY 1311 
PSY 2302 Human Sexuality & Gender 
Social-psychological and developmental aspects of human sexuality. Examples of topics include: 
courtship, pregnancy and delivery, sexual health, and sex education. 
Pre-Requisites: PSY 1311 
 
 
PSY 2303 Lutheran Ethos and Psychology 
Exploration of the relationship between Lutheran ethos and Psychology. Topics will include 
vocation, servant leadership, and learning as a lifelong pursuit. Personal growth and fulfillment will 
be emphasized. 
Pre-Requisites: PSY 1311 and REL 1301 
PSY 2305 Scientific Writing in Behavioral Sciences 
Introduction to scientific writing in the behavioral sciences, with specific emphasis on written 
communication of academically rigorous original research. Topics covered include journal article 
structure, APA format, and peer review. 
Pre-Requisites: PSY 1311 or SOC 1301 
PSY 2341 Statistics for the Behavioral Sciences 
An introduction to the fundamentals of descriptive and inferential statistics, especially as they apply 
t the behavioral and social sciences. Cross-listed as SOC 2341. 
Pre-Requisites: PSY 1311 or SOC 1301 
PSY 2391 Research Methods in the Behavioral Sciences 
Methods and approaches to research in the behavioral and social sciences. Cross-listed as SOC 
2391. 
Pre-Requisites: PSY/SOC 2341 
PSY 3302 Cognitive Psychology  
A comprehensive overview of the many facets of cognitive psychology including information 
processing, the complexities of memory, language acquisition and functions, problem solving and 
decision making, and basic neurology. Also includes an overview of learning theories with a more 
in-depth look at the principal ones. 
Pre-Requisites: PSY 1311 
PSY 3303 Neuropsychology 
Biological and cognitive aspects of neuropathological conditions, including relevant brain/behavior 
relationships. Introduction to neuropsychological assessment. 
Pre-Requisites: PSY 1311 
PSY 3304 Group Dynamics  
Theory and practice in small group communication; goal setting, problem solving, listening, 
feedback, and leadership. As part of the course experience, students will plan an off-campus trip 
with additional costs to student.  Cross-listed as COM 3304.  
Pre-Requisites: PSY 1311 
PSY 3305 Learning and Memory 
Explores principles of conditioning and motivation; approaches to learning, including acquisition of 
verbal materials, concepts, and motor skills. Explores processes underlying information storage and 
retrieval, including different kinds of memory, forgetting, and conditions associated with memory 
impairment.  
Pre-Requisites: PSY 1311 
 
 
PSY 3306 Sensation & Perception 
An introductory survey of the human senses and their role in perception, considering how we sense 
the physical environment and what factors influence our perception of it. Integrates theory, 
research, and application. 
Pre-Requisites: PSY 1311 
PSY 3312 Criminal Profiling  
Exposes the student to the distressful, painful and often devastating effects of maladaptive behavior. 
The course will explore the interwoven biological, psychological and social antecedents and 
correlates of criminal behavior. Psychological issues and their relation to criminal and anti-social 
behavior will be studied. Personal and societal attitudes, feelings and values about criminal and 
anti-social behavior will be discussed extensively.  Cross-listed as CRIJ 3312. 
Pre-Requisites: PSY 1311 
PSY 3315 History & Philosophy of Psychology  
This course studies and examines the development of psychology from its early roots in philosophy 
and religion, through its empirical bases, to its direction in today's society. The aim is to discover 
what relationships, if any, there are between psychology and justice. This course may replace three 
hours of social/behavioral sciences, if at least one course is not already designated in the major.  
Pre-Requisites: PSY 1311 
PSY 3325 Interpersonal Relationships 
Investigation into the communication and psychology of family dynamics, friendships, and romantic 
partners. One goal of this course will be to understand our own relationships and seek to improve 
them. In addition, students will examine relationship styles different from our own experiences in 
order to broaden our knowledge of relationship theories, practices, and cultural variations.     Cross 
listed with COM 3325. 
Pre-Requisites: PSY 1311 or permission of instructor 
PSY 3330 Social Psychology  
Examination of cultural and psychological influences in the development of individuals and 
societies. Cross-listed as SOC 3330.  
Pre-Requisites: PSY 1311 and SOC 1301 
PSY 3334 Exercise and Sports Psychology  
This class covers the psychological aspects of movement activities that underline performance. It 
also covers the intrinsic and extrinsic factors that must be recognized in order to understand, 
motivate, and evaluate human movement. Cross listed with KIN 3334.   Note: Does NOT count for 
core physical education requirements. 
Pre-Requisites: PSY 1311 
PSY 3331 Introduction to Counseling Skills   
An introductory course designed to acquaint students with current counseling theories and to 
acquire a beginning skill in counseling.  
Pre-Requisites: None 
 
 
PSY 3332 Personality Theories 
Applicability of major personality theories to understanding human behavior.  
Pre-Requisites: PSY 1311 
PSY 3335 Health Psychology 
Investigation of how biological, psychological, and social factors relate to disease states, illness, and 
stress.  
Pre-Requisites: PSY 1311 
PSY 3341 Abnormal Psychology  
Psychological abnormality, including anxiety, somatoform, obsessive-compulsive, and dissociative 
disorders; psychoses, mental retardation, brain dysfunction, sexual deviance, and other maladaptive 
behaviors.  
Pre-Requisites: PSY 1311 
PSY 3350 Biopsychology  
An introduction to the structure and function of the nervous system and the relationship between 
psychological processes and the brain in humans and other animals. Cross-listed with BIO 3350.  
Pre-Requisites:  
PSY 3406 Animal Behavior  
An introduction to the study of animal behavior. Cross-listed as BIO 3406.     
Pre-Requisites: Any 3 or 4 academic hour course which fulfills a portion of the Natural Science Core 
requirement with a grade of "C" or above. Course Fee: $75 
PSY 4310 Behavioral Sciences Internship  
Supervised on-the-job experience and involvement at one of Austin's agencies/companies. Interns 
will work with professional in the intern's field of specialization. A senior level course for Behavioral 
Science majors only. Graded Pass/Not Pass.   Fulfills Experiential Learning requirement.     
Pre-Requisites: Senior standing, 3.0 GPA, 2.5 cumulative GPA, 18 credit hours of lower level and 9 credit 
hours of upper level work in the major.  
PSY 4360 Topics in Behavioral Sciences 
A seminar-style examination, discussion, and analysis of specific issue, population, theoretical 
approach, or person(s) studied in the Behavioral Sciences.  The focus of the seminar may be from a 
Psychological or Sociological perspective, or a combination of the two disciplines.  Students may 
repeat this course when the topic changes.  Cross listed with SOC 4360 
Pre-Requisites: 6 hours of upper-level hours in the Behavioral Sciences or by consent of the instructor. 
Public Health (Undergraduate) 
PUBH 1303 Intro to Population Health 
This course introduces students to the study of population health and what it means to live a long 
and healthy life. It includes examining the factors that can influence health and wellness as well as 
the various fields all connected to health. The course is interdisciplinary. It covers a broad range of 
 
 
issues including health communication, environmental health, infectious diseases, social health, and 
how to improve your community as well as your own life. This is an exciting eye-opening course 
that any student interested in his/her well-being or the well-being of others can take. Cross-listed 
with BADM 1303. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
PUBH 3314 Essentials: Global Public Health 
Examines the main functions of public health; disease prevention and health promotion. Students 
will learn the history and philosophy of public health, its core values and functions across the globe 
and in society. Students will examine the factors that impact health and how productivity is 
influenced by health outcomes since prevention is more cost effective than cure. Students will learn 
about working in both clinical care settings as well as institutions that promote population health. 
Case studies will be used. Cross-listed with BADM 3314. 
Pre-Requisites: Recommended Sophomore level standing 
PUBH 3315 Comparative Health Care System 
Examines the healthcare delivery system of the United States, it fundamental characteristics and 
organization as well as differences in the healthcare systems of other countries. Students will learn 
about the various agencies involved in health and access to healthcare will be reviewed. Students 
will have a better understanding of the composition of health workers in the United States and other 
countries. Innovative technologies and best practices will be studied. Cross-listed with BADM 3315. 
Pre-Requisites: Recommended Sophomore level standing 
PUBH 3323 Globalization, Trade, Health Policy 
Examines the increasing interdependence of the world with greater connectivity affecting the speed 
of access to information. Key focus will be on the dimensions of globalization including trade in 
food, pharmaceutical products, tobacco as well as healthcare personnel and the shift in patterns of 
disease. Case studies will be used. Cross-listed with BADM 3323. 
Pre-Requisites: Recommended Sophomore level standing 
PUBH 3370 Health
A fascinating study of communication in the field of health; focusing on the origins and theories of
health communication, and exploration of the complexities inherent in both verbal and nonverbal 
communication, and health messaging. Additional focus will be on several contemporary areas 
within the field of health communication research and practice. Cross-listed as COM 3370. 
Pre-Requisites: Recommended Sophomore level standing 
PUBH 4319 Immigration, Violence, Disaster and Health 
Issues that impact vulnerable populations in the United States and other countries including the 
socioeconomic, behavioral, biological, environmental and other factors that impact human health 
and contribute to health disparities. Immigration, the impact of violence, natural and man-made 
disasters, terrorism and the organizations that respond to these issues will be examined. Cross-
listed with BADM 4319. 
Pre-Requisites: Recommended Sophomore level standing 
 
 
PUBH 4321 Public Health Organizations, Ethics & Law 
Examines public health organizations that are local, national and international in focus, how they 
operate and the role they play in promoting health and preventing disease as well as those 
organizations not typically associated with health such as the United Nations, World Trade 
Organization, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and Dell. Cross-listed with BADM 4321. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
PUBH 4302 Global Public Health Practicum 
Students will be engaged in internships in organizations in the United States with a health focus 
(healthcare delivery or population health); or organizations that are regional or international in 
scope that promote global health.  In the future opportunities for internships will be created for 
practical experiences working in other countries and in select international organizations (public 
and private). Fulfills experiential learning 
Pre-Requisites: Course to be taken in the last year of program using Concordia’s internship guidelines  
PUBH 4398 Program Management & Health Evaluation (capstone) 
Examines health programs and the use of evidence to support the practice of health. Using theories 
and case studies examined in the Healthcare concentration, students will complete a critical 
analysis of the public health program of choice integrating lessons learned, best practices and the 
theories studied. Cross-listed with BADM 4398. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
 
RDG 3311 Foundations of Literacy  
This course offers an overview of the theoretical foundations of reading and writing instruction. It 
includes developing an understanding of the five components of an effective reading program 
(phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary, and comprehension), reading strategies, and 
the Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills (TEKS) to understand the importance of a successful 
reading program in early childhood through grade twelve. 
Pre-Requisites: None  
RDG 3326 Emergent Literacy and Language in Primary Grades 
This course focuses on developing literacy (speaking, listening, writing, and viewing) in primary 
grade elementary classrooms. Students will be expected to critically examine and reflect on ways in 
which teachers can provide the environment and experiences needed to promote literacy, 
development and learning of diverse children in inclusive classrooms. 
Pre-Requisites: Admission to the Teacher Education Program and RDG 3311 
RDG 3342 Disciplinary Literacy 
In this course content education students deepen their understanding of the literacy demands 
(listening, speaking, reading and writing) associated with their future teaching disciplines.  Students 
also develop skills for identifying the literacy demands required to complete a lesson and teaching 
those skills along with the content.  45 hours of fieldwork is required. Fulfills Experiential Learning 
 
 
requirement 
Pre-Requisites: Admission to the Teacher Education Program  
RDG 4327 Literary and Language in the Intermediate Grades 
This course focuses on appropriate methods of designing and implementing literacy instruction for 
students in the intermediate grades (3-8) based on the science of teaching reading. Students will 
observe, design, implement, and reflect on literacy lessons based on theory and research validated 
strategies for diverse learners. This course requires fieldwork. 
Pre-Requisites: Admission to the Teacher Education Program and RDG 3326.  
 
REL 1301 New Testament History and Reading  
The background, growth and content of the New Testament. Sources and chronology of the 
Apostolic Age and Early Jewish Christianity.  
Pre-Requisites: None 
REL 1311 History and Literature of the Old Testament  
A literary-historical interpretation of the Old Testament, with special emphasis on its religious 
significance. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
REL 1331 Introduction to Christianity  
An introduction to the historical background, sources, literature, and basic beliefs of the Christian 
tradition. Intended for students with little or no background in the knowledge and experience of the 
Christian faith. This course may not be taken by any student who has earned more than 3 credit 
hours in religion.  (Students seeking certification by Concordia University Texas for professional 
work in The Lutheran Church-Missouri Synod must satisfy all religion credit requirements by means 
other than this course). 
Pre-Requisites: None 
REL 3302 Luke-Acts 
Study of the two-volume work of Luke stressing the growth of the church. 
Pre-Requisites: REL 1301 and REL 1311 
REL 3303 Major Pauline Epistles  
Examination of major Pauline Epistles. Emphasis on theological perspective these contributed to 
the Apostolic Church and Protestant Reformation. 
Pre-Requisites: REL 1301 and REL 1311. 
REL 3305 Law, Justice and Grace in the Biblical Perspective  
This course exposes students to the biblical concepts of law, justice, grace and the role of religion in 
modern American law. Students will read and discuss biblical passages dealing with the divine role 
of civil government, the law of God, civil disobedience, the death penalty, and the place of grace in 
a Christian's life. The course will also focus on freedom of religion and the proper roles of church 
 
 
and state. 
Pre-Requisites: REL 1301 and REL 1311. 
REL 3312 Wisdom Literature 
A study of Israelite wisdom writings, especially the books of Job, Ecclesiastes and Proverbs, and the 
application of their themes to contemporary issues. 
Pre-Requisites: REL 1301 and REL 1311. 
REL 3313 Major Prophets: Isaiah  
The interpretation of the prophecies of the Book of Isaiah with attention to historical events, literary 
style, and ancient and modern religious significance. 
Pre-Requisites: REL 1301 and REL 1311. 
REL 3333 Introduction to Christian Ethics 3,0 
A study of ethical behavior and norms provided by the Christian faith. Attention given to both 
Christian ethical theory and contemporary personal and moral issues. 
Pre-Requisites: REL 1301 and REL 1311. 
REL 3335 Christian Apologetics  
This course will survey the nature, objectives, and significance of presenting a viable defense of the 
Christian faith against objections of the major philosophies and ideologies that conflict with the faith 
in this "post Christian" and "post-modern" age. 
Pre-Requisites: REL 1301 and REL 1311. 
REL 3341 Lutheran Doctrine  
The main purpose of this course will be to explore the foundational doctrinal teachings that have 
shaped Lutheran traditions, beliefs and life. In our attempt to understand what Lutheran Christians 
have historically believed, taught and confessed, we will also seek to apply Lutheran theological 
commitments to specific theological debates in contemporary Christianity. Moreover, we will 
explore how Lutheran doctrinal beliefs remain important resources for contemporary and 
ecumenical theological understanding, for ministry, for preaching, for teaching. 
Pre-Requisites: REL 1301 and REL 1311. 
REL 3342 Lutheran Confessions 
A study of the history and content of the Lutheran confessional documents contained in the Book of 
Concord.     
Pre-Requisites: REL 1301 and REL 1311. 
REL 3345 Theology of Worship  
In this course, students will consider the biblical, philosophical, historical and cultural influences on 
Christian worship. Throughout the course, students will study the participation in and leadership of 
Christian worship from a variety of perspectives. 
Pre-Requisites: REL 1301 or REL 1311. 
 
 
REL 3346 A Christian View of Nature  
An examination of Biblical passages about the natural world and discussion of related theological 
issues.  
Pre-Requisites: REL 1301 and REL 1311; plus junior standing or permission of instructor. 
REL 3352 History and Philosophy of the Reformation  
History, philosophy, theology, and literature of the Protestant Reformation. 
Pre-Requisites: REL 1301 and REL 1311 
REL 3353 American Christianity  
A study of the major denominations within American Christianity. 
Pre-Requisites: REL 1301 and REL 1311. 
REL 3354 History of Christianity  
An overview of the history of Christianity from the New Testament era to the present. The course 
will focus on the central persons, ideas, issues, and events that have shaped the Christian Church 
and its worship, doctrine, ethics, organization, and mission. Cross-listed as HIS 3354. 
Pre-Requisites: REL 1301 and REL 1311. 
REL 3355 History of Christian Mission  
The course will cover the historical expansion of the Christian church and its impact on societies 
around the world.  The course will examine the theology, culture, politics and methods of mission 
efforts beginning with the Acts of the Apostles. 
Pre-Requisites: REL 1301 and REL 1311. 
REL 3361 The Writings of C. S. Lewis  
Studies the life, the works, the literary criticism, the themes, and the thought of C.S. Lewis, with 
attention to the various literary genres within which Lewis wrote. This course is also available 
online. 
Pre-Requisites: REL 1301 and REL 1311. 
REL 3362 Narnia Meets Middle Earth  
This course offers a close look at the impact of such authors as Joseph Campbell, C.S. Lewis, J.R.R. 
Tolkien, J.K. Rowling, and the Scriptures upon the world of religion, imaginative literature, 
communication, and our way of life by studying the role of imagination and myth.  
Pre-Requisites: REL 1301 and REL 1311. 
REL 3381 Major World Religions  
Introduction to the history, faith, and culture of the major non-Christian religions of the modern 
world, including Islam, Judaism, Hinduism, and Buddhism, with brief attention to minor religions 
and non-theistic religion. 
Pre-Requisites: REL 1301 and REL 1311. 
 
 
 
REDU 1111 Spiritual Disciplines I  
This course will assist students in their spiritual life through an exploration of the spiritual 
disciplines and an integration of truth into life as it pertains to their current lives as students 
preparing for full-time ministry. (To be taken freshman year) 
Pre-Requisites: None. Course Fee: $75  
REDU 1112 Spiritual Disciplines II  
This course will assist students in their spiritual life through an exploration of the spiritual 
disciplines and an integration of truth into life as it pertains to their transition from college life to 
full-time ministry.  (To be taken senior year) 
Pre-Requisites: REDU 1111  
REDU 2220 Introduction to DCE Ministry  
This course examines the ministry of the DCE within the context of the Lutheran Church --Missouri 
Synod so students can make personal evaluations of their appropriateness for this ministry. 
Pre-Requisites: None  
REDU 2350 Curriculum & Methods in Religious Education  
This course focuses on the educational ministry of the local church with attention to writing, 
evaluating, and teaching Bible studies as well as organizing a comprehensive plan for Biblical 
discipleship. 
Pre-Requisites: None  
REDU 3230 Leading Contemporary Worship 
This course examines contemporary expressions of worship, and prepares DCEs to lead 
congregations into these forms of worship expression. Cross-Listed as MUS 3230 
Pre-Requisites: None  
REDU 3232 Outdoor Christian Ministry  
This course seeks to examine the historical and contemporary purposes and formats of Outdoor 
Christian Education. Students will be equipped with the skills needed to implement an effective 
Outdoor Christian Education program in a congregational or school setting. This is a one-week 
intensive course taught in a camp setting, and includes a course fee (amount variable). 
Pre-Requisites: None. Course Fee: $400 
REDU 3240 Missional Leadership 
Students will gain knowledge of the latest theories and trends of missionaries and missional living. 
This class will also provide training in how to plan, budget, manage, execute and evaluate a short 
term mission trip, and how to turn short term trips into long term experiences.  
Pre-Requisites: None. Course Fee: $300  
 
 
REDU 3250 Christian Witness and Evangelism  
This course introduces students to the theology and practice of Christian evangelism. Skills in 
speaking the Gospel to others will be developed. 
Pre-Requisites: None  
REDU 3310 Youth Ministry  
This class provides basic knowledge of parish youth ministry, knowledge of the curricula and 
resources available in youth ministry, and an opportunity to develop and observe models and styles 
appropriate in parish youth ministry. 
Pre-Requisites: None  
REDU 3311 Cultural Influences on Youth Ministry  
This course will focus on the cultural context of teenagers in America. Students will be viewing the 
American teenager’s world of popular culture and societal norms as a missionary views a modern 
culture.  
Pre-Requisites: None  
REDU 3313 Special Topics in Youth Ministry  
This course will introduce theories on ways to minister to youth through some of the current hot 
issues in youth culture, such as: sexuality, addiction, abuse, etc. May be repeated for credit when 
topics vary. Students are limited to 9 hours of special topics courses. 
Pre-Requisites: REDU 3310  
REDU 3315 Confirmation Planning and Implementation  
This course will review and assess the purposes, history, and structure of confirmation in the 
Lutheran Church for the purpose of structuring and outlining implementation strategies for use in a 
local congregation. Adult and junior confirmation programs will be considered. 
Pre-Requisites: None  
REDU 3316 Leadership & Administration in Children’s Ministry  
This course examines the many facets of the administrative process within the context of a staff 
ministry position to children and families. Staff relations, recruiting, the integration of children’s and 
family ministry into the greater church body and leadership will be addressed. Evaluation of 
curriculum, facilities, policies, and procedures will also be addressed. 
Pre-Requisites: REDU 3317  
REDU 3317 Children's Ministry  
This course will introduce theories related to children that will assist in developing an integrated 
ministry to children in a congregational setting. The five major sections of the course include 
development of the child; learning theories; the content of the child's learning in the church; 
planning, administration, and implementing a comprehensive ministry to children; and resources, 
activities and environments for children's ministry. 
Pre-Requisites: None  
 
 
REDU 3319 Middle School Ministry  
This course will introduce theories related to pre-adolescents, specifically 5th through 8th grade 
that will help in developing specific ministries for this age group in a parish setting. Knowledge of 
age appropriate curriculum, activities and ministry will be provided as well as compared and 
contrasted to children’s and High School ministry. 
Pre-Requisites: None  
REDU 3320 Parish Administration  
An introduction to and exploration of the theory and processes associated with the administration 
of parish educational programs. Special emphasis is placed on idea generating; initiating change; 
promotion; evaluation; use of technology; budget; office and time management; managing 
volunteers; and legal issues relating to the responsibilities of the DCE in the parish. 
Pre-Requisites: None  
REDU 3330 Family Ministry  
This class gives students a look at family structures and will help show the importance of solid 
family ministry in the context of children and youth ministry. 
Pre-Requisites: None  
REDU 3340 Adult Education in the Parish  
This class focuses on adult learning theory, faith development and andragogy as it relates to the 
planning of effective adult education programs in a local congregation. 
Pre-Requisites: None  
REDU 3345 Emergent Theory  
This course will go over the basic understandings, purposes, reactions and history of Emergent 
movement and discuss the positives and negatives in a Lutheran context. The concepts of 
postmodernism, post-Christianity and post-scales will be evaluated, discussed and connected. 
Pre-Requisites: None  
REDU 3198 National/International Studies: Mission Trip 
Students will participate in and share leadership responsibilities for a 1-2 week short-term mission 
trip experience. May be repeated for credit. Students are limited to 9 hours of mission trip courses. 
Fulfills Experiential Learning requirement.  
Pre-Requisites: None.  
REDU 4210 DCE Practicum I  
This course provides opportunities for students to gain meaningful insights and understandings of 
the congregational structure and organization of education and youth ministries.  Fulfills 
Experiential Learning requirement 
Pre-Requisites: None. Course Fee: $75  
REDU 4211 DCE Practicum II  
This course allows students to become involved in leadership activities of the education and youth 
ministries of the congregation.  Fulfills Experiential Learning requirement 
Pre-Requisites: None. Course Fee: $75  
 
 
REDU 41210 DCE Internship I  
This class is a directed and supervised, academic three-month to one-year training program. It 
enables students to experience many aspects of the educational ministries in a congregation as 
possible. These include part-time instructional agencies, youth work, family life, adult education, 
counseling, evangelism and church music.  Course graded on a Pass/Fail basis.  Fulfills Experiential 
Learning requirement 
Pre-Requisites: None. Course Fee: $1000  
REDU 41211 DCE Internship II  
This class is a directed and supervised, academic three-month to one-year training program. It 
enables students to experience many aspects of the educational ministries in a congregation as 
possible. These include part-time instructional agencies, youth work, family life, adult education, 
counseling, evangelism and church music. Course Graded on a Pass/Fail basis.  Fulfills Experiential 
Learning requirement 
Pre-Requisites: REDU 41210. Course Fee: $1000 
 
SCI 1402 Introduction to Astronomy  
A study of the solar system, the Sun, stars, galaxies and the Universe.  Descriptive and 
observational astronomy are stressed.  This course has a required laboratory component.  Students 
who have credit for a higher-level Astronomy course may not take this course for credit. Students 
must enroll in co-requisite SCI 1402L lab course. 
Pre-Requisites: Placement at lower college entry mathematics or higher or successful completion of MTH 
0320. Course Fee (SCI 1402L): $85 
SCI 3301 Astronomy  
A study of the stars, the solar system, planets, satellites, and galaxies. Descriptive and observational 
astronomy are stressed. 
Pre-Requisites: MTH 1323 Quantitative Literacy or higher  
SCI 3303 Geology and Ecology : Southwestern U.S. 
A field study of major landforms and wildlife associated with the desert Southwest. This course 
emphasizes recognition of depositional and erosional features, identification of wildlife, and the 
interactions between biotic and abiotic components of desert ecosystems. Also includes a study of 
environmental concerns and conservation efforts in the deserts of the Southwest. Offered during 
Spring Break and/or summer and requires extensive physical exertion and "roughing it." Additional 
fee for course paid at the time of registration.  Fulfills Experiential Learning requirement. 
Pre-Requisites: Consent of instructor. Course Fee: $650  
SCI 3304 Geology and Ecology of Hawaii 
A field study of volcanism and the biological and physical factors which have influenced the 
ecological development of the Hawaiian Islands. This course emphasizes recognition of geologic 
features, wildlife identification, and a study of environmental concerns and conservation efforts in 
Hawaii. Offered during Spring Break and/or summer and requires extensive physical exertion and 
 
 
"roughing it." Additional fee for course paid at time of registration.   Fulfills Experiential Learning 
requirement. 
Pre-Requisites: Consent of instructor. 
SCI 3307 Geology and Ecology of Texas 
A field study of the geology and ecology of selected ecoregions in Texas, including the biological 
and physical factors which have influenced the development of different ecoregions in Texas. The 
course emphasizes application of ecological concepts to the field, recognition of geological features, 
wildlife identification, and a study of environmental concerns. Requires good physical condition due 
to strenuous hiking activity. Fulfills Experiential Learning requirement. Pre-Requisites: Consent of 
instructor. 
SCI 4310 Natural Science Research Project  
Students will plan, execute, and report on a research project under the supervision of a Natural 
Science faculty member. A senior level course for natural science majors and environmental 
science majors; graded on a Pass/Fail basis. Instructor approval required for registration. May be 
repeated once for credit. 
Pre-Requisites: Approval of Natural Science faculty instructor. Course Fee: $75 
 
SOC 1301 Introduction to Sociology  
Application of sociological analysis and concepts to American society.  Fulfills Experiential Learning 
requirement. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
SOC 2306 Race and Ethnic Relations  
Emphasis on race and ethnic relations as a national concern with emphasis on these concerns in the 
Southwest. Cross-listed as HIS 2306. 
Pre-Requisites: SOC 1301 or HIS 1301 or HIS 1302  
SOC 2341 Statistics for the Behavioral Sciences  
An introduction to the fundamentals of descriptive and inferential statistics, especially as they apply 
to the behavioral and social sciences. Cross-listed as PSY 2341. 
Pre-Requisites: PSY 1311 or SOC 1301 
SOC 2391 Research Methods in the Behavioral Sciences  
Methods and approaches to research in the behavioral and social sciences. Cross-listed as PSY 
2391 
Pre-Requisites: PSY 2341 or SOC 2341. 
SOC 3301 Urbanization (Demography) 
City development especially in the United States and examination of the social implications of 
urbanization. 
Pre-Requisites: SOC 1301 
 
 
SOC 3302 Marriage and Family  
Study and analysis of dating, marriage and the family in North America. 
Pre-Requisites: SOC 1301 
SOC 3303 Social Gerontology 
Study and analysis of aging in the United States; secondary reference to the elderly in selected 
countries of the world. 
Pre-Requisites: SOC 1301 
SOC 3304 History & Culture: Mexican American  
An analysis of the history and culture of the Mexican American people. Cross-listed as HIS 3304. 
Pre-Requisites: Three credit hours of history or SOC 1301  
SOC 3305 Introduction to Social Work  
An introduction to the field of social work, which includes an examination of the nature of 
professional social work, the diverse career opportunities for social workers, the historical 
development of the profession, and the values and ethics that shape the profession. 
Pre-Requisites: SOC 1301 
SOC 3306 Social Welfare and Social Policy  
Examination of social welfare policy, including the purposes of social welfare and the most 
important social welfare programs addressing major social problems. Attention will also be given to 
the significance of social, economic, and political factors that influence policymaking and 
implementation. 
Pre-Requisites: SOC 1301.  
SOC 3307 Social Inequality: Class, Status, and Power 
An analysis of the ways that societies are unequal in their distributions of wealth, power, and 
prestige, including an examination of inequality related to social class, race, ethnicity, and gender as 
well as a study of mobility and institutions that inhibit or enhance mobility. The course also 
explores contemporary manifestations of social inequality as well as historical and theoretical 
understandings. 
Pre-Requisites: SOC 1301  
SOC 3308 Sociology of Sport 
Sports, similar to other institutions throughout the world, can be viewed as socially constructed and 
therefore a product of society. The sociology of sport is the predominate approaches to 
understanding how sport is developed, maintained, and influential to society. 
Pre-Requisites: SOC 1301  
SOC 3311 Criminology and Crime  
The examination of crime, criminals, corrections, and community response; criminology theories 
and correctional systems. Cross-listed as CRIJ 3311. 
Pre-Requisites: SOC 1301 
 
 
SOC 3321 Sociological Theory  
An examination of both historical and contemporary sociological theories. 
Pre-Requisites: SOC 1301, 6 additional credit hours in Sociology and Behavioral Sciences, upper level 
standing. 
SOC 3330 Social Psychology  
Examination of cultural and psychological influences in the development of individuals and 
societies. Cross-listed as PSY 3330. 
Pre-Requisites: PSY 1311 and SOC 1301 
SOC 3331 Sociology of Children and Childhood  
Examination and analysis of the concepts, theories, and empirical research in the sociological study 
of children and childhood with a focus on the social construction of the perception of children and 
of childhood as a distinct life stage; the process of socialization; and the social problems facing 
children. Although the emphasis will be on children in U.S. society, a global perspective will also be 
used to explore the diversity of children’s experiences across societies. 
Pre-Requisites: SOC 1301 
SOC 4310 Behavioral Sciences Internship 
Supervised on-the-job experience and involvement at one of Austin's agencies/companies. Interns 
will work with professional in the intern's field of specialization. A senior level course for Behavioral 
Science majors only. Graded Pass/No Pass.   Fulfills Experiential Learning requirement. Cross- 
listed with PSY 4310 
Pre-Requisites: Senior standing, 3.0 GPA, 2.5 cumulative GPA, 18 credit hours of lower level and 9 credit 
hours of upper level work in the major.  
SOC 4360 Topics in Behavioral Sciences 
A seminar-style examination, discussion, and analysis of specific issue, population, theoretical 
approach, or person(s) studied in the Behavioral Sciences.  The focus of the seminar may be from a 
Psychological or Sociological perspective, or a combination of the two disciplines.  Students may 
repeat this course when the topic changes. Cross-listed with PSY 4360. 
Pre-Requisites: 6 hours of upper-level hours in the Behavioral Sciences or by consent of the instructor. 
 
SPN 1401 Spanish I  
Introductory Spanish imparts communication skills for daily use in these areas:  listening, speaking, 
reading, and writing.  Instruction emphasizes linguistic and cultural accuracy. 
Pre-Requisites: None. 
SPN 1402 Spanish II  
Continued introductory Spanish imparts further communication skills for daily use in these areas:  
listening, speaking, reading, and writing.  Instruction emphasizes linguistic and cultural accuracy. 
Pre-Requisites: SPN 1401 
 
 
SPN 2301 Medical Spanish for Healthcare Workers 
Medical Spanish imparts conversational vocabulary for healthcare settings; also, cultural awareness 
of Spanish-speaking populations. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
SPN 2311 Spanish III  
Intermediate Spanish imparts advanced communication skills for daily use in these areas:  listening, 
speaking, reading, and writing.  It further offers advanced skills in linguistic and cultural accuracy. 
Pre-Requisites: SPN 1402. 
SPN 2312 Spanish IV  
Continued intermediate Spanish imparts advanced communication skills for daily use in these 
areas:  listening, speaking, reading, and writing.  It offers high-level skills in linguistic and cultural 
accuracy. 
Pre-Requisites: SPN 2311. 
 
SPAD 5301 Critical Issues/Events in Sports 
Studies contemporary administrative, social, and ethical issues in American supports through a 
historical lens. Students will read about and discuss the historical roots of sports violence, doping, 
amateurism, sports as builders of nations and character, the relationship between sports and race 
and gender, and the relationship between sports and the media. 
Pre-Requisites: None  
SPAD 5303 Finance 
Reviews the management of finances in administering a sports program, event or facility and seeks 
to develop administrators who will act with integrity, fairness, and competence in dealing with 
budget formation and compliance, revenue source identification, and expenditure allocations. 
Pre-Requisites: None  
SPAD 5304 Facilities/Event Planning 
Explores the details of planning and implementing various sports-related events while also making 
the best use of available facilities and space. 
Pre-Requisites: None  
SPAD 5305 Media/Marketing 
Explores the use of various media and techniques to market sports to a wide variety of consumers. 
It discusses factors which affect consumer behavior, tools to understand consumers, branding, and 
the implementation of effective marketing programs. 
Pre-Requisites: None  
SPAD 5310 Organizational Behavior in Sports 
This course explores the multidimensional aspect of individuals’ behaviors and roles within the 
context of sport’s group dynamics. Study includes motivational strategies, personality traits, 
 
 
communication techniques, and team climate which lead to team cohesion and success. 
Pre-Requisites: None  
SPAD 5311 Legal Aspects of Sports 
The course surveys the multitude of regulations and legal developments relating to interscholastic, 
intercollegiate, and professional athletics.  Included are issues relating to gender equity (Title IX), 
individuals with special needs (Individuals with Disabilities Act, Section 504, Americans with 
Disabilities Act), and tort actions (negligence, assault, hazing, defamation).  
Pre-Requisites: None  
SPAD 5331 Principles of Coaching 
Introduction to coaching including philosophy, self-evaluation, ethical behavior, skills, coaching techniques, management, safety concerns, teaching sport specific skills and 
developing physical and psychological conditioning for competition.  
Pre-Requisites: None  
SPAD 5333 Practicum in Coaching 
This practicum provides students with the opportunity to apply the cumulative knowledge and skills 
in the SPAD program to a real-world work environment. The internship involves the following 
steps: 1) selecting a work site; 2) developing a contract that ensures both employer and student 
benefit; 3) fulfilling the contract activity through ongoing work; and 4) preparing a paper that 
summarizes the learning experience and outcomes. The expectation is for a minimum of hours 
completed in this internship.  
Pre-Requisites: None. Course Fee: $75  
 
THEA 1301 Experience of Drama  
This course examines the play’s journey from page to stage.  Appropriate for both beginning and 
advanced theatre students, the class will meet twice a week.  The first class session each week will 
include script and production analysis, delivered through lecture, presentations, and class-
discussion.  The other sessions will be spent attending theatrical performances, often including a 
talk-back with production personnel.  May be repeated for credit.  May be used to fulfill all or a 
portion of the Fine Arts requirement. 
Pre-Requisites: None. Course Fee: $75 
THEA 1315 Script Analysis 
In this class, students will develop skills in examining scripts for production. Each student will be 
provided with a method of playscript analysis based upon attention to fundamentals of action, 
structure, and character. Students will be exposed to multiple resources for script analysis in order 
to develop their own analytical style and skills. 
Pre-Requisites: None.  
 
 
THEA 1320 Stagecrafts I: Lighting, Set, and Sound 
This is an introductory course in theatrical stagecraft, lighting, and sound, designed to introduce the 
students to the basic principles of the scenic construction process, lighting and sound technology, 
use of materials and tools, and shop techniques and principles. 
Pre-Requisites: None.  
 
 
THEA 1321 Stagecrafts II: Costumes and Make-Up 
This is a practical course in techniques, skills, research, and preparation related to theatrical 
costuming and make-up. Students will complete several projects, covering hand and machine 
sewing, cutting, fabric identification, simple alterations and costume crafts, as well as make-up 
design and application. 
Pre-Requisites: None. Course Fee: $70. 
THEA 3X21 Theatre Practicum 
The purpose of this experiential course is for students to learn theatre by doing theatre, in any and 
all of its aspects. Students are presented with the opportunity to practice professional, 
organizational, and collaborative skills, culminating in a fully-mounted theatre production. Roles 
and responsibilities range widely and might include acting, stage management, house management, 
board operations, dramaturgy, design, publicity, and assignments on various production crews, 
depending on student aptitude, interest, and disposition. Therefore, the course is offered for 
variable credit (1-3 credits), determined by the hours required for the student’s specific role. This 
course is offered every semester and may be repeated twice (total of three) for credit. 
Pre-Requisites: Permission of the instructor. 
 
THEA 2315 Rendering and Model-Building 
In this course, students will develop concrete skills for rendering concepts onto paper and building 
models to visually represent exact designs in scaled forms. Students will explore rendering 
techniques as an expression of design across many media such as colored pencil, ink, watercolor, 
gouache, and acrylic. Students will also develop varied levels of model making, including the simple 
and functional white model, the fully realized color and texture accurate scenic model, and 3D 
models generated with computer aided design. Pre-Requisites: THEA 1320 and THEA 1321, or 
permission of the instructor. 
THEA 2316 Stage Management 
In this course, students will gain a greater understanding of stage management methods and 
practices, as well as furthering the understanding of stage management in relation to production as 
a whole. Particular focus will be given to organization, leadership, and communication skills 
necessary to contribute to the production process as a stage manager. 
Pre-Requisites: THEA 1320 or permission of the instructor. 
THEA 2322 Theatre for Social Change 
Due to the unique power of the immediate moment of interaction between audience and performer, 
theatre has tremendous potential as a tool for social change.   This course will examine the theories 
and methods of theatre for social change throughout the 20th century.  We will examine a wide 
array of international topics, including agit-prop theatre, radical street performance, Theatre of the 
Oppressed, theatre in prisons, and the use of theatre in the church.  May be used to fulfill all or a 
 
 
portion of the Fine Arts requirement. 
Pre-Requisites: None.  
THEA 2323 Voice and Movement 
This course introduces students to the fundamentals of movement and voice training for dance and 
theatre. Students gain skills to improve their physical awareness, body alignment, and movement 
and vocal range. Through practical, hands-on work, the class teaches an in-depth understanding of 
the effects of habit on body, mind, and voice and how to learn effective ways to release habitual 
tensions, experiencing the voice beginning to open and connect to authentic impulse. By 
participating in studio explorations and solo performances, students are introduced to the principles 
of physical performance, character transformation, and ensemble kinetic relationships. 
Pre-Requisites: None.  
THEA 3311 Theatre History I 
This course investigates the development of world theatre from antiquity through the 18th century. 
It includes a consideration of plays, playwrights, actors, audiences, critics, theatre spaces, design, 
performance, and production practices. Theatre history will be linked to larger social, intellectual, 
political, and cultural developments around the world. 
Pre-Requisites: None.  
THEA 3312 Theatre History II 
This course investigates the development of world theatre from the 18th century through today. It 
includes a consideration of plays, playwrights, actors, audiences, critics, theatre spaces, design, 
performance, and production practices. Theatre history will be linked to larger social, intellectual, 
political, and cultural developments around the world. 
Pre-Requisites: THEA 3311, or permission of the instructor. 
 
THEA 3315 Set Design 
In this course, students will engage deeply with the Scenic Design process, learning how to shape 
and craft a landscape for a production based on initial script analysis, to communicate ideas 
effectively with the technical director and all members of the collaborative team, and to discover 
and develop a personal aesthetic and point of view as a set designer. Specifically, students will learn 
to translate their creative design ideas onto the page via such formats as draftings and models. Pre-
Requisites: THEA 1320, or permission of instructor.  
THEA 3316 Lighting Design 
In this course, students will gain a greater understanding of lighting theories, methods, and 
practices while furthering their understanding of lighting design in relation to the script. May be 
repeated for credit once. 
Pre-Requisites: None.  
THEA 3317 Costume Design 
This course is designed for students who have a basic understanding of the principles of theatrical 
design and who want a more intensive study of costume design and the psychology of clothing. 
Students develop designs that emerge through a process of character analysis, based on the script 
and production concept. Period research, design, and rendering skills are fostered through practical 
 
 
exercises. Instruction in basic costume construction, including drafting and draping, provide tools 
for students to produce final projects. 
Pre-Requisites: THEA 1321, or permission of the instructor. May be repeated once for credit. 
THEA 3322 Acting: Improvisation and Scene Study  
This class provides the theatre student with an opportunity to develop acting skills through the 
disciplines of improvisation and scene study.  Improvisation is employed as a means of structuring 
original ideas in order to create scenes, as a method of confronting and solving acting problems, as 
a way to inspire social change, and as a means of theatricalizing non-dramatic sources such as 
folktales.   May be repeated for credit. May be used to fulfill the Fine Arts core requirement. 
Pre-Requisites: None 
THEA 3323 Scene Study  
This course provides the theatre student with an opportunity to develop acting skills through 
disciplined scene study. Activities will include in-class discussion, a close reading of course texts, 
detailed character analysis, rehearsal, and performance. May be repeated for credit. 
Pre-Requisites: THEA 3322 
THEA 3324 Acting for the Camera  
Students will develop skills and techniques for single-camera acting in film and television, as well as 
a basic understanding of the business of acting. Special attention will be given to the on-camera 
production process, preparing for on-camera auditions, on-camera audition and performance 
evaluation skills, and honing students’ creative tools and expression for the camera. 
Pre-Requisites: None. 
THEA 4323 Audition Technique 
In this course, students will develop a dependable set of tools to prepare them for auditions. Each 
student will be provided with a method of character analysis based upon physical action and the 
truth of the moment. 
Pre-Requisites: THEA 1322, or permission of the instructor.  
THEA 4324 Directing 
In this course, students will explore the principles and practice of play directing for beginning 
directors. Class discussion of the collaborative components of the theatre, the director’s approach 
to the script, the actors, and the theatre space, and the laboratory experience in directing scenes 
from the core experiences of this course.  
Pre-Requisites: THEA 1315 and THEA 1322, or permission of the instructor.  
