BIOL COURSES
1000 Principles of Modern Biology
4 hrs. (3, 2)
Fundamental ideas in the science of biology, including molecules, cells, genetics, ecology, the diversity of life, and the human body.
OFFERED: Sem. I; Summer.
2010 Medical Terminology
2 hrs. (2, 0)
Course objective is to make students familiar with the common root words, prefixes, and suffixes of terms used in the medical fields.
The material to be covered includes anatomical, procedural, diagnostic, disease, and pharmacology terms. OFFERED: Sem. I, II,
Summer.
2040 Personal and Community Health
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Health problems of individuals, home, school, and community. Covers nutrition, child growth, personality development, home living,
and the human body. Includes application of exercise to the maintenance of individual and community health. SAME AS: PUBH 2040.
OFFERED: Sem. I.
2070 Humans and the Environment
4 hrs. (3, 2)
Students are exposed to basic concepts of ecology and to select environmental issues. They are encouraged to engage in vigorous
discussion and to think critically about our impact on the environment. The perspective of Christian environmental stewardship is
emphasized throughout the course. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2023-24.
2080 Flora of Indiana
4 hrs. (3, 2)
Taxonomic study (identification, classification, and nomenclature) of flowering plants of Indiana.
2210 Foundations of Modern Biology I
4 hrs. (3, 2)
Basic principles of cell structure and function, genetics, evolution, biodiversity, and ecology using animal and human models.
Through these themes, the student becomes familiar with major animal groups, their salient characteristics, environmental
interactions, and postulated evolutionary relationships. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2220 Foundations of Modern Biology II
4 hrs. (3, 2)
Concepts of cell structure and function, cell metabolism, genetics, organismal structure and function, and principles of
ecology using plant models. Through these themes, the student becomes familiar with major plant groups, their salient
characteristics, environmental interactions, and postulated evolutionary relationships. PREREQUISITE: BIOL 2210.
OFFERED: Sem. II.
2230 Microbes and Disease
4 hrs. (3, 2)
Introduction to the science of microbiology using clinical microbiology as a model. Some emphasis is given to general areas
such as microbial classification, genetics, physiology, and ecology, with concentration on subjects related to disease-
microorganism relationships: classification, culture and identification of pathogenic organisms, control processes (antisepsis,
disinfection, antibiotics), infection patterns, control of disease, and elementary immunology. PREREQUISITE: BIOL 2220 or
2420. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2240 Cell Biology
4 hrs. (3, 3)
Introduction to fundamental concepts of cellular and molecular biology. Integrated lab and classroom curriculum introduce
the subject in four parts: (1) fundamentals of biochemistry, (2) the flow of genetic information in the cell, (3) cellular anatomy
and physiology, and (4) cell regulation. PREREQUISITE: BIOL 2220. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2310 Field Biology in Spring
4 hrs. (4, 0)
Springtime plants and animals, their field identification, field biology, behavior and landscape context, with a focus on spring
flora, amphibia, and birds. Focuses on observation and sounds of life in the field occurring between the end of the spring
college semester and the end of spring high school semester to provide prospective teachers and naturalists with an
opportunity to investigate the natural history of this time of year. OFFERED: At Au Sable Institute.
2410 Human Anatomy and Physiology I
4 hrs. (3, 2)
Topics will include cell form and function and organization of human cells into tissues, organs, and organ systems. Course will
emphasize skeletal tissues, muscles, and the nervous and endocrine systems. Emphasis will be given to pathological
conditions that alter the normal functions of these organ systems and how these alterations affect the organism as a whole.
The lecture and laboratory experiences will emphasize how the structure and function of each topic is interrelated (that
function follows form). OFFERED: Sem. I, Summer.
2420 Human Anatomy and Physiology II
4 hrs. (3, 2)
Topics will include cell form and function as well as the human digestive, cardiovascular, respiratory, urinary, and reproductive
systems. Emphasis will be given to pathological conditions that alter the normal functions of these organ systems and how
these alterations affect the organism as a whole. The lecture and laboratory experiences will emphasize how the structure and
function of each topic is interrelated (that function follows form). PREREQUISITE: BIOL 2410 or CHEM 1000. OFFERED: Sem. II,
Summer.
3030 Microbiology
4 hrs. (3, 4)
Introduction to microbiology using a study of various microbes. Biochemical, genetic, and ecological aspects of Archaea,
prokaryotes, viruses, fungi, and protozoans will be covered. One unit will cover human pathology and immunology.
PREREQUISITE: BIOL 2220. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3050 Advanced Topics in Microbiology
2 hrs. (2, 0-3)
Topics important to the understanding and practice of microbiology will be covered in a seminar/laboratory format
customized to the topic being discussed. Includes latest developments in the topic areas of immunology, virology, and
mycology. May be repeated under a different topic. PREREQUISITE: BIOL 3030. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3080 Animal Ecology
4 hrs. (4, 0)
Interrelationships between animals and their biotic and physical environments, emphasizing animal population dynamics in
old growth pine forests and bogs. This field-intensive course centers on the ecology of northern Michigan fauna from a
stewardship perspective. Included are individual student projects. PREREQUISITE: BIOL 2220. OFFERED: At Au Sable
Institute.

3170 Comparative Vertebrate Anatomy
5 hrs. (3, 4)
Lecture emphasizes major themes of vertebrate structure, function, and development, such as the vertebrate transition to
land, adaptations for terrestrial life, the evolutionary relationship between birds and theropod dinosaurs, and the evolution of
flight. Laboratory emphasizes comparative morphology of representative chordate types. PREREQUISITE: BIOL 2220.
OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3270
Human Gross Anatomy and Histology
5 hrs. (3, 4)
Detailed study of gross anatomy, microscopic and ultramicroscopic structures of tissues and organs of the human body.
Laboratory emphasizes examination of the gross to microscopic structure through various techniques. Relationship of
structure and function emphasized. PREREQUISITE: BIOL 3030. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2023-24.
3310
Entomology
4 hrs. (3, 2)
Study of insects, with an emphasis upon their identification and role in the environment. PREREQUISITE: BIOL 2220.
OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3420 Fish Biology and Ecology
4 hrs. (3, 2)
Covers in detail the systematics, evolution, and anatomy of fishes. Students will be exposed to selected topics in fish
physiology, ecology, and behavior. Fishery issues will be touched upon as time permits. The lab component includes
identification and classification of fishes using specimens from the university’s collections, as well as comparative dissections
of sharks and representative teleosts. PREREQUISITE: BIOL 2220. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3510
Bioethics
2 hrs. (2, 0)
Seminar course examines ethical questions that arise in the relationships among life sciences, biotechnology, medicine,
politics, law, philosophy, and theology. Topics and case studies are selected and discussed in terms of the ethical issues they
present. These issues include beginning of life, death and dying, human and animal testing, and environmental stewardship.
Applies to the Civil Discourse and Critical Reasoning component of the Liberal Arts.  PREREQUISITE:  Junior standing. SAME
AS: PUBH 3510. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3920 Integration of Faith and Science
2 hrs. (2, 0)
Seminar course featuring reading and discussion on topics common to science and Christianity. Topics include origins issues,
natural law, environmental stewardship, and the nature of the soul. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4050 Genetics
4 hrs. (4, 2)
Study of the principles of genetics, including Mendelian, molecular, microbial, developmental, and behavioral genetics, as
well as cytogenetics and genomics. Laboratory experiences range from classical to molecular procedures and concepts.
Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: BIOL 2240. OFFERED: Sem. I.
4070 Ecology and Evolutionary Biology
4 hrs. (3, 2)
Covers essential concepts and principles in ecology and evolutionary biology, including natural selection, genetic drift,
speciation, energy flow, nutrient cycling, and physiological and community ecology. The course has four main goals: the first
is to provide an overview of the current status of the science of ecology; the second is to provide some exposure to current
environmental concerns; the third is to engage in thoughtful, informed discussion of some of the controversies in modern
ecology, and the fourth is to expose students to some field methods. PREREQUISITE: BIOL "4050". OFFERED: Sem. I.
4120 Mammalian Physiology
4 hrs. (3, 3)
A study of the function and interrelationships of various tissues, organs, and organ systems, with emphasis on homeostatic
mechanisms. PREREQUISITE: BIOL 2240. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2024-25.
4210 Biochemistry I
4 hrs. (3, 3)
Introduction to fundamental principles of biochemistry. Lectures and project-oriented laboratories emphasize concepts of
macromolecular structure, aspects of enzymology, and intermediary metabolism. PREREQUISITE: BIOL 2240, CHEM 2220.
SAME AS: CHEM 4210. OFFERED: Sem. I.
4220 Biochemistry II
4 hrs. (3, 2)
Further discussion of particular metabolic pathways in animals and plants with an overall emphasis on control of metabolism
and regulation of pathways. PREREQUISITE: BIOL/CHEM 4210. SAME AS: CHEM 4220. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2023-24.
4310 Molecular Biochemistry and Genetics
4 hrs. (3, 4)
Emphasizes molecular and biotechnology aspects of the fields of biochemistry and genetics. This is a laboratory-intensive
course on techniques involved in biotechnology for the cloning and investigation of gene function, and is designed to train
students in the types of techniques used in the current biotechnology industry. EXPECTATION: BIOL/CHEM 4210 strongly
recommended. "PREREQUISITE: BIOL "4050". PREREQUISITE or COREQUISITE: CHEM "2220". OFFERED: Sem. II, 2024-25."

4650 Independent Study
1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Independently executed investigations, normally by students with upper-division standing. REPEAT: May be repeated; credit
not to exceed 12 hours.
4910 Science Seminar I
1 hr. (1, 0)
Techniques and practice of written and oral technical communication with respect to experimental or library research
projects. Required of all science majors. Both BIOL 4910 and 4920 must be completed to receive advanced writing
competency (writing-intensive) and speaking-intensive credit. PREREQUISITE: Science major. SAME AS: CHEM/PHYS 4910.
OFFERED: Sem. I.
4920 Science Seminar II
1 hr. (1, 0)
Techniques and practice of written and oral technical communication with respect to experimental or library research
projects. Required of all science majors. Both BIOL 4910 and 4920 must be completed to receive advanced writing
competency (writing-intensive) and speaking-intensive credit. EXPECTATION: "4910" Science Seminar I should be completed.
PREREQUISITE: Science major. SAME AS: CHEM/PHYS 4920. OFFERED: Sem. II.

ACCT COURSES

2010 Principles of Accounting I
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduces accounting principles and practice. Covers the accounting cycle, internal control and system design principles, and
financial statement preparation and interpretation. PREREQUISITE: MATH 1300 or 1400 or 2010. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2020 Principles of Accounting II
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Continues accounting principles and practice with emphasis on the use of accounting information by management and
external users. PREREQUISITE: ACCT 2010. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
3010 Intermediate Accounting I
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Focuses on financial statements presented to external users and the complexities of financial reporting in today’s business
environment. PREREQUISITE: ACCT 2010. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3020 Intermediate Accounting II
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Continues principles, practices, and theories used to provide financial information to external users. Includes research and
communication regarding issues in financial reporting, along with emphasis on the use of spreadsheets. PREREQUISITE:
ACCT 3010. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3110
Managerial Accounting
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Focuses on accounting methods that assist an organization with planning and control. Emphasis is placed on decision-making.
Topics include cost systems, cost allocation, budgeting, and variance analysis. PREREQUISITE: ACCT 2020. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3500 Accounting Information Systems
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Accounting information systems from a business perspective, including the organization and management of electronic
information, the design of effective internal controls, system life cycle issues, and financial reporting considerations. The
study and use of low- to mid-market accounting systems and their methods for processing information is an integral part of
this course. PREREQUISITE: Only open to accounting major and minors who have completed ACCT 2010. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3850 Practicum in Accounting
1-3 hrs. (arranged)
Students work with faculty consultants to plan and execute programs designed to integrate content in accounting in a
practical, service-oriented project. Students are responsible for successful implementation of defined projects and reporting
results. REPEAT: May be repeated; total credit not to exceed 4 hours. GRADE: CR/NC. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
3860 Volunteer Income Tax Assistance Practicum
1 hr. (arranged)
Provides professional preparation and a service-learning opportunity in the preparation of federal and state income tax
returns. REPEAT: May be repeated. GRADE: CR/NC. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4020 Federal Income Tax
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines Internal Revenue Code and Treasury regulations with respect to taxation of individuals. Includes emphasis on tax
research, planning, and compliance. PREREQUISITE: ACCT 2020. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4050 Advanced Federal Income Taxation
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Federal income taxation of corporations, partnerships, and estates and trusts. Students will develop and enhance tax research
skills. PREREQUISITE: ACCT 2020. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4100 Advanced Financial Accounting
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Advanced accounting issues related to business combinations, consolidated financial statements, intercompany transactions,
multinational accounting, segment and interim reporting, partnership accounting, and government/ not-for-profit
accounting. PREREQUISITE: ACCT 3020. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4800 Accounting Internship
1-6 hrs. (arranged)
With the approval of the Falls School of Business faculty and a cooperating business enterprise, the student studies under the
supervision of an experienced, practicing professional. REPEAT: May be repeated up to 6 hours. CONSENT: Instructor.
PREREQUISITE: ACCT 3010. GRADE: CR/NC. OFFERED: Sem. I, II; Summer.
4850 Practicum in CPA Exam Preparation
1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Preparation in study for the CPA exam. One credit per section of the Uniform CPA Examination. PREREQUISITE: Senior
standing. GRADE: CR/NC. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
4860 Practicum in CMA Exam Preparation
1-2 hrs. (arranged)
Preparation in study for the CMA exam. One credit per section of the CMA Examination. PREREQUISITE: Senior standing.
GRADE: CR/NC. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
4900 Professional Ethics for Accountants
1 hr. (1, 0)
A study of ethics for the accounting profession, with attention both to law and personal choice. Applies to liberal arts writing-
intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: Junior Standing. OFFERED: Sem. I.

BSNS COURSES
1050 Business as a Profession
2 hrs. (2, 0)
The entry course for Falls School of Business majors. Examines the multiple roles and responsibilities of business
organizations in a capitalistic democracy, introduces the various functions of business, and explores the implications of
viewing business as a calling and/or vocation. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2310 Business Analytics
3 hrs. (3,0)
Provides an introduction in business-based problem-solving using computer applications. The core topics include
spreadsheet modeling and data analysis using visualization techniques. Spreadsheet applications will emphasize
formulas and functions and data visualization will focus on tools and analysis. Business problems and issues will be used
to provide students with hands-on experience in data visualization and spreadsheet calculations. Students will be
introduced to design principles for creating meaningful displays of quantitative and qualitative data to facilitate
managerial decision-making. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2450 Data Analysis and Decision-Making for Business
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Designed to provide students with a basic understanding of introductory statistics and econometrics in a business context and
to equip them with the knowledge and skills to quantitatively analyze and interpret data using data analysis software in
business decision-making. Major topics covered include descriptive and inferential statistics, probability distributions, sample
distributions, estimation, hypothesis testing, regression analysis, and time-series forecasting. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2510 Principles of Finance
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Provides overview of the financial management of the business enterprise, with emphasis on ways financial managers create
value. Decision-making skills relying on discounted cash-flow techniques, capital budgeting, and the fundamentals of security
pricing are presented. PREREQUISITE: ACCT 2010. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2710 Principles of Management
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Managerial principles and problems of conducting a business enterprise. Topics include management philosophy, objectives,
functions performed by management, and the significance of management in relation to other activities. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2810 Principles of Marketing
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Studies ways organizations of all sizes and types (including nonprofit) go about finding, getting, and keeping customers. Deals
with understanding customers’ needs, hopes, wants, dreams, habits, and motivations. Examines ways organizations try to
meet those needs and wants through their marketing mix strategies while operating within a dynamic, competitive, and
increasingly global environment. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
3100 Opportunity Identification and Feasibility
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Focuses on developing ideas for new businesses. Utilizes group exercises and case studies to help students determine
which ideas might result in feasible businesses. Students select a business idea and write a feasibility plan, the first step in
developing a detailed business plan. This plan will determine if the idea has profit potential. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3120 Global Business
3 hrs. (3, 0)
The importance of thinking globally and understanding the legal, technological, and economic differences that affect business
practice are explored through readings and projects. The focus is on the global changes impacting national sovereignty,
regionalization, and the balance of economic and political power. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement.
OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
3130
Sport Marketing
3 hrs. (3, 0)
The sport industry has become one of the most important and influential institutions in our society. Provides students the
opportunity to study and experience the application of marketing principles and processes in the sport industry. The course
emphasizes experiential learning with a focus on selling the sports/entertainment experience. PREREQUISITE: BSNS 2810.
OFFERED: Sem. I.
3150
Financial Planning
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Study of money management and comprehensive financial-planning skills for immediate and long-range goals of individuals
and families. Areas of study include values identification, career planning, consumerism, tax strategies, investments,
retirement, and estate planning. Open to all students. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
3210 Buyer/Seller Relations
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Emphasis on essential qualities, right mental attitudes, and emotional control, as well as good selling skills necessary to sell
self, services, and products. Applies to liberal arts speaking-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: BSNS 2810. OFFERED:
Sem. I.

3220 Consumer Behavior
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Develops awareness of various aspects of consumer motivation and behavior. Provides understanding of influences of
business and environment and ways each affects consumer purchase decisions. PREREQUISITE: BSNS 2810. OFFERED:
Sem. I.
3230
Human Resource Management
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Emphasizes human resource policies and practices. Topics include legal aspects of human resources, recruitment and
selection, training and development, career planning and management, compensation and benefits, employee relations,
discipline, and counseling. PREREQUISITE: BSNS 2710. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3240 Operations Management
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Emphasis is on the challenges of operations in all forms of organizations. Topics include process design, layout strategies,
location decisions, inventory control, forecasting, human resource and material requirements planning. Utilizing a problem-
solving focus as a basis for decision-making is a prime objective. "PREREQUISITE:  BSNS 2710; BSNS 2450 or MATH 2120 or
PSYC 2440. OFFERED: Sem. II."
3270
Project Management
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduces the principles and techniques of project management. Topics include leadership and management skills such as
motivation, communication, team building, project selection and initiation, resource planning, implementation, and project
control. Critical issues such as time, cost, and performance parameters will be analyzed from organizational, people, and
resource perspectives. Tools such as statement of work, CPM/PERT, work breakdown structure, and linear responsibility
chart will be covered. There will be an opportunity to define and plan simulated projects, create work breakdown structures,
assign resources, develop schedules, and practice the essential elements of project control through assignments and an
experiential project." PREREQUISITE: BSNS 2710; BSNS 2450 MATH 2120 or PSYC 2440.".
3320
Legal Aspects of the Music Business
2 hrs. (2, 0)
Selected topics in copyright management, music licensing, and publishing contracts. PREREQUISITE: MUBS 2010, 2020.
SAME AS: MUBS 3310. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3330
Music Marketing
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Students will identify the marketing mix tools that are available for a music marketer to use when developing a music brand
and affiliate marketing plan. Students will learn the theoretical and practical mechanisms involved in understanding the
needs, wants and classifications of music consumption. Students will gain an appreciation of how internal competencies
and the external environment impact the execution of music marketing plans. Applies to liberal arts writing and speaking-
intensive requirements. PREREQUISITE: MUBS 2010, 2020. SAME AS: MUBS 3350. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3350
Corporate Finance
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Studies specific financial cases and the need for ethics in finance within a system of well-established laws and industry
regulation. Sample topics could include the cost of capital, capital structure, capital budgeting, dividend policy, financial
analysis and forecasting, sales and lending practices, socially responsible investing, insider trading, the ethics of bankruptcy,
and hostile takeovers. PREREQUISITE: BSNS 2510. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3360 Beyond Talent: Entrepreneurship
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Allows students to take an exploratory journey into the understanding of their own talent and identity management through
the research of established/professionals, personal career reflective writing, and the development of a ‘Professional
Performance’ journal, evidencing existing or planned career activities. All of these undertakings will allow the student to
better comprehend the importance of personal branding. PREREQUISITE: Senior status.
3390 Advanced Descriptive Analytics
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Descriptive analytics is a type of data analytics that analyzes historical data to give an account of what has happened.
Designed to provide students with the ability to use descriptive analytics in business decision-making. Students will be
equipped with the knowledge to use various statistical techniques with a focus on data visualization to identify historical
trends and relationships in business. PREREQUISITE: BSNS 2450.
3400 Digital Marketing
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines use and integration of digital technologies in the business setting. Focus will be on how technology can enhance the
business value chain through knowledge management, customer relationship management, and supply chain management.
Also examines eCommerce fundamentals, including the online order process and fulfillment, online service, and related
issues. OFFERED: Sem. I.

3420 Business Law
3 hrs. (3, 0)
The nature and historical development of the U.S. legal system, court structure, and legal procedure. Law of contracts,
sales, agency, and corporations. Valuable for non-business majors as well as business majors. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
3510
Supply Chain Management
3 hrs. (3, 0)
The study of the issues associated with making goods and services available for use or consumption. Examines activities,
organizations, and tools — such as logistics and retailing — involved in delivering the right product to the right place at the
right time, quantity, quality, and price. PREREQUISITE: BSNS 2810. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3550
Integrated Branding and Promotion I
3 hrs. (3, 0)
The course gives students the opportunity to explore and experience the various forms of promotion that are part
of integrated marketing communications (IMC). Consideration is given to communications theory, as it relates to marketing
communications. Students will appreciate how psychology and social identity relates to marketing communications. Finally,
students will complete a critical marketing communications assessment of the promotional tools and techniques used in a
practical case scenario. PREREQUISITE: BSNS 2810 or BSNS 330. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3850 Practicum in Business
1-3 hrs. (arranged)
Students work with faculty consultants in planning and executing programs to integrate content in business in a practical,
service-oriented project. Students are responsible for reporting results. REPEAT: May be repeated; total credit not to exceed
4 hours. GRADE: CR/NC. OFFERED: Sem. I, II; Summer.
4010 Organizational Behavior and Theory
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Stresses behavior in relation to organizational theories, knowledge, and the application of theories related to individual,
group, and organizational performance. Emphasis on understanding the managerial process from a behavioral perspective.
PREREQUISITE: BSNS 2710. SAME AS: PSYC 3220. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4050 Quality Systems and Control
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Develops a foundational level of awareness, the fundamental body of knowledge, and a set of critical skills in order to
optimize and/or improve any given processes. Topics include statistical process control (SPC), statistical quality control (SQC),
Pareto analysis, root cause analysis, flowcharting, affinity sorting, and formalized quality applications such as 6-sigma and
lean thinking. Utilizing a problem-solving focus as a basis for decision-making is a prime objective. Taught in lecture and
seminar format. Offers theoretical foundations, practical application, and an opportunity for self-assessment through
experiential project application using text, journal readings, and case studies. "PREREQUISITE: BSNS 2710; BSNS 2450 or
MATH 2120 or PSYC 2440.".
4110 Marketing Research
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Research methodology and application of research to solve marketing problems. "PREREQUISITE: BSNS "2810" or BSNS "3330",
BSNS 2450 or MATH 2120 or PSYC 2440.". OFFERED: Sem. I.
4120 International Management
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines challenges facing managers competing in a global economy. Uses case studies to address ways firms of all sizes
become and remain competitive in an international environment, how businesses establish and conduct international
transactions, and what managers must know to be effective in the international marketplace. PREREQUISITE: BSNS 2710.
OFFERED: Sem. II.
4150 Investments
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines the organization and function of securities markets, valuation of securities, relationship of risk to required rates of
return, and portfolio construction. This is achieved by focusing on concepts and strategies applicable to individual investors
and by using the tools employed by professional portfolio managers. PREREQUISITE: BSNS 2510. OFFERED: Sem. I.
4160 Portfolio Management
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines diversification, asset allocation, risk management, performance evaluation, and socially responsible investing.
Additionally, the course content will be applied with students making specific investment recommendations for the student-
managed Raven Investment Fund. REPEAT: May be repeated once. PREREQUISITE: BSNS 4150. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4170 International Trade and Finance
3 hrs. (3, 0)
A survey of the analytical and institutional aspects of international trade and finance. The historical and contextual elements
are the foundation for the examination of current theoretical and empirical approaches to international economic and
financial relations. Major areas of emphasis include international finance, international trade, and regional economic
integration. Special attention is also given to the issues of globalization and the problems of economic development.
CONSENT: Instructor. OFFERED: At IBI.

4240 Topics in Business and Economics
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Allows for subjects pertinent and/or current in nature to be explored. PREREQUISITE: Varies depending on topic.
REPEAT: May be repeated as long as the topic is different. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
4250 Global Marketing
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Elements of an international marketing plan are discussed and developed, including the cultural environment of global
markets, assessing global market opportunities through consumer behavior research, global marketing strategies for the
international marketing mix, and implementation of a global marketing strategy. Case studies will be used to illustrate
theoretical concepts, and students will develop their own international marketing plan for a product or service.
PREREQUISITE: BSNS 2810. OFFERED: Sem. II; Summer (at IBI).
4260 Estate Planning
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines the components of the estate planning process.  Examines topics related to estate planning including: gift and
estate taxes, trusts, charitable giving, life insurance, probate, and generation-skipping transfers.
4310 Business Plan Development
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Immerses the student in the dynamics of planning, establishing, and growing a new business. Focuses on the development
of a business plan that identifies a market need, evaluates the financial viability of the venture, and organizes the resources
to launch the business. Taught in a seminar format using both the analysis of cases and the evaluation of business plans.
PREREQUISITE: BSNS 2710, 2810 or BSNS 3330; ACCT 2010. OFFERED: Sem. I.
4350 Retirement Planning and Employee Benefits
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Study of the retirement planning process including needs analysis, qualified plans, and other regulatory needs. Also
examines the role of social programs in the planning process. Retirement income and distribution strategies, rules, and
taxation will be explored.
4330 Marketing Management
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Students learn to identify and explain important concepts of marketing management and apply them to practical situations.
Students become acquainted with the roles, responsibilities, and tools of the marketing manager. Students also become
familiar with developing marketing plans, feasibility studies, and planning and executing marketing strategies.
PREREQUISITE: BSNS 2810 or BSNS 3330; senior standing. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4360 Sport Sponsorship and Sales
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Analyzes and develops skills essential to effectively build sales and revenue within a sports business. Focus on professional
selling and communication processes successful in the realm of sports products and services. Topics include presentation
methods, persuasion, handling objections, finding solutions, developing relationships, and serving clients and customers.
Also examines the growing presence of corporate sponsorship in non-sports organizations. Emphasis on effective methods
used to plan, price, organize, acquire, implement, measure, and evaluate sponsorships, including the development of a
corporate sponsorship plan. PREREQUISITE: BSNS 2810, 3130. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4390 Advanced Predictive Analytics
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Predictive analytics is a type of data analytics that examines historical data to make predictions about possible future
outcomes. Designed to provide students with the ability to use predictive analytics in business decision-making. Students will
be equipped with the knowledge to use various statistical techniques with a focus on regression analysis to forecast potential
scenarios that can help make strategic business decisions. PREREQUISITE: BSNS 2450.
4400 Social Media
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Explores current trends in social media marketing. There is a focus on brands that are successfully marketing themselves
across social networking platforms and the tools they are using for communication, customer retention, branding,
marketing, market research, and interacting with customers and clients. Topics also include privacy and best practices.
Students examine the process of engagement and co-creation of content as well as other trends in analytics and
platforms. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4450 Global Business Strategy
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Integrates field experiences and presentations by guest faculty and practitioners in the area of international business
management with reading and academic work that includes recent developments and literature in this field. Students
will be expected to prepare analytical reports on the various firms and institutions visited on the field seminar. Major
topics include the role of the multinational firm in the global economy, international and global business strategy, and
cultural adaptation and organizational behavior in the global firm. Ethical values and issues in global management will
also be discussed. CONSENT: Instructor. OFFERED: At IBI.

4480 Leadership
3 hrs. (3, 0)
To develop knowledge and critical understanding of the main theoretical concepts, current research and approaches to
leadership in organizations and at different organizational levels, and to identify those most valuable to management in a
modern global and ethical context. Will lead to an understanding of the social influence processes and dynamics of power
and politics in organizations. Applies to liberal arts speaking-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: BSNS 2710, junior
class standing. OFFERED: Sem. I.
4500 Strategic Management
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Study of administrative policy and strategy in organizations. Emphasis on the integration and inter-relationships of functional
business areas for the purpose of a broad perspective (accounting, economics, finance, marketing, and management).
Students evaluate strategy formulation and decision-making situations from top management perspectives. Through the use
of case studies, addresses a variety of both organizational structures and sizes." PREREQUISITE: BSNS 2510, 2710, 2810 or
3330; ACCT 2020; senior standing. OFFERED: Sem. I, II. "
4510 Financial Plan Development
3 hrs. (3, 0)
The application of the financial planning process to effectively develop, communicate, critique financial plans. Examines
the CFP Board of Code Ethics and Standards of Conduct and their role in the financial planning process. PREREQUISITE:
BSNS 3150, ACCT 4020, BSNS 4150, BSNS 4260, and BSNS 4350.
4550 Integrated Branding and Promotion II
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Allows students to carry through prior knowledge regarding their understanding of integrated marketing communications
(IMC) to develop a comprehension and appreciation of the strategic planning processes that contribute to the development
of an effective marketing communications plan. Consequently, students will gain knowledge about the components of an
effective framework for IMC plans. Students will also complete a critical marketing communications plan assessment
through a practical case scenario. PREREQUISITE: BSNS 3550. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4560 Business of Game-Day Experience
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Covers various aspects in administrative procedures, operational techniques, hospitality, public relations, marketing, and
technical services of the fan experience on game days through sponsorship of events. Issues related to both safety, security,
and public policy in planning, financing, and operating a sports event will also be addressed. PREREQUISITE: BSNS 2810,
3130, 4360. OFFERED: Sem. I.
4800 Business Internship
1-4 hrs. (arranged)
With approval of the Falls School of Business faculty and a cooperating business enterprise, students study under the
supervision of experienced executives. EXPECTATION: 30 hours completed toward a business major. CONSENT: Instructor.
REPEAT: May be repeated. GRADE: CR/NC. OFFERED: Sem. I, II; Summer.
4810 Internship in Music Business
1-3 hrs. (arranged)
In-depth experience in selected areas of the music industry tailored to the ability and needs of the individual student.
REPEAT: May be repeated up to 4 hours. PREREQUISITE: MUBS 2010, 2020. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
4910 Senior Seminar in Business
2 hrs. (2, 0)
Capstone course is designed to encourage students to seriously consider their individual responsibilities to the organization
and to society. The Christian call to be “salt and light” is explored in an organizational context. Applies to liberal arts writing-
intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: Senior standing. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.

ECON COURSES
2010 Principles of Macroeconomics
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Provides students with a basic understanding of contemporary macroeconomic theories and principles. Emphasis is placed on
the analysis of economic growth and fluctuation, macroeconomic indicators, and macroeconomic policies. PREREQUISITE:
Sophomore standing. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2020 Principles of Microeconomics
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Provides students with a basic understanding of contemporary microeconomic theories and principles that explains how
market forces determine an equilibrium in a market economy and that examines the choice and behavior of individual
economic units, such as consumers and producers. PREREQUISITE: Sophomore standing. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3020 Intermediate Microeconomics
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Provides a deeper understanding of contemporary microeconomics theories and principles and to teach how to use scientific
models to understand the microeconomic choices of economic agents. PREREQUISITE: ECON 2010, 2020; MATH 1400.
OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3110
Public Sector Economics
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Provides students with a basic understanding of the primary functions of government as a public economic agent collecting
resources from its citizens and using the collected resources to improve their welfare. Emphasis is placed on the impact of the
government's fiscal and public economic policy on the efficient allocation of resources and the distribution of income in the
economy. PREREQUISITE: ECON 2010 or ECON 2020. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3210 International Economics
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Provides students with a basic understanding of contemporary international economic principles and theories. Emphasis is
placed on the analysis of international trade and international finance that deal with how goods, services, factors, and money
move across national borders and how they affect national and international economies. PREREQUISITE: ECON 2010 or
ECON 2020. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3250
Comparative Economic Systems
3 hrs. (3, 0)
A survey of the major economic systems, including the underlying ideological foundations and institutional arrangements.
The major theoretical aspects of various types of systems are covered in terms of political economy and their central
organizational features. Special attention is given to changes and developments in the former Soviet Union and Eastern
Europe. The European Union is covered in depth, along with the major Asian economies of China and Japan. CONSENT:
Instructor. OFFERED: At International Business Institute.
3410 Money, Banking, and Financial Markets
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Provides students with a basic understanding of banking, the financial system, the role of central banks, and monetary policy
from a macroeconomic point of view. Emphasis is placed on the application of macroeconomic principles to understand
money, banking, and the financial system. PREREQUISITE: ECON 2010 or ECON 2020. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3850 Practicum in Economics
1-3 hrs. (arranged)
Students work with faculty consultants in planning and executing programs to integrate content in economics in a practical,
service-oriented project. Students are responsible for successful implementation of defined projects and reporting results.
REPEAT: May be repeated; total credit not to exceed 4 hours. GRADE: CR/NC. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
4020 Topics in Contemporary Economics and Finance
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Allows for subjects pertinent and/or current in nature to be explored. PREREQUISITE: Varies depending on topic. REPEAT:
May be repeated as long as the topic is different. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.

LEAD COURSES
1000 Personal and Professional Discovery
1 hr. (1, 0)
Designed to increase the student’s success in the professional arena by assisting the student in obtaining the emotional
intelligence skills necessary to reach his/her potential. Topics include coping with stress, adapting to change, developing
interpersonal relationships and intrapersonal skills, and recognizing how emotional intelligence affects personal and
professional success and leadership skills.
1050 Accounting Fundamentals
2 hrs. (2, 0)
A prerequisite to Managerial Accounting (LEAD 3300) and Managerial Finance (LEAD 3350). Offers basic information on
financial statements resulting from the accounting processes that are used by owners, investors, and employees. Effective
accounting demands an understanding of accounting terms. Will help students become informed users of accounting
information.
1100 Introduction to Business Environments
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduces functional areas of business, tracing the evolution of business forms, the role of government and society,
relationships between administrators and employees, ethical issues, and globalization of world markets.
1200 Management Foundations
3 hrs. (3, 0)
A study of management as it pertains to the dynamics of leadership, strategic planning, and controlling of resources.
2200 Issues in Human Resource Management
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Focuses upon the primary functions of human resources management, increasing the effectiveness and contributions of
employees in the attainment of organizational goals and objectives. Topics include strategic planning, organizational goals,
job descriptions and evaluations, human resources selection techniques, and labor/employee relations.
2300 Social Problems and Their Impact on the Workplace
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Presents an analysis of major contemporary social problems, especially in the United States. Particular attention is given to
the problems of poverty, racism, sexism, drug and alcohol abuse, and illiteracy, and their impact on the contemporary
workplace. Consideration is given to diverse sociological perspectives with regard to these problems and their causes,
consequences, and solutions.
2400 Organization Ethics
3 hrs. (3, 0)
This study in business ethics provides instruction in systematically applying standard moral and ethical approaches in
analyzing issues, problems, and cases.
2410 Global Issues
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Helps the adult learner acquire knowledge and become aware of the increasing interdependence of the world and the global
nature of contemporary issues. Essentially seeks to help adult learners to think beyond their immediate surroundings and see
themselves as part of a larger community.
2590 Management Foundations Capstone
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Offers a discussion of selected topics of current issues in management. There will be a written and oral presentation of a
management project involving the application of management concepts and principles. CONSENT: Departmental permission
required.
3000 Professional Development and Applied Ethics
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduces students to personal and professional development through an on-going process by which an individual can begin
to strategically identify their distinctive value to self and to others. Encompasses various theoretical, conceptual and
emerging practical frameworks of ethical personal and professional development today, in an effort to develop confident,
compassionate, and professional difference-making leaders. Students will discover, develop, define and communicate their
unique purpose through their personal and professional brand.
3100 Introduction to Information Systems and Analysis of Data
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduces students to information systems and the analysis of data. Contemporary information systems and how they add
value at the individual level and at the global, organizational level. Students will focus on the key components of information
systems: people, hardware, data, and network technologies. Students will develop a business application using database,
spreadsheet, and web development tools.
3200 Issues in Management
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Students examine management control functions, strategic planning, and organizational structure and design. Also examined
are motivational theory and its application to individual and group functioning in work and home situations. Leadership styles
related to particular circumstances are analyzed. Negotiation concepts and skills are covered through reading and class
practice, with an analysis of the effect on productivity.


3220 Leadership in Nonprofits
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Designed to further the professional development of leaders in the non-profit sector. Students will gain a richer
understanding of how to integrate organizational mission with economic strategy and the importance of developing a strong
network with a diverse array of non-profit leaders. Learners will form a personal plan of action for leading a non-profit that
addresses key organizational and strategic challenges.
3240 Culture and Gender in Leadership
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Intended to help learners better understand the challenges women face as they obtain and sustain leadership roles within
society today. Learners will examine how women have gained access to powerful leadership positions; why men have more
access than women; and how, as current and future leaders, both males and females can eliminate barriers within their own
areas of influence that discourage access for women in leadership.
3260 Conflict Resolution
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduces students to conflict resolution through an ongoing process by which an individual can begin to understand the
various types of conflict and comprehend how to attempt to resolve conflict. Encompasses various theoretical, conceptual
and emerging practical frameworks of conflict resolution today. Designed to develop confident, compassionate, and
professional difference-making leaders. Students will discover, develop, and confidently engage with critical issues related
conflict resolution in the context of their own unique identity.
3280 Project Management
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Discusses the factors necessary for successful project management, including concepts, needs identification, project
manager, teams, project communications, project planning and scheduling, control and cost performance. Project
management software tools will also be utilized as part of the course.
3300 Managerial Accounting
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Presents the financial tools available to the manager in decision-making. It includes a study of income statements, balance
sheets, cash flow budgets, changes in financial position, and ratio analysis. Emphasis is on reading and understanding
accounting and financial documents rather than on their preparation.
3350
Managerial Finance
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Focuses on the areas of corporate finance needed by adult learners, even if they are not planning a finance career. The study
of finance provides a number of tools and reports that aid in determining which long-term investments to make, where the
financing will come from, and how to manage collecting from customers and paying suppliers. Capital budgeting, capital
structure, and working capital management will be studied in detail.
3400 Managerial Economics
3 hrs. (3, 0)
An analysis of the principles of economics necessary to equip managers and supervisors for effective decision-making and
leadership. Specific economic concepts will be applied to problem-solving in the manager’s workplace.
3500 Managerial Marketing
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Principles of marketing that need to be understood by managers in all areas in order to develop and utilize effective marketing
practices are examined. Concepts of our global economy, including major social, psychological, and political influences, will be
explored and their marketing implications considered from a manager’s perspective.
3510
Buyer Behavior
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Adult learners will be exposed to numerous theories from psychology, sociology, economics, education, and marketing to
explain why and how consumers buy the products and services that they do. Buyer behavior will be integrated into the large
discipline marketing to illustrate the marketing concept and marketing orientation of putting the customer first.
3550
Legal Environments of Business
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Prepares students to evaluate the legal risks associated with business activity. Students will study topics including the legal
system, alternative dispute resolution, the trial process, contracts, tort law, real property, enterprise liability, product liability,
international law, business risks, intellectual property, and legal forms of business.
3570
Developing a Mentoring Culture
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Attempts to help individuals within organizations of every type to build a framework that supports and sustains organizational
mentoring. Peer mentoring, mentoring forums, and team mentoring are becoming common-place in organizations and
today’s leader needs to be knowledgeable of the process and reasoning behind it.
4000 Group and Organizational Dynamics
3 hrs. (3, 0)
A study of group behavior and how group functioning impacts organization effectiveness, with emphasis on decision-making
and conflict resolution. Students develop strategies for efficient and productive group management and determine which
tasks are best handled within a group setting.

4100 Communicating Within Organizations
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Investigates the role of communication in creating a productive organizational environment. Aids students in developing and
strengthening communication skills by focusing on interpersonal, group, and presentation skills.
4200 A Systems Approach to Organizational Change
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Students examine the formal and informal functions of organizations and analyze an agency or organization based on a
systems model. Students will also analyze and solve organizational problems using a step-by-step method. This analysis will
be applied to students’ work-related research projects.
4300 Strategic Planning
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduces students to various management planning models and techniques and applies these to business cases. Stresses
the concepts of strategic planning and strategic management.
4400 Personal Values and Organizational Ethics
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Several major ethical theories will be reviewed. Students examine personal values through reading and workplace analysis to
formulate management accountability, human rights, and a reasonable lifestyle in the contemporary world.
4500 Service Leadership
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Helps learners implement concepts of Robert Greenleaf’s servant leadership as vital in the workplace. An understanding of
service leadership empowers leaders as they implement concepts of being a leader who is servant first. Learners will become
more competent, capable and compassionate leaders as they learn to help others while leading.
4550 Diversity and Intercultural Humility
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Helps students understand their own values and beliefs and those of others in the context of a larger, complex world.
Encompasses various theoretical, conceptual and emerging practical frameworks of diversity and intercultural understanding.
Designed to develop leaders who have the ability to understand, engage and integrate people of different backgrounds and
worldviews – on many fronts – with a servant leader approach. Students will explore their ability to synthesize their leadership
skills in building sustainable organizations that leverage diversity, promote inclusion, and enable productive collaboration in
an increasingly cross-cultural context.
4900 Seminar in Ethics and Leadership
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Senior capstone course designed to encourage students to seriously consider their individual responsibilities to the
organization and to society. Students will develop a better understanding for their natural leadership style and will be
presented strategies to improve their leadership effectiveness. Students should take this class during their final semester.
4910 Professional Seminar
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Helps learners to be professionally ready, whether re-entering the job market or bettering a career. Includes the completion of
a professional portfolio comprised of the learner’s professional picture, résumé, letters of recommendation, leadership
philosophy, strengths testing results, personal mission statement, and final review of a service project.
4990 Action Research Project
3 hrs. (3, 0)
A major research effort designed to enhance knowledge in an area related to one’s work or community, to provide research
skills, and to assist in effective decision-making. Statistical analysis concepts and methods assist the student in identifying a
problem area, collecting data, proposing a solution and measuring results. Each student gives an oral report of project
findings. Applies to both liberal arts writing-intensive and speaking-intensive requirements. CONSENT: Departmental
permission required.

BIBL COURSES
2000 Introduction to the Bible
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Historical and literary study of the Hebrew Bible and the New Testament as Scripture. Introductory course surveying historical
contexts, varieties of literature, and development and expression of theology of these writings. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2050 Methods in Biblical Exegesis
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduction to methods, resources, and practice of exegesis of both the Hebrew Bible and the New Testament. Practical
application of current exegetical methodologies to biblical texts. Biblical languages not required. EXPECTATION: ENGL 1120.
PREREQUISITE: BIBL 2000. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2110 Beginning Hebrew I
4 hrs. (4, 0)
Study of the basic principles of biblical Hebrew grammar and syntax, with reading and writing exercises with an emphasis on
understanding the culture of the text’s production and reception. Acquisition of a basic vocabulary of 150-200 words is
expected. BIBL "2110" and BIBL "2120" together fulfill liberal arts requirement for Global and Intercultural Ways of Knowing:
Ancient Languages. OFFERED: Summer.
2120 Beginning Hebrew II
4 hrs. (4, 0)
Continuation of Beginning Hebrew I. Study of biblical Hebrew grammar and syntax, with reading and translation of selected
narrative passages and an emphasis on understanding the culture of the text’s production and reception. Second-year Hebrew
is strongly recommended after this course for facility in the Hebrew text of the Hebrew Bible. BIBL "2110" and BIBL "2120" together
fulfill liberal arts requirement for Global and Intercultural Ways of Knowing: Ancient Languages. PREREQUISITE: BIBL "2110" or
equivalent. OFFERED: Summer.
2150 Theological Interpretation of the Bible
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Study of the approach to biblical interpretation known as “theological interpretation,” including its history and the context for
its resurgence, major voices in its discourse, and reflection on its contemporary practice. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
2210 Beginning Greek I
4 hrs. (4, 0)
Basic principles of grammar, with reading and writing exercises. Acquisition of basic vocabulary. Reading in selected passages
with an emphasis on understanding the culture of the text’s production and reception. Foundational for any further work in
Greek (biblical or classical). BIBL "2210" and BIBL "2220" together fulfill liberal arts requirement for Global and Intercultural Ways
of Knowing: Ancient Languages. OFFERED: Sem. I.

2220 Beginning Greek II
4 hrs. (4, 0)
Continuation of Beginning Greek I. Basic principles of grammar, with reading and writing exercises. Acquisition of basic
vocabulary. Reading in selected passages. Foundational for any further work in Greek (biblical or classical). BIBL "2210" and
BIBL "2220" together fulfill liberal arts requirement for Global and Intercultural Ways of Knowing: Ancient Languages.
PREREQUISITE: BIBL 2210 or equivalent. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2900 Honors Seminar
2-4 hrs. (arranged)
CONSENT: Department chair. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3000 History of Biblical Interpretation
3 hrs. (3, 0)
A historically based study of the ways in which Christians have interpreted the Bible. Considers the diversity of Christian
interpretation as well as the development of Christianity as the biblical text was interpreted over time. Applies to liberal arts
writing-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: BIBL 2000; upper-division standing. SAME AS: RLGN 3000. OFFERED: With
sufficient demand.
3110
Intermediate Hebrew
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Consists of reading selected passages of the Hebrew Bible for the purpose of acquiring a large vocabulary and general facility
in interpretation of Hebrew texts. PREREQUISITE: BIBL 2120. OFFERED: Sem. I (with sufficient demand).
3120 Hebrew Exegesis
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Continuation of reading of selected passages of the Hebrew Bible, with special attention given to exegesis. The student will
also research and write a major exegetical study of a Hebrew Bible passage, based on the Hebrew text. PREREQUISITE: BIBL
3110. OFFERED: Sem. II (with sufficient demand).
3210 Advanced Greek I
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Translation of New Testament and other selected Hellenistic texts. Emphasis on grammar review and study of syntax to
introduce students to basic principles of exegesis. PREREQUISITE: BIBL 2220. OFFERED: Sem. I (with sufficient demand).
3220 Advanced Greek II
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Continuation of BIBL 3210. Translation of New Testament and Hellenistic texts. May also include Greek texts from the
classical period. Emphasis on more extensive application of principles of exegesis. PREREQUISITE: BIBL 3210. OFFERED:
Sem. II (with sufficient demand).
3310
Archaeological History of the Ancient Near East
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Principles, problems, and contributions of archaeology as related to ancient civilizations from Sumer to fall of Rome.
OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
334x The Gospels
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Study of the background of the Gospels and current exegesis of specific Gospels, rotating among the individual synoptic
Gospels and the Gospel of John. PREREQUISITE: BIBL 2000, 2050; RLGN 2150. REPEAT: May be repeated under a different
number.
3341  Matthew
3 hrs. (3, 0)
3342  Mark
3 hrs. (3, 0)
3344  John
3 hrs. (3, 0)
3345  Luke
3 hrs. (3, 0)
335x
Pauline Letters
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Study of the background, purpose, content, teachings, and exegesis of individual letters or meaningful clusters of letters.
PREREQUISITE: BIBL 2000, 2050; RLGN 2150. REPEAT: May be repeated under a different number.
3351  Romans
3 hrs. (3, 0)
3352  I/II Corinthians
3 hrs. (3, 0)
3353  I/II Thessalonians
3 hrs. (3, 0)
3354  Galatians
3 hrs. (3, 0)
3355  Prison Letters
3 hrs. (3, 0)
3356  Pastorals
3 hrs. (3, 0)
336x General Writings
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Study of the New Testament writings including the general letters and Acts, exploring the background, purpose, and current
exegesis of single books or meaningful clusters. PREREQUISITE: BIBL 2000, 2050; RLGN 2150. REPEAT: May be repeated
under a different number.
3361  James/Peter/Jude
3 hrs. (3, 0)
3362  Acts of the Apostles
3 hrs. (3, 0)
3363  Hebrews
3 hrs. (3, 0)
3364  Johannine Literature
3 hrs. (3, 0)

BIBL (cont.)
337x
The Pentateuch
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Study of the books of the Pentateuch in terms of the background, setting, formation, and current exegesis of the individual
books or as a meaningful cluster. PREREQUISITE: BIBL 2000, 2050; RLGN 2150. REPEAT: May be repeated under a different
number.
3371  Genesis
3 hrs. (3, 0)
3372  Exodus
3 hrs. (3, 0)
3373  Deuteronomy
3 hrs. (3, 0)
338x Former and Latter Prophets
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Rise, development, and significance of prophecy in the Hebrew Bible with study of individual prophetic books or meaningful
clusters of books regarding background, purpose, and current exegesis. PREREQUISITE: BIBL 2000, 2050; RLGN 2150.
REPEAT: May be repeated under a different number.
3381  Isaiah/Jeremiah/Ezekiel
3 hrs. (3, 0)
3382  Hosea/Amos
3 hrs. (3, 0)
3383  Former Prophets: 1-2 Kings
3 hrs. (3, 0)
3384  Isaiah
3 hrs. (3, 0)
3385  Former Prophets: 1-2 Samuel
3 hrs. (3, 0)
3386  Former Prophets: Joshua/Judges
3 hrs. (3, 0)
339x Hebrew Bible Writings
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Study of the writings section of the Hebrew Bible examining individual books or meaningful clusters regarding background,
purpose, content, and interpretation. PREREQUISITE: BIBL 2000, 2050; RLGN 2150. REPEAT: May be repeated under a
different number.
3391  Psalms
3 hrs. (3, 0)
3392  Wisdom Literature
3 hrs. (3, 0)
3393  Ecclesiastes
3 hrs. (3, 0)
3394  Esther/Daniel
3 hrs. (3, 0)
3395  Ezra/Nehemiah
3 hrs. (3, 0)
3410 Images of Jesus Then and Now
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examination of the New Testament’s images of Jesus and their transformations in different cultures. Emphasis is upon how
different images of Jesus entail corresponding lifestyles and worldviews. Comparisons of images of Jesus with selected focal
images from other religions (such as Allah or the Tao) show the images’ structural importance for religious systems and
cultures. PREREQUISITE: BIBL 2000; upper-division standing. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
3420 New Testament Ethics
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Exegetical study of the ethical teachings of Jesus and Paul. Secondary emphasis on the Johannine writings. An overview of the
major ethical systems (such as Deontology and Consequentialism), discussions of moral issues (such as abortion), and an
examination of how the teachings of the New Testament, and of the Bible in general, have been used in making moral
decisions. PREREQUISITE: BIBL 2000. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3520
Apocalyptic Literature
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examination of the nature and purpose of Judeo-Christian writings of the apocalyptic genre. Study from the perspectives of
scholarly exegesis of selected apocalyptic passages from the Hebrew Bible (Daniel), the Apocrypha, the Pseudepigrapha, and
the New Testament, with particular emphasis on the Apocalypse of John. PREREQUISITE: BIBL 2000; 2050; RLGN 2150.
OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3900 Honors Seminar
2-4 hrs. (arranged)
CONSENT: Department chair. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
4650 Independent Study
2-4 hrs. (arranged)
Individual study, investigation, research, or project. CONSENT: Department chair. REPEAT: May be repeated.
4900 Honors Seminar
2-4 hrs. (arranged)
CONSENT: Department chair. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
4910 Seminar
1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Special areas of study and research in Old and New Testaments. PREREQUISITE: BIBL 2000. REPEAT: May be taken twice
under a different topic. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.

CMIN COURSES
CMIN COURSES
2000 Introduction to Christian Ministry
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Entry-level course for students interested in ministry. Focuses on competency in ministry practices and theological
perspectives on ministry.  OFFERED: Sem. I.
2260 Educational Ministry with Youth
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Approaches to planning and leading youth ministry in the local church. Focus on teaching/learning biblical, theological, and
skill foundations for youth ministry that encourage adolescent faith formation. PREREQUISITE: CMIN 2000. OFFERED:
2024-25, Sem. I.
2270 Faith and Worship
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Understanding Christian worship through consideration of its biblical and historical backgrounds and through observation of
its current practice. Experience in planning and conducting worship in a variety of settings. OFFERED: With sufficient
demand.
2810 Ministry Exploration
1 hr. (arranged)
Students will complete in-service ministry exploration in conjunction with a designated supervisor in an approved ministry
setting. The ministry exploration may be during the summer or during the school year. CONSENT: Consent of the instructor.
GRADE: CR/NC.
2900 Honors Seminar
2-4 hrs. (arranged)
CONSENT: Department chair. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3050 Homiletics
3 hrs. (3, 0)
A study of the preparation and delivery of sermons, contemporary methods of sermon building, and the spiritual formation of
the preacher. Applies to liberal arts speaking-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: BIBL 2000, CMIN 2000. SAME AS:
PAST 5500. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3080 Pastoral Care and Counseling
3 hrs. (3, 0)
A foundational pastoral care course exploring the multi-faceted dimensions of pastoral ministry in building healthy faith
communities, caring for people in need, and leading a ministry of reconciliation. PREREQUISITE: CMIN 2000. SAME AS:
PAST 6370. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3230
Educational Ministry with Families
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Explores the relationships between families and faith, the variety of contemporary influences on family life, and the
opportunities for faith communities to minister to families. PREREQUISITE: CMIN 2000. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3260 Leading, Teaching, and Discipling Youth
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Explores the foundations and praxis of evangelism, discipleship, and leadership in the context of youth ministry. Includes
attention to adolescent development and materials and methods for teaching-learning with youth. PREREQUISITE: CMIN
2260. SAME AS: PAST 6160. OFFERED: 2024-25, Sem. II.
3340 The Community of Faith in an Urban Culture
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Two weeks of field experiences in two major American cities or in Berlin, Germany, are preceded by a week of assigned reading
and class discussion. Students experience firsthand the church’s response to runaway and throwaway children, homelessness,
hunger, drug addiction, racism, unemployment, and other expressions of urban alienation. Written reaction on the experience.
CONSENT: Instructor. GRADE: CR/NC. OFFERED:  May.
3900 Honors Seminar
2-4 hrs. (arranged)
CONSENT: Department chair. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3910 Ministry Seminar
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Addresses issues important to ministry in multiple settings. A variety of ministry practices become the means by which to
explore the many dimensions of the focal issue(s). Topics include hunger and poverty, justice and reconciliation, life
commitments and transitions, leadership and organizational life, and loss, illness, and end of life. Applies to liberal arts
speaking-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: CMIN 2000; BIBL 2000. REPEAT: May be repeated as long as the topic is
different; total credit not to exceed 6 hours. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4250 Theology in a Ministry Context
3 hrs. (3, 0)
In this capstone course required for Christian Ministries and Youth Ministries majors, students draw upon methods of
congregational study, practical theology, and ministry experience to identify and address selected issues within a particular
congregation. Includes written and oral presentations of ministry-related research. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive
requirement. EXPECTATION: Completion of all internship hours and CMIN-captioned courses required by one’s major.
PREREQUISITE: CMIN 4810. OFFERED: Sem. II.


4650 Independent Study
1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Individualized study, investigation, research, or project. CONSENT: Department chair.
4810 Internship
1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Students will complete in-service ministry training in conjunction with a designated supervisor in an approved ministry
setting. The internship may be summer placement or concurrent part-time placement during the school year. CONSENT:
Consent of the instructor. PREREQUISITE: CMIN 2000. REPEAT: May be repeated. GRADE: CR/NC. SAME AS: THFE 7810.
OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
4900 Honors Seminar
2-4 hrs. (arranged)
CONSENT: Department chair. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.

PHIL COURSES
2000 Introduction to Philosophy
3 hrs. (3, 0)
An introduction to the important questions, ideas, and figures in the Western philosophical tradition from both topical and
historical perspectives. OFFERED: 2024-25, Sem. I.
2120 Ethics
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Classical and contemporary considerations of moral issues and nature and status of ethical theory. OFFERED:  Sem. I.
2240 Contemporary Philosophy
4 hrs. (4, 0)
Twentieth-century philosophical movements and philosophers from Sartre to Wittgenstein. OFFERED: With sufficient
demand.
3010 History of Political Thought
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examination of major works in the development of political thought from ancient Greece through the 20th century. Theorists
studied include Plato, Aristotle, Machiavelli, Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, and Mill. Particular emphasis is placed on the practical
consequences of ideas for leaders in politics and society. PREREQUISITE: Sophomore standing. SAME AS: HIST/POSC 3010.
OFFERED: Sem. II, 2023-24.
3200 Nineteenth-Century Philosophy
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Particular emphasis on Kant, rise of German Idealism, and dominant figures through Nietzsche. OFFERED: With sufficient
demand.
3210 Moral Conflicts and Controversy
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines the question of moral conflict through the works of the Greek tragic poets Aeschylus and Sophocles and selected
works of Plato and Aristotle. Students consider solutions to the moral problems arising from irreconcilable life situations.
PREREQUISITE: PHIL 2000. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3250
Ethics and Morality for Professionals
3 hrs. (3, 0)
An introduction to Western ethical traditions and particularly to critical thinking about moral experience within Christianity.
From classical perspectives in Christian ethics, students will practice using resources (such as the Bible) to develop their own
ethical code, system of values, and constructive approaches by which they would resolve ethical dilemmas and conflicts.
Special focus on teaching moral reasoning as a skill for professionals, particularly for Christian leaders, to resolve moral
dilemmas in society and in organizations (both the profit and not-for-profit sectors). PREREQUISITE: Upper-division
standing. SAME AS: RLGN 3250. OFFERED: Sem. I.
4910 Seminar
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Selected philosophers and philosophical problems. REPEAT: May be taken twice with different topics. OFFERED: With
sufficient demand.

RLGN COURSES
1100 Introduction to Spiritual Formation
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Study of the history, theology, and practice of spiritual formation. Combines traditional academic study with practical
experiences of spiritual formation. Introductory course for the Spiritual Formation complementary major.
2000 Introduction to Religion
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduction to the nature of religion as it is understood critically in contemporary thought. Viewpoints, including historical,
anthropological, sociological, psychological, philosophical, and phenomenological studies of religion, will be surveyed. Brief
introduction to the history of the study of religion is included. OFFERED: Sem. I.


2130 Introduction to Christian Ethics
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduction to the nature, sources, and diversity of Christian ethics understood as the deliberate reflection on the Christian
moral life. Particular attention given to how Jesus and the church as a moral community of faith provide basic guidance in
forming individuals capable of determining questions of right and wrong, good and evil. PREREQUISITE: BIBL 2000.
OFFERED: 2024-25 Sem. II.
2150 Hermeneutics: The Practice of Interpreting
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Sustained reflection on the practice of interpreting, understood to be a necessary activity in all of human life. Primary
attention is given to the art of interpreting texts — including biblical texts as well as those of theology, philosophy, ethics,
history, and others, both ancient and contemporary. PREREQUISITE: BIBL 2000. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2270 Church of God Heritage
4 hrs. (4, 0)
Sociohistorical treatment of the Church of God (Anderson, Ind.). Emphasis on dynamic factors influencing direction of
change. PREREQUISITE: BIBL 2000. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
2310 Faith, Fantasy, and Christian Formation
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Explores how literature, such as The Chronicles of Narnia and The Lord of the Rings, helps to stir our imagination, shape our
faith, and form our lives to make a lasting difference in this world. The class will examine both the fiction and friendship of C.S.
Lewis and J.R.R. Tolkien and discover how faith is formed in the matrix of the stories that shape our lives. OFFERED: With
sufficient demand.
2410 Where am I? Faith and Cosmology
3 hrs. (3, 0)
An exploration of the development of cosmologies in the Western world from early Egyptian and Greek cosmologies to the
modern scientific ones of Newton and Einstein. A comparison of these cosmologies with foundational themes in Jewish and
Christian cosmology. Students will assess their own worldview, noting how their views lay the ground-work for their Christian
spiritual formation. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
2430 Who am I? Theological Anthropology
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Study of theological anthropology from a biblical and historical perspective. Students will analyze their own understanding of
what it means to be human and the theological vision that underlies their functional anthropology. The course will focus on
the influence of theological understanding of the self as it relates to the worldview question: Who are we? OFFERED: Sem. I
(with sufficient demand).
2900 Honors Seminar
2-4 hrs. (arranged)
CONSENT: Department chair. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3000 History of Biblical Interpretation
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Historically based study of the ways in which Christians have interpreted the Bible. Considers the diversity of Christian
interpretation as well as the development of Christianity as the biblical text was interpreted over time. Applies to liberal arts
writing-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: BIBL 2000; upper-division standing. SAME AS: BIBL 3000. OFFERED: With
sufficient demand.
3010 Faith in Context
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Faith always emerges in multiple contexts, including cultural, developmental, and religious. Students will examine personal
experiences with faith, the faith experiences of their families of origin, and contemporary North American expressions of
popular religion and spirituality.  OFFERED: Sem. I ,II.
3020 Christianity and Social Justice
3 hrs. (3, 0)
The call to “do justice, love mercy, and walk humbly with your God” is deeply rooted in Christian faith. Just what this element
of Christian commitment means in lived experience, however, is neither consistently interpreted nor universally applied.
Affords students the opportunity to explore in some depth the relationship between Christian faith, in its various articulations,
and social justice. The class addresses a selection of contemporary social justice issues (for example, racial justice, gender
justice, environmental justice), exploring ways in which representative groups and individuals from the Christian tradition
have understood the relationship between faith and social justice. The goal of the course is to introduce students to the
complexities of each social justice issue, to encourage them to consider ways in which Christian faith commitments intersect
with concerns about the issue, and to prompt them to develop a lifelong engagement with these concerns. OFFERED:
Summer.
3040 Introduction to Christian Theology
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Beginnings in theology: province and methods of theology, doctrines of God, human nature, Christ, the church, and
eschatology. PREREQUISITE: BIBL 2000. OFFERED: Sem. II.


3060 History of Christianity
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Comprehensive survey of the history of Christianity. An effort is made to trace main lines of development and to understand
them in light of their inner dynamics and general environment. SAME AS: HIST 3060. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3100 Christian Understandings of Human Experience
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Investigation of perennial human experiences of intimacy, spirit, community, hope, revelation, and search for truth and
reconciliation. Acquaints students with biblical-Christian interpretation of these experiences. PREREQUISITE: Upper-division
standing. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3120 Current Issues in Christian Ethics
3 hrs. (3, 0)
A critical examination of Christian reflections and decision-making on moral and ethical issues in contemporary life.
“Christian,” as used in this course, seeks particularly to take Jesus and the church seriously in defining, describing, and
illuminating the nature and content of moral issues. The course examines varying approaches to Christian moral decision-
making, with a view to shaping sound responses to several current moral issues confronting human beings and creation.
OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3135 Medievalism and Reform: Europe from Charlemagne to Luther
3 hrs. (3, 0)
European civilization beginning with the medieval recovery from Rome’s collapse to the Reformation and the age of religious
wars. Treating the millennium between the Carolingian monarchs and the age of the great reformers, the course examines
the emergence of new states, the first Agricultural Revolution, the creation of the vibrant culture of Christendom, the
Crusades and Black Death, and the burst of cultural, political and economic vitality characteristic of the Renaissance and
Reformation. SAME AS: HIST 3135.
3170 Sociology of Religion
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Sociological factors influencing expression of religion. OFFERED: With sufficient demand. SAME AS: SOCI 3170.
3250
Ethics and Morality for Professionals
3 hrs. (3, 0)
An introduction to Western ethical traditions and particularly to critical thinking about moral experience within Christianity.
From classical perspectives in Christian ethics, students will practice using resources (such as the Bible) to develop their own
ethical code, system of values, and constructive approaches by which they would resolve ethical dilemmas and conflicts.
Special focus on teaching moral reasoning as a skill for professionals, particularly for Christian leaders, to resolve moral
dilemmas in society and in organizations (both profit and not-for-profit sectors). PREREQUISITE: Upper-division standing.
SAME AS: PHIL 3250. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3300 Beginnings of Christianity
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Study of the origin and development of Christianity within its Jewish and Greco-Roman environments through the fourth-
century Trinitarian debates. Special attention to the ways Christians answered the questions “Who is God?” “Who is Jesus?”
“Who are we?” and “How should we live?” Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: BIBL 2000.
OFFERED: Sem. II.
3320
World Religions
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduction to the major tenets and cultural expressions of selected religions, such as Islam, Taoism, Buddhism, Jainism,
Hinduism, Judaism, and Christianity. Religions are compared and contrasted thematically, structurally, and culturally.
Emphasis is placed on the interdependence of religions and cultures, and on what it means to be a responsible citizen in a
globalized world. SAME AS: HIST 3320. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3420 American Religious History
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Comprehensive survey of diverse American religious experiences in the past and present. A study of various historic forms of
Christianity, Judaism, Eastern faiths, and indigenous American religions, as well as unifying religious forces, such as “civil
religion.” SAME AS: HIST 3420.
3900 Honors Seminar
2-4 hrs. (arranged)
CONSENT: Department chair. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
4650 Independent Study
2-4 hrs. (arranged)
Individualized study, investigation, research, or project. CONSENT: Department chair. REPEAT: May be repeated.
4900 Honors Seminar
2-4 hrs. (arranged)
CONSENT: Department chair. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
4910 Seminar
1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Special areas of study, research, or field work under departmental direction. CONSENT: Department chair. REPEAT: May be
repeated; total credit not to exceed


4960 Capstone Course: Spiritual Formation Through Work, Calling, and Holiness
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Study of the spiritual approach of Christian praxis through the lens of vocational holiness. Students will consider various
understandings of holiness across a variety of Christian traditions. Priority is given to understanding, analyzing, and applying
the principle of vocational holiness that seeks to conceive of all of life as falling within the domain of holiness. Fulfills the
experiential liberal arts requirement for the CSF complementary major. PREREQUISITE: RLGN 1100 and 20 or more hours of
coursework in the Christian spiritual formation major or instructor approval. OFFERED: Sem. II.

ARTH COURSES
3040 Great Themes in Global Art History
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Important themes of art and architecture in non-Western and non-Eurocentric cultural contexts. Lectures and immersive
museum experiences focus on African, Asian, Islamic, Latin American, and Pre-Columbian art. Applies to liberal arts speaking-
intensive requirement. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2023-24.
3050 Western Art History
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Survey of the prevailing theories, significant figures, styles, movements and topics in Western art through lecture and
immersive museum experiences. Students identify significant characteristics of Western art and expand their knowledge
of the debates regarding art theory and criticism. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. OFFERED: Sem. I,
2024-25.

ARTS COURSES
1210 Drawing for Liberal Arts
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduction to the basics of drawing with an emphasis on the elements of space, value, line, and form. OFFERED: Sem. II.
1230 Painting for Liberal Arts
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduction to concepts and processes of painting. Basic problems of space, image and color are explored. OFFERED: Sem. I.
1250 Graphic Design for Liberal Arts
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Study of graphic design history, color theory, design rules, and graphic design software. Students create theme-based
projects. OFFERED: Sem. I, Summer.
2010 Introduction to Drawing
3 hrs. (3, 3)
Covers a variety of skills and subject matter attempting to develop visual understanding and sensitivity. Formal art elements
relevant to drawing; exploration of various graphic media. Main concerns are concepts of processes and seeing as related to
drawing. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2011 Two-Dimensional Design
3 hrs. (3, 3)
A series of directed studio problems, using a variety of media, concerned with the elements of form and the principles of
organization in two-dimensional visual forms. Emphasis on composition, such as Gestalt principles, structural arrangements,
and visual communication theories. Students are introduced to a design/research process that is applied to course
assignments and to the departmental sketchbook/journal requirement. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2060 Illustration
3 hrs. (3, 3)
Builds on the visual concepts in Introduction to Drawing. Emphasis is placed on problem solving through structured,
illustrative projects that engage the relationship of form and concept. PREREQUISITE: ARTS 2010. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2100 Introduction to Visual Design Studio
3 hrs. (3, 2)
Introduction to problem-solving in visual communication. Students engage in hands-on design and computer activities,
develop creative thinking strategies, and devise solutions to visual communication design challenges. Intended for Visual
Communication Design majors. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3110
Visual Design Studio I
3 hrs. (3, 3)
An introduction to the practice of graphic design. Students engage in studio problems that explore the communicative
potential of visual symbol-making. The meaningful interrelation of text and image is investigated through the integration of
drawing, photography, illustration, and typography. Students also begin to develop an individual design methodology that
includes textual and visual research, explorative design thinking, appropriate visual/ verbal presentation approaches, and
critique skills. PREREQUISITE: ARTS 2011, 2060, 2100. OFFERED: Sem. I.

3114 Visual Design Studio II
3 hrs. (3, 3)
Utilizes visual research and design thinking introduced in Visual Design Studio I. Through the execution of projects employing
layout, illustration and photo-imaging software, students examine aspects of the complexities of visual communication.
PREREQUISITE: ARTS 2011, 2060, 2100, 3310. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3310
Typography Studio
3 hrs. (3, 3)
Introduction to history, aesthetics, and process of typography. Examines layout formats and the interrelationships of text,
display types, composition, and content. Study of letter forms and designing with type. PREREQUISITE: ARTS 2011, 2060,
2100. OFFERED: Sem. I.
4114 Design for Digital Media
3 hrs. (3, 3)
Advanced study and application of systems, principles, and procedures underlying the practice of graphic design as related to
digitally based projects. Introduction to interactive digital media technology and the impact upon design professions.
Students encounter the complexities of working with clients and vendors in the realization of designed electronic materials
and virtual environments. Interdisciplinary design teams work to structure design problems to develop well-conceptualized
solutions. PREREQUISITE: ARTS 3114. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2024-25.
4310 Design Thinking
3 hrs. (3, 3)
Further investigation of effective visual communication with an emphasis on problem solving, conceptual development, and
visual logic. Students develop design methodology while exploring various facets of the design process. PREREQUISITE:
ARTS 3110. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2023-24.
4420 Design Methodology
3 hrs. (3, 3)
Research and communication theory and practice related to practicum experiences. Series of meetings and discussions with
visiting experts. PREREQUISITE: ARTS 4114. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4450 Special Topics in Graphic Design
3 hrs. (3, 3)
Opportunity to explore in depth a specialization in the graphic design industry that is outside the design core. Topics may
include design within nontraditional media, book layout and illustration, and packaging design. PREREQUISITE: ARTS 4114.
OFFERED: Sem. II, 2023-24.
4650 Special Projects in Art (Two-Dimensional)
1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Exploration of specific problems in students’ areas of concentration, carried out independently with instructor.
EXPECTATION: Appropriate introductory and intermediate-level experience. Does not count toward the visual
communication design major. CONSENT: Instructor. REPEAT: May be repeated; total credit not to exceed 4 hours.
OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
4820 Internship
1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Practical experiences in the professional field, typically up to 20 hours per week. Students learn employers’ job methods
relating to creative design applications, production responsibilities, and client contact. CONSENT: Instructor. REPEAT: May
be repeated. Two hours of credit are required in the major; an additional two hours may be taken. PREREQUISITE: ARTS
4114. OFFERED: Sem. I, II; Summer.
4930 Comprehensive Projects I
2 hrs. (2, 0)
Development of paper utilizing inquiry-based research approach. Exhibition planning. PREREQUISITE: ARTS 4114.
OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
4950 Comprehensive Projects II
4 hrs. (4, 2)
Students prepare portfolios, written inquiry papers, an oral presentation on their work, and concluding exhibitions. Applies
to liberal arts speaking-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: ARTS 4930. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.

COMM COURSES
1000 Introduction to Speech Communication
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Exploration and practice of public speaking with respect to topic selection, research, organization, and presentation. Students
deliver speeches extemporaneously and by manuscript in the informative, persuasive, and commemorative modes. Emphasis
on verbal and nonverbal aspects of speaking. OFFERED: Sem. I, II; Summer.
2000 Media and Society
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examination of major print and electronic media in terms of historical development, functions, structures, and issues.
Entry course to majors in public relations, journalism, and cinema and media arts. OFFERED: Sem. II.

2020 Audio Concepts and Production
3 hrs. (3, 1)
Introduction to the basic tools, disciplines, and concepts of audio production. Using current audio hardware and software,
students will develop skills in announcing, recording, mixing, and digital editing. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2060 Video/Cinema Concepts
3 hrs. (2, 2)
Introduction to the disciplines, concepts, hardware, and software of video/cinema production. Topics and practices include
theory of video/cinema, visual space, camera operation, graphics, digital editing, directing, and producing. Both multi-camera
and single-camera production opportunities. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2130 Writing for the Media
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Research and writing in a variety of media, with an emphasis on news, features, public relations, and commercial copy.
Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2140 Producing Multimedia Content
3 hrs. (3, 2)
Intro to multimedia production for non-CMA majors. Includes on- and off-camera presentation techniques, use of a
teleprompter, single- and multi-camera productions, audio and video editing, and podcast production. Applies to liberal arts
speaking-intensive requirement. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2024-25.
2160 The Art of Storytelling
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduction to theme, plot, story arc, character, and narrative view as told through cinema and media arts. Particular
emphasis on screenwriting. Additional topics include finding stories, adapting to the audience, and proper written form for
different media. Includes daily writing assignments. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2200 Visual Communication
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduction to typography, color theory, photography, and design principles for print, Internet, and video/ cinema
communication. Instruction in the appropriate production technologies. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2240 Public Relations Foundations
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduction to public relations: history, environment, processes, tools, and practices. Concepts are reinforced through
current-event discussions and the development of a basic public relations plan. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2320 Television Studio Production
4 hrs. (3, 2)
Intermediate course on the studio production process with an emphasis on producing, directing, and viewing the process as a
collaborative effort. Programs include news, drama, and other television genres. Students rotate through all crew positions.
PREREQUISITE: COMM 2060. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2023-24.
2420 Field, Soundstage, and Postproduction
4 hrs. (3, 2)
Intermediate practice of the single camera video/cinema production process in the field. Involves pre-production planning,
producing, directing, cinematography, and digital editing. PREREQUISITE: COMM 2060. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2024-25.
2840 Fifth Street Communications Staff
1 hr. (arranged)
Practical experience in a student-staffed public relations agency primarily serving not-for-profit organizations. Emphasis on
researching client needs, developing appropriate and high-quality communication deliverables, and providing outstanding
customer service to clients. PREREQUISITE: COMM 2130, 2240. REPEAT: May be repeated; total credit not to exceed 4
hours. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2850 Andersonian Staff
1 hr. (1, 0)
Involves working in staff positions on the student-operated news organization, the Andersonian. Staff members plan, report,
write, edit, and design content for the newscast as well as the online platform.  PREREQUISITE: COMM 2130. REPEAT: May
be repeated; total credit not to exceed 4 hours. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2860 Black Bird Media Lab
1hr. (1, 0)
Students work as producers, directors, writers, cinematographers and editors on film and video projects. PREREQUISITE:
COMM 2060. REPEAT: May be repeated; total credit not to exceed 4 hours. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
3050 Global Communication
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Hybrid course focusing on international and intercultural aspects of communication. Includes a spring break international
travel option that allows for in-depth study of the subject matter. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2023-24.
3120 The Business of Cinema and Media Arts
3 hrs. (3, 0)
A survey of the distribution of radio and television programs and film through traditional and new media. Topics include
structures, sales, programming, audience measurement, promotions, and distribution. PREREQUISITE: Upper-division
standing. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2023-24.

3130 Advanced Newswriting and Reporting
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Study of advanced research, interviewing, and newswriting techniques, with emphasis on print and multimedia formats.
Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: COMM 2130. OFFERED: Sem 1, 2024-25.
3160 Motion Graphics
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Design, creation, and technique related to motion graphics for television and cinema. Primary tools are Photoshop and
After Effects. Includes 2D and 3D animation, compositing and visual effects. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2024-25.
3200 Communication Ethics
3 hrs. (3, 0)
The examination of ethical standards and decision-making processes in journalism, public relations, advertising, and
entertainment media. PREREQUISITE: Upper-division standing. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2023-24.
3220 Screenwriting
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Development of concepts and scripts in comedy, drama and other genres. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive
requirement. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2024-25.
3230 Advanced Feature and Digital Writing
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Strategic conception and creation of feature-oriented content for distribution in traditional print as well as digital outlets.
Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: COMM 2130. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2023-24.
3240 Public Relations Campaigns
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Planning and implementation of public relations principles and strategies in a variety of campaign situations. Focus may be on
the development of specialized campaigns in areas such as business, healthcare, travel and government. PREREQUISITE:
COMM 2240. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2023-24.
3250 Event Planning and Management
2 hrs. (2, 0)
Introduction to event planning, execution, and evaluation. Coursework includes concepts and principles of event
management and project management, as well as practical application of learned concepts. Emphasis on understanding
and using planning tools to meet organizational goals. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3310 Interpersonal Communication
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Analyzes how individuals relate to one another in various interpersonal situations (dyadic, family, small groups, etc.)
 and the communication skills needed for those situations. Includes topics such as self-disclosure, group dynamics, gender
differences, and critical listening. CONSENT: Instructor. OFFERED: Summer, 2024.
3340 Public Relations Writing
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Writing of effective public relations materials, use of persuasion techniques, and study of procedures for dissemination of
public information. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: COMM 2130, 2240. OFFERED:
Sem. II, 2024-25.
3370 Communicating through Social Media
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Study of social media communication strategy and execution; topics include modifying messages for various media,
managing online reputation, understanding and developing social media policies, and measurement and evaluation. Course
projects include development of social media messages and strategy. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2024-25.
3420 Cinema Studies
3 hrs. (3, 0)
An overview of motion pictures, including history, elements of production, and the critique. Involves the review of several
major motion pictures and the context of their creation. Applies to liberal arts speaking-intensive requirement. OFFERED:
Sem. I, 2024-25.
3440 Public Relations Research
2 hrs. (2, 0)
Introduction to media and communication research methods, including reviewing secondary research, developing surveys,
performing communication audits, and conducting interviews and focus groups. Emphasis is on understanding the types of
research, identifying benefits and risks of each type, and choosing the correct type of research given time and cost
constraints. PREREQUISITE: COMM 2240. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2024-25.
3860 Practicum in Event Management
1-2 hrs. (arranged)
Application of principles of successful event planning and management. Students work with a local organization to implement
and evaluate an event. PREREQUISITE: COMM 3250. REPEAT: May be repeated; total credit not to exceed 4 hours
OFFERED: Sem. I, II; Summer.
4000 Communication Law
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Provides an understanding and appreciation of American legal traditions surrounding freedom of speech and of the press as
well as an examination of libel, slander, privacy, copyright, trademark, entertainment law, and free press/fair trial issues.
PREREQUISITE: COMM 2000; upper-division standing. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2024-25.

4120 Advanced Video Production
3 hrs. (3, 1)
Capstone teleproduction course. Advanced theory and practice. Students will produce content for air on local or national
television and for submission at film festivals. PREREQUISITE: COMM 2420; upper-division standing. OFFERED: Sem. I,
2023-24.
4340 Executing Effective Events
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Researching, designing, organizing and assessing events. Emphasis on communication, promotion, tools and techniques.
Students develop a communication plan and implement an event. PREREQUISITE: COMM 3250. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2023-24.
4500 Communication Capstone
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Intended for seniors in the online communication major. Involves a comprehensive project that draws on the knowledge,
skills, concepts, and methods that majors have acquired throughout the curriculum. Using a research, action, communication,
and evaluation model, students create a strategic communication plan for their workplace or another community
organization. Students give an oral presentation of their projects. OFFERED: Sem. I, II; Summer.
4750 Strategies for Teaching Speech
1 hr. (arranged)
Surveys the content of a secondary-level speech class, evaluation methods, and extra-curricular activities related to the
speech classroom. OFFERED: Sem. I.
4800 Internship
1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Opportunity for advanced work off campus in the area of specialization at a radio or TV station, production or film-related
company, newspaper, magazine, public relations agency, or other relevant environment. CONSENT: Instructor. REPEAT:
May be repeated; total credit not to exceed 4 hours. OFFERED: Sem. I, II; Summer.
4900 Seminar in Communication
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Intensive study of selected topics in historical or contemporary communication. Topics vary. CONSENT: Instructor. REPEAT:
May be repeated.

CPSC COURSES
1100 Introduction to Business Informatics
3 hrs. (3, 0)
An introduction to computer-based business-problem-solving applications and methods. Core topics include spreadsheets
with emphasis on formulas and functions, relational databases with emphasis on relational database design and use of SQL,
and web software development with emphasis on HTML 5 and CSS. Students are to take the Certiport Microsoft Excel
certification exam as part of the course. OFFERED: Sem. I.
1200 Introduction to Web Programming
4 hrs. (4, 0)
An introduction to program design and development using HTML 5, CSS, JavaScript, and WordPress. Emphasis is on problemsolving and issues related to web publishing. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2020 Fundamentals of Computational Thinking and Programming
4 hrs. (3, 2)
An introduction to concepts in the field of computer science, the skills of computational thinking, and the craft of computer
programming.  Topics include a survey of problem-solving and algorithm development, data types and variables, collections,
control-of-flow structures, methods and parameters, file processing, and objects. Emphasis is placed on effective testing and
debugging, and an introduction to the command line environment is presented. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2030 Object-Oriented Analysis and Design
4 hrs. (3, 2)
Builds upon the topics covered in Fundamentals of Computational Thinking and Programming with an emphasis on writing
classes and a focus on object-oriented programming. Topics include the theory and application of encapsulation, abstraction,
inheritance, and polymorphism. An introduction to version control is presented. PREREQUISITE: Grade of C- or better in
CPSC 2020. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2040 Introduction to Data Science
4 hrs. (3, 2)
Students will gain practical knowledge of Data Science using the Python programming language. Topics covered will include
data wrangling, storage, analysis, and visualization. Basic applications of statistical inference will be covered using Jupyter
Lab, pandas, numpy, scipy, and sklearn. PREREQUISITE: CPSC 2020. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2080 Introduction to Cybersecurity
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduces cybersecurity beginning with the foundational concepts and security principles then proceeding to threat,
vulnerability, and risk management. Students will work with different offensive and defensive cyber tools to identify, protect,
detect, respond, and recover critical infrastructure. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2100 Database Programming
4 hrs. (4, 0)
Study of relational database management systems and information storage and retrieval techniques. Topics include ERD and
UML modeling, normalization, and SQL programming, stored procedures, triggers, views, transaction processing,
concurrency control. PREREQUISITE: CPSC 2020. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2180 Scripting and Systems
2 hrs. (1, 2)
Teaches students to develop scripts for managing systems and automating operations. Students in the class will write scripts
for command environments in Windows and Linux operating systems. The course introduces fundamental scripting goals and
programming concepts like algorithms, data structures, type checking, loops, conditional logic, functions, parameters, and
regular expressions. PREREQUISITE: Grade of C- or better in CPSC 2020. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2250 Discrete Mathematical Structures
4 hrs. (4, 0)
Topics include Boolean algebra, computer logic, relations and functions, logic and proof techniques, combinatorics, algebraic
structures, and graph theory. SAME AS: MATH 2200. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2300 System Administration
3 hrs. (2, 2)
Students will learn systems administration principles and practices focusing on both Windows and Linux based environments.
Students will be exposed to hardware and software components of modern computing systems (desktop, server, IOT, virtual
and cloud), data storage devices, data in use and transmission, networking and security components, as well as operating
system kernel, configuration hardening, vulnerability, and patch management. PREREQUISITE: CPSC 2020 or CPSC 2180 or
ENGR 2003. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2320 C++ Programming
1 hr. (0, 2)
Introductory course in C++ programming for students who know a different high-level language. Introduces the C++ syntax
and semantics of functions, classes, and parts of the standard template library (STL). Hands-on projects use the C++ language
to solve mathematical and engineering problems. PREREQUISITE: ENGR 2310 or CPSC 2030. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2330 Web Application Development
4 hrs. (4, 0)
Introduces students to a broad range of web application software development tools and technologies. Includes coverage of
HTML 5, CSS, and JavaScript. Topics include client and server side web page development, the creation of asynchronous web
applications, database access and MVC software design. PREREQUISITE: CPSC 2100. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2420 Computer Architecture
2 hrs. (1, 2)
Principles of computer architecture are introduced, including instruction and data representation, fundamentals of assembly
language, and low-level operating systems concepts, including registers, memory addressing, caching, the operating system
stack, and bus architecture. PREREQUISITE: CPSC 2030 or ENGR 2310. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2430 Programming Languages and Compilers
2 hrs. (1, 2)
A survey of programming languages and methods of translation. Topics include programming paradigms, language syntax
and lexical analysis, language design choices, and design of compilers. PREREQUISITE: CPSC 2500. OFFERED: Sem. II.

2500 Data Structures and Algorithms
4 hrs. (3, 2)
In-depth study of data structures and algorithms, including stacks, queues, and trees through the use of abstract data types to
facilitate problem solving. Searching and sorting techniques will be applied to appropriate data structures. PREREQUISITE:
Grade of C- or better in CPSC 2030 or ENGR 2310. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2550  Selected Topics
2-4 hrs. (arranged)
Courses offered periodically on selected topics related to computer science or cybersecurity, and intended for both non-
majors and majors within the department. Prerequisites vary according to course content. REPEAT: Different topics can be
counted towards major electives, up to 6 total credit hours. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3300 Numerical Analysis
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduction to numerical algorithms fundamental to scientific and mathematical computer use. Solutions of transcendental,
polynomial, and differential equations; matrix algebra; linear programming; numerical integration and differentiation; Monte
Carlo methods; and curve fitting. PREREQUISITE: CPSC 2020, MATH 2020. SAME AS: MATH 3300. OFFERED: With
sufficient demand.
3380 Applied Cryptography and Security
4 hrs. (3, 2)
Covers topics in applied cryptography (symmetric and asymmetric), public-key infrastructure, hashing, digital signatures,
VPN, confidentiality and identity mechanisms, as well as common cryptographic failures. Protocols for securing data,
applications, and network transmissions are covered in hands-on labs. Covers the technical skills necessary to understand
cryptographic standards and assess their implementation. The current state of technology and cybersecurity is also discussed.
"PREREQUISITE: CPSC: "2030" or CPSC "2180" or ENGR "2310". MATH "2200" or MATH "2010". OFFERED: Sem. I."
3410 Computer Networks
4 hrs. (3, 2)
Students will learn the fundamental concepts, technologies, components, and issues related to communications and data
networks. The course topics include networking models (OSI and IP), media (wired, wireless, optical), architectures (PAN,
LAN/WAN, DMZ, VLAN, subnetting), devices (routers, switches, firewalls), and protocols (IP, TCP, UDP, ICMP). The
fundamental concepts behind network security and network related threats are presented. Practical network software
programming is covered with hands-on experience in the lab. PREREQUISITE: CPSC "2180" or CPSC "2500". OFFERED: Sem. I.
3500 Design and Analysis of Computer Algorithms
4 hrs. (4, 0)
A study of techniques used in advanced algorithms, including algorithmic approaches such as brute-force, greedy, and divide-
and-conquer algorithms, as well as recursive backtracking and dynamic programming. Supporting data structures like trees
and graphs are studied, as well as search methods and related algorithms. In addition, the differences between P, NP, and NP-
complete problems are discussed. PREREQUISITE: CPSC 2500. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3520 Introduction to Artificial Intelligence
4 hrs. (3, 2)
Introduces a range of topics in artificial intelligence including classical search algorithms, knowledge bases and logical
inference, Bayesian networks and statistical inference, and machine learning. Emphasis is given to applications of these
techniques. Students are required to implement many of the algorithms discussed throughout the course in the form of
multiple larger projects. PREREQUISITE: CPSC 2500, MATH 2120 or 4010, MATH 2010. EXPECTATION: Strong
mathematical background and Python proficiency. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3550 Special Topics
2-4 hrs. (arranged)
Courses offered periodically on special topics related to computer science or cybersecurity, intended for majors within the
department. Prerequisites vary according to course content. REPEAT: Different topics can be counted towards major
electives, up to 6 total credit hours. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3650 Independent Study
2-4 hrs. (arranged)
Independent study under faculty direction. CONSENT: Instructor. REPEAT: May be repeated.
4080 Network Security
3 hrs. (2, 2)
This class provides students with an understanding of the concepts used in designing a secure network, defending a network,
and a familiarity with the tools and techniques that can be used to protect a network from cyber threats. Issues in network
forensics are addressed. Students will use packet capturing and logging to diagnose real-world network and security issues.
PREREQUISITE: CPSC 2300, CPSC 3380, and CPSC 3410. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4100 Advanced Databases and Big Data Analytics
4 hrs. (3, 2)
Lecture and discussion of advanced topics in data management is combined with a student-managed big data concept project.
The course emphasizes applying research and planning to provide robust and efficient solutions to common complex big data
issues. PREREQUISITE: CPSC 2100. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.

4420 Operating Systems
4 hrs. (3, 2)
Focuses on the fundamentals of operating systems (OS), including how the OS manages processes, memory, I/O, and file
management. Process and thread management are emphasized, including synchronization, communication, races, and
deadlocks. Virtual memory, virtualization/hypervisors, and disk management are also discussed. With each topic, the security
implications and design considerations are thoroughly discussed. PREREQUISITE: CPSC "2420" and CPSC "2500". OFFERED:
Sem. II.
4430 Software Engineering
4 hrs. (3, 2)
A study of the principles of software design and development through the development of a large group project. Topics
include requirements specification, project design and scheduling, security issues, verification, and validation. Software tools
will be used for static code analysis, vulnerability scanning, and fuzzing. An emphasis is put on writing secure, high quality
software that will work as expected in all circumstances and not be easily susceptible to vulnerabilities. PREREQUISITE: CPSC
"2100" and CPSC "2500". RECOMMENDED: CPSC 2330. OFFERED: Sem. I.
4480  Technical Certification
1 hr. (arranged)
Students study for an industry-relevant certification exam using prior course experiences and online resources. Students must
take the certification exam to earn credit for the course. Eligible certification exams include CompTIA Security+, EC-Council
Certified Ethical Hacker, AWS Certified Developer - Associate, Microsoft Certified: Azure Developer Associate, Microsoft
Technology Associate: Database Fundamentals, or a certification deemed equivalent by faculty. Students are responsible for
required course materials and the exam fee. Meets the Experiential Learning Requirement of the Liberal Arts catalog.
REPEAT: May be repeated once for a second certification. PREREQUISITE: Junior standing. GRADE: CR/NC.
4800 Software Engineering Internship
2-4 hrs. (arranged)
Participation under professional supervision in business and industry that includes experience working on software
development, QA testing, and/or database development in a production environment. Meets the Experiential Learning
Requirement of the Liberal Arts catalog. REPEAT: May be repeated once for a second internship. CONSENT: Instructor.
GRADE: CR/NC.
4810 Data Science Internship
2-4 hrs. (arranged)
Participation under professional supervision in business and industry that includes experience working on analytics, machine
learning, and/or visualization in a production environment. Meets the Experiential Learning Requirement of the Liberal Arts
catalog. REPEAT: May be repeated once for a second internship. CONSENT: Instructor. GRADE: CR/NC.
4820 Cybersecurity Internship
2-4 hrs. (arranged)
Participation under professional supervision in business and industry that includes experience working on incident response,
risk and compliance, threat intelligence, and/or security operations in a production environment. Meets the Experiential
Learning Requirement of the Liberal Arts catalog. REPEAT: May be repeated once for a second internship. CONSENT:
Instructor. GRADE: CR/NC.
4950 Senior Seminar: Professional Development
1 hr. (1, 0)
Primarily discussion-based, course will further develop the oral communication skills of the student. Students will engage in
career-readiness through the preparation of a resume, the development of a portfolio of accomplished work, the presentation
of technical work, whiteboard questions, mock interviews, and networking with guest speakers and alumni. Applies to liberal
arts speaking-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: Senior standing. OFFERED: Sem. I.
4960 Senior Seminar: Ethics
1 hr. (1, 0)
Primarily discussion-based, course will further develop the critical-thinking skills and writing abilities of the student. Topics
involved include a discussion of current topics in the fields of computer science and data science as well as a discussion of
applied ethical issues. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: Senior standing. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4970 Senior Project
2-4 hrs. (arranged)
Application of relevant industry principles (software engineering, data engineering, information security, etc.) through the
development of a significant project. May be completed individually or in a small group of students also enrolled in the course.
Meets the Experiential Learning Requirement of the Liberal Arts catalog. CONSENT: Instructor. GRADE: CR/NC.

ENGL COURSES
1000 Composition Studio
1 hr. (1, 0)
Provides additional support and instruction for students enrolled in "ENGL 1110" through one-on-one instruction with a
member of the English faculty and writing tutors.  GRADING: C/NC. PREREQUISITE: Placement. CO-REQUISITE: "ENGL
1110. REPEAT: May be repeated. "
1100 Rhetoric and Composition - Basic
4 hrs. (4, 0)
Designed for students who need supplemental help with writing skills. Focuses on theory and practice of expository writing
based on experience and observation. Emphasizes development of functional and flexible writing processes for a range of
purposes and audiences. Includes assigned readings. Requires attention to sentence style, diction. Grade of C- or better
required.
1110 Rhetoric and Composition
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Focuses on theory and practice of expository writing based on experience and observation. Emphasizes development of
functional and flexible writing processes for a range of purposes and audiences. Includes assigned readings. Grade of C- or
better required.
1120 Rhetoric and Research
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Focuses on theory and practice of writing based on external sources. Emphasizes library, electronic, and primary research
sources and methods. Satisfies writing skill requirement for graduation. Does not satisfy the Advanced Writing Competency
requirement. Grade of C- or better required. PREREQUISITE: Grade of C- or better in ENGL 1100 or ENGL 1110.
2220 Global Literature
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Surveys representative 20th-century and contemporary literature from the several inhabited continents. Seeks to explore
both the diversity and commonality of the global community in the social, political, ethical, and cultural dimensions. Applies
to liberal arts speaking-intensive requirement. OFFERED: Spring 2023-24.
2400 Introduction to Literary Studies
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines works in English, American, and world literature to help students learn to read poetry, fiction, and drama for
maximum enjoyment, appreciation, and understanding. Emphasis on critical analysis of literature and applying these skills in
written work as well as discussion. Major scholarly approaches to literature introduced. Required for literary studies and
language arts teaching majors. Strongly recommended as the first literature course in the major. OFFERED: Every fall.
2500 Appreciation of the Writing Craft
2 hrs. (2, 0)
Defines and analyzes the fundamental elements and writing techniques of various creative genres, such as short fiction,
poetry, literary nonfiction, and/or drama. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. Strongly recommended as a
prerequisite to ENGL 3110, 3120, or 3180. PREREQUISITE: Grade of C- or above in ENGL 1120. OFFERED: Every spring.
2510 Creative Writing Workshop
1 hr. (1, 0)
Offers students a workshop setting in which to experiment with writing techniques to produce original poetry, short fiction,
drama, or literary nonfiction. PREREQUISITE: Grade of C- or above in ENGL 1120. COREQUISITE: ENGL 2500. OFFERED:
Every spring.
2580 The Spiritual Practice of Writing
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines the techniques writers use in the practice of writing as a spiritual discipline. Advances students’ understanding of
this discipline as it is exercised in a variety of literary forms, including poetry, personal essay, spiritual meditation, prayer, and
devotions, and provides opportunities for students to practice these literary techniques in their own spiritual writing.
OFFERED: 2023-24.
3000 Grammar and Style
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Studies the English language by focusing on contemporary descriptive grammar and morphology. Students will apply course
concepts to improve their own writing style. Course designed for writing majors and teaching majors. Required for language
arts teaching majors. OFFERED: Spring 2024-25.
3050 History of the English Language
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Investigates the origins and development of the English language. Particular emphasis on social and political forces that have
influenced the development of the language. Applies to liberal arts writing and speaking-intensive requirement.
PREREQUISITE: Grade of C- or above in ENGL 1120. OFFERED: Fall 2025-26.
3110 Creative Writing: Fiction
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Emphasizes techniques writers use in various modes of short fiction. Attention to the vocabulary and techniques of the fiction
writer’s craft applied theoretically in analysis of published literary short stories and applied practically in students’ own
creative endeavors in short fiction. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. EXPECTATION: ENGL 2500 strongly
recommended as a prerequisite. PREREQUISITE: Grade of C- or above in ENGL 1120. OFFERED: Spring 2025-26.
3120 Creative Writing: Poetry
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Emphasizes techniques writers use in various modes of poetry. Attention to the vocabulary and techniques of poet’s craft
applied theoretically in analysis of published literary poetry and applied practically in students’ own creative endeavors in
poetry. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. EXPECTATION: ENGL 2500 strongly recommended as a
prerequisite. PREREQUISITE: Grade of C- or above in ENGL 1120. OFFERED: 2024-25.
3140 Writing and Digital Media
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Advances students’ professional writing skills by developing four key digital literacies: interacting with, analyzing,
researching, and producing digital media. Includes a focus on rhetorical and professional writing theory. Students will
examine the role language plays in digital spaces and will gain skills to produce quality writing in digital spaces. Applies to
liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: Grade of C- or above in ENGL 1120. OFFERED: 2024-25.
3160 Professional Writing and Editing
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Focuses on reader-centered approaches to develop skills necessary in professions that require strong writing and editing
ability. Designed for students of varied academic majors and occupational interests. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive
requirement. PREREQUISITE: Grade of C- or above in ENGL 1120. OFFERED: 2023-24.
3180 Composing Nonfiction
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Explores the processes of nonfiction writing and the variety of “forms” that are available to nonfiction writers. Matters of style
and voice will be examined closely. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. EXPECTATION: ENGL 2500 strongly
recommended as a prerequisite. PREREQUISITE: Grade of C- or above in ENGL 1120. OFFERED: 2025-26.
3190 Composing Arguments
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Explores various models of argument, including persuasion, advocacy, consensus building, and classical rhetoric. Focuses on
analyzing and composing multiple genres. Examines audience accommodation, research, tone, and revision. Applies to liberal
arts writing-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: Grade of C- or above in ENGL 1120. OFFERED: 2023-24.
3320 Shakespeare
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Analyzes the poetry and several representative dramas within their historical context. Areas of emphasis will include Ovidian
influences, early modern culture, and pedagogy. PREREQUISITE: Grade of C- or above in ENGL 1120. OFFERED: 2024-25.
3540 Studies in Early British Literature
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Surveys masterpieces of medieval and early modern British literature. The focus and themes of the course, as well as authors
and texts, will vary with each iteration of the course. Readings will highlight the imagination, poetics, and politics of authors
such as Chaucer, Kempe, Shakespeare, Donne, Milton, and Behn, among others. PREREQUISITE: Grade of C- or above in
ENGL 1120. OFFERED: 2023-24.
3560 Studies in Later British Literature
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Surveys masterpieces of Romantic, Victorian, and Modern British literature. The focus and themes of the course, as well as
authors and texts, will vary with each iteration of the course. Readings will highlight the imagination, poetics, and politics of
authors such as Wordsworth, Austen, Dickens, Yeats, Woolf, Pinter, among others. PREREQUISITE: Grade of C- or above in
ENGL 1120. OFFERED: 2023-24.
3570 Studies in American Literature
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Surveys masterpieces of early and Modern American literature. The focus and themes of the course, as well as authors and
texts, will vary with each iteration of the course. Readings will highlight the imagination, poetics, and politics of authors such
as Hawthorne, Melville, Wharton, Chopin, Hemingway, Faulkner, Baldwin, Morrison, Wilson, among others. PREREQUISITE:
Grade of C- or above in ENGL 1120. OFFERED: 2025-26.
3580 American Ethnic Literature
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines contemporary American poetry, fiction, and nonfiction, focusing on themes prominent in the literature of cross-
cultural authors, such as assimilation, cultural adaptation, discrimination, identity formation, intergenerational family
conflicts, oppression in the homeland, and linguistic challenges. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement.
PREREQUISITE: Grade of C- or above in ENGL 1120. OFFERED: 2024-25.
3590 Teaching Diversity through Young Adult Literature
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Provides secondary, middle, and upper elementary pre-service teachers with a wide variety of experiences in reading,
analyzing, and discussing texts written specifically for young adults. PREREQUISITE: Grade of C- or above in ENGL 1120.
Grade of C or better required for education majors. Applies to liberal arts Aesthetic Ways of Knowing. OFFERED: Every spring.
3870 Literary Arts Practicum
1 hr. (arranged)
Allows students to work with a faculty consultant in producing an annual campus literary arts magazine. Activities include
selecting materials, editing, promoting, and selling the magazine. PREREQUISITE: Grade of C- or above in ENGL 1120.
REPEAT: May be repeated; total credit not to exceed 4 hours. GRADE: CR/NC. OFFERED: Every semester.
3880 Writing Tutor Practicum
1 hr. (arranged)
Prepares students to be exceptional writing tutors, including in the Kissinger Academic Center for Excellence. Students will
examine the various strategies of writing tutoring and how a writing center can best serve the needs of diverse student
populations. PREREQUISITE: Grade of C- or above in ENGL 1120. REPEAT: May be repeated; total credit not to exceed 4
hours. CONSENT: Instructor. OFFERED: Every semester.
4000 Special Topics in Literature
 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines discrete literary areas and topics not included in the current offerings. Previous topics have included the literature
of the American South, American nature writing, the fiction of Thomas Hardy, and Christian writers. PREREQUISITE: Grade
of C- or above in ENGL 1120. REPEAT: May be repeated; total credit not to exceed 6 hours. OFFERED: On demand.
4650 Independent Study
1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Individualized projects for upper-division students. PREREQUISITE: Upper-division standing.
4700 Methods of Teaching English
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Surveys methods, materials, and resources used in teaching composition, language, and literature in middle schools and high
schools. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. COREQUISITE: EDUC 4710. EXPECTATION: Should be taken in
conjunction with COMM 4750. OFFERED: Every fall.
4800 Internship in Writing
1-3 hrs. (arranged)
With approval of department chair and cooperating business or non-profit enterprise, allows student to choose from a variety
of paid and non-paid experiences in writing, preparing them for jobs in which the ability to write well is a major component.
4910 Senior Capstone Seminar
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Requires all senior-level English majors and writing majors to complete a comprehensive project that draws on the
knowledge, skills, concepts, and methods they have accumulated through study in the other courses taken for the major. The
project prepares them for work in graduate school, professional organizations, the literary marketplace, or corporate settings.
Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: Senior standing with a major in literary studies or
writing. OFFERED: Every fall.

HIST COURSES
2000 World History
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examination of the history of the non-Western world of Asia, the Middle East, Africa, and Latin America. Course material
includes the interaction of non-Western cultures with Europe and the United States, particularly from the 1500s to the
present. Emphasizes patterns of development; religion and culture; political, economic, and social issues; and historical and
current problems. Required of all social studies teaching majors. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2030 Western Civilization I
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examination of major themes in the development of Western civilization. Special attention is given to intellectual and cultural
heritage of the classical world and to the transmission of the classical heritage to the modern world. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2040 Western Civilization II
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examination of major themes in the development of Western civilization. Special attention is given to the expansion of the
West, the development of modern political ideologies, and the historical impact of economic modernization. Examines the
period from the 16th century to the present. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2110 American History I
3 hrs. (3, 0)
American civilization from the first English settlements through the Civil War: artistic, intellectual, literary, social, economic,
political, and religious currents in American life. Required of all social studies majors. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2120 American History II
3 hrs. (3, 0)
American civilization from Reconstruction to present: artistic, literary, intellectual, social, economic, political, and religious
currents in American life. Required of all social studies majors. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2300 Historical Inquiry
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines various approaches to historical research, major bibliographical tools, varieties of history, and philosophies of
history. Applies to liberal arts speaking-intensive requirement. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2023-24.
2350 Foundation of Public History
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Required introduction for students whose major is history or public history, examining the role and function of the public
historian, the conditions of the primary settings in which history is presented to the broader public, and contemporary
theory and practice in the discipline. Applies to liberal arts speaking-intensive requirement. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2023-24.
3010 History of Political Thought
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examination of major works in the development of political thought from ancient Greece through the 20th century.
Theorists studied include Plato, Aristotle, St. Augustine, Machiavelli, Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, and Mill. Particular
emphasis is placed on the practical consequences of ideas for contemporary leaders in politics and society.
PREREQUISITE: Sophomore standing. SAME AS: PHIL/POSC 3010. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2023-24.
3060 History of Christianity
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Comprehensive survey of the history of Christianity. An effort is made to trace main lines of development and to
understand them in light of their inner dynamics and general environment. SAME AS: RLGN 3060. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3100 Ancient History
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Study of ancient Greek and Roman civilizations. Particular attention is devoted to social and political history of both
societies and to a consideration of their lasting cultural bequest to the West. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2023-24.
3135 Medievalism and Reform: Europe from Charlemagne to Luther
3 hrs. (3, 0)
European civilization beginning with the medieval recovery from Rome’s collapse to the Reformation and the age of
religious wars. Treating the millennium between the Carolingian monarchs and the age of the great reformers, the course
examines the emergence of new states, the first Agricultural Revolution, the creation of the vibrant culture of
Christendom, the Crusades and Black Death, and the burst of cultural, political and economic vitality characteristic of the
Renaissance and Reformation. SAME AS: RLGN 3135. OFFERED: Sem II, 2023-24.
3150 Europe since 1870
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Political, economic, and intellectual developments in recent Europe. Also examines the unique characteristics of modern
European culture and artistic development. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2024-25.
3190 Jewish Holocaust and its Historical Context
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines the destruction of European Jewry by the government of Nazi Germany from "1933" to "1945". Topics include the
history of anti-Semitism in Europe, National Socialist racial ideology, Jewish resistance, attitudes of churches toward
Nazi policies, development of death camps as the “final solution,” and non-Jewish victims of Holocaust terror.
PREREQUISITE: Upper-division standing. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
3220 The Age of World Wars, "1900-1950"
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines the onset, course, and consequences of the two world wars that devastated Europe in the first half of the 20th
century; the roles of the United States in the wars and America’s emergence as a global power; the transformation of the
position of women in Western societies; the beginning of the era of colonial liberation; the ideological division of the
West for half a century; and genocides in Armenia, the Ukraine, and Nazi-occupied Europe and the foundation of the
state of Israel in the aftermath of the Holocaust. PREREQUISITE: Upper-division standing. OFFERED:  Sem. II, 2023-24.
3240 History of Russia and the Soviet Union
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines the development of the Muscovite state and the rise of the Russian “federation” and tsarist system, imperial
ambitions and an unruly empire, the influence of the Orthodox Church and its symbiotic relationship with the government,
Russian literature and music as a reflection of Russian culture, the revolutions of 1905 and 1917 and the subsequent rise of
the Soviet Union, the Cold War, and the downfall of the Soviet Union and its consequent splintering into 15 separate
republics. PREREQUISITE: Upper-division standing. OFFERED:  Sem. I, 2025-26.
3250 History of the Cold War
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines at length the roots of the Cold War; the tension between the United States and the Soviet Union, particularly after the
conclusion of World War II, and the causes of the continued strained relations; the national and cultural influence of the Cold War
(the Red Scare and the space race, to name just two); the impact of the Cold War on global relations and decolonization in the
Third World, and the benefits and/or limitations of alignment; the historiography of Cold War schools of thought; why and how
the Cold War ended; and the long-term impact of the Cold War. Particular emphasis is placed on the need to understand, in a
non-biased manner, the positions and influences of the nations involved. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2023-24.
3260 Women in the World, 1800 to Present
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Covers a broad history of the role of women throughout the world from approximately the end of the 18th century to modern times.
A brief examination of the lives of western women will provide a basis for discussion of the political, cultural, economic, and
theological influences on women in Asia, Africa, and the Middle East specifically, with additional attention being paid to women in
Latin America and India. Considerable time will be spent discussing the changing roles of women over the course of two centuries.
Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: Upper-division standing. OFFERED: Sem II, 2023-24; Summer.
3280 The Age of Global Empires
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Considers European expansion in the 19th century and the consequences of that interaction on three continents — Europe,
Asia, and Africa. Examines French, British, American, Dutch, and Italian empires; gauges the impact of Western intrusion
upon indigenous societies; and considers the ways in which the colonized peoples understood what was happening, as well
as the outside world’s impact upon the West. PREREQUISITE: Upper-division standing. OFFERED:  Sem. II, 2024-2025.
3300 Middle East
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Survey of Middle Eastern history since the rise of Islam. Emphasis on the 18th century to the present, including the impact of
the West on the Middle East. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: Upper-division standing.
OFFERED:  Sem. I, 2024-25.
3320 World Religions
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduction to the major tenets and cultural expressions of selected religions, such as Islam, Taoism, Buddhism, Jainism,
Hinduism, Judaism, and Christianity. Religions are compared and contrasted thematically, structurally, and culturally.
Emphasis is placed on the interdependence of religions and cultures, and on what it means to be a responsible citizen in a
globalized world. SAME AS: RLGN 3320. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3360 History of Modern Asia
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Focuses on the histories of China, Japan, Korea, India, and Vietnam, including the foundational values (religions, philosophies, and
customs) of each culture; their political and economic structures; their struggles to retain autonomy against Western encroachment
as well as their inter-Asian rivalries and cooperation; the challenges of preserving historical traditions and values in a modern world,
particularly when tempted by the rapid technological advancement of the 19th century; 20th century conflicts (including two world
wars, the Korean War, the Vietnam War, and the Cold War); and current issues faced by these countries in the 21st century.
OFFERED: Sem. I, 2024-25.
3370 General History of Latin America
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Pre-Columbian civilizations and the results of their clash with European cultures, formation of Latin American culture and
character, past and present movements for political and economic independence, and the role of the United States in
shaping the current socioeconomic situation. PREREQUISITE: Upper-division standing. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2024-25.
3420 American Religious History
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Comprehensive survey of diverse American religious experiences in the past and present. A study of various historic forms of
Christianity, Judaism, Eastern faiths, and indigenous American religions, as well as unifying religious forces, such as “civil
religion.” SAME AS: RLGN 3420.
3425 Slavery and Freedom in the Modern World, 1800 to the Present
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines the institutions of slavery and their demise during the “Age of Emancipation” in the 19th century, focusing
particular attention on the emancipation process in the United States, England, Brazil, and the Caribbean. Also connects
these historical events and debates to modern debates regarding liberty, forced labor and Christian ethics in the modern
era. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2023-24.

3440 Civil War and Reconstruction
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines the coming of the Civil War, the major figures in the North and the South, issues related to the conduct of the
war, and the reconstruction of the nation following its conclusion. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement.
PREREQUISITE: Upper-division standing. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2024-25.
3451 United States from the Gilded Age to 1945
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Focuses on the political, economic, social, psychological, and diplomatic influences that contributed to the United  States
emerging as the dominant world power in the 20th century. Particular emphasis on the triple motivations — national
security, economic health, and moral duty — that traditionally have driven American foreign policy. Applies to liberal arts
writing-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: Upper-division standing. OFFERED:  Sem. I, 2024-25.
3452 United States from 1945 to the Present
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Focuses on U.S. history as the country emerged as the dominant power following World War II and faced a new struggle with
the Soviet Union that became known as the Cold War. Particular attention will be given to the economic, geographic, and
ideological threats — real and perceived — that influenced the decision-making process regarding foreign policy. Emphasis
will also be placed on topics such as the Baby Boom, Johnson’s Great Society, Civil Rights, the Women’s Movement, and
efforts of other groups to gain recognition, economic cycles, and political events. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive
requirement. PREREQUISITE: Upper-division standing. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2024-25.
3470 The American West
3 hrs. (3, 0)
A comprehensive examination of the history of the American West from the Louisiana Purchase to present day. Introduces
issues of American expansion and settlement, relations with Native Americans and other peoples of color, and patterns of
economic and cultural interaction and conquest in the Trans-Mississippi region. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive
requirement. PREREQUISITE: Upper-division standing. OFFERED: On demand.
3480 Introduction to Archival Theory and Practice
3 hrs. (3,0)
A comprehensive course providing a broad range of knowledge and practical skills for those desiring work in a variety of fields,
to include museums, archives, and government research. Includes an introduction to the history of archives and how they fit
into library and museum institutions; acquisition, evaluation, and arrangement of archival material; cataloging, digital
methods, and the use of archival programs; records management and terminology of archivists. PREREQUISITE: Upper-
division standing. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2023-24.
3490 Archival Presentation and Preservation
3 hrs. (3,0)
Introduces the foundations of preservation and exhibit strategies; causes of deterioration of museum objects and best
practices for limiting or preventing loss; preservation of collections; museum and other historical venues as a means to
educate and challenge the public; the use of space and visual presentation for exhibits. PREREQUISITE: Upper-division
standing. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2023-24.
3510 Law, the Constitution, and War in American History, 1787 to present
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines the historical development of legal and constitutional issues surrounding American warfare, paying close attention
to the history of wartime civil liberties, questions regarding the legal definitions of war, treason, citizenship and enemy
combatants, and the many challenges posed by the nation’s economic, cultural, and political mobilization for large-scale
conventional wars (the Civil War and the two world wars) and asymmetrical conflicts such as the U.S. interventions in
Southeast Asia and the Middle East. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2023-24.
3520 History of the Vietnam War
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Explores U.S. foreign policy toward Vietnam, the diplomatic history of the conflict, the deepening commitment of U.S. forces,
the experiences of U.S. Armed Forces personnel, and the full-scale war waged in the country. This will include domestic
responses to the war, particularly the massive protest movement that the war generated and its effect on politics in this
country. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2024-25.
3540 Civil Rights Movement in the United States
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines the growth and dynamics of the African-American Civil Rights Movement, one of the most influential mass
movements in American history. Emphasis will be given to the economic, social, and cultural changes that have influenced the
civil rights struggles as well as historical conceptions of race that have plagued this country. OFFERED: On demand.
3560 History of Sports in America
3 hrs. (3, 0)
A comprehensive examination of the origins, history and development of sports as a basic component of modern American
cultural, social, political and economic life. Sports is a valuable lens through which students may examine larger trends in
American race relations, modern capitalism and labor relations, and the development of the idea of leisure activity in an
increasingly urban and suburban American landscape. Sports history is a subject of considerable interest to students, and it is
also a useful way to introduce them to larger trends in the study of American history. OFFERED: On demand.
4030 History of the American Family
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Explores the historical development of American families with changes in gender roles, sexuality, race, and life stages. This
will include looking at the concepts of manhood, womanhood, and childhood over time and the changed meaning of the
family, roles, and obligations of each member. Contemporary issues will include the definition of the family as well as the
notions underpinning current conceptions of what a traditional family is. OFFERED: On demand.
4650 Advanced Readings and Research
2-3 hrs. (2-3, 0)
Includes general reading and discussion covering the major or related field and intensive study of a specific subject in the
major field. Area of study is determined by the student and instructor with departmental approval. EXPECTATION: 3.0 or
higher cumulative GPA. Special consideration and consent may be given to students in other majors with 3.0 or higher GPAs
in their major fields. CONSENT: Instructor. PREREQUISITE: Upper-division standing. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
4700 Methods of Teaching Social Studies
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Prepares Social Studies Secondary Education majors in the development of teaching methodology appropriate to the social
sciences. Designed only for Social Studies Secondary Education majors and does not apply toward the history major or minor.
COREQUISITE: EDUC 4710. OFFERED: Sem. I.
4800 Internship in Public History
1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Offers practical experience in an active public history setting, integrating classroom study, research, and discussion with
mentor-guided hands-on work in the field. CONSENT: Instructor. PREREQUISITE: Upper-division standing; HIST 2350 and
additional 15 history credit hours. REPEAT: May be repeated; total credit not to exceed 4 hours. GRADE: CR/NC. OFFERED:
Sem. I, II; Summer.
4900 Historical Problems and Interpretations (American, European, Asian)
4 hrs. (4, 0)
In-depth examination of specific problem areas and interpretations of history. In seminar context, issues dealt with in terms of
specific areas of interpretation and illustration. REPEAT: May be repeated; total credit not to exceed 12 hours. OFFERED:
Sem. I, II.
4915 Honors Research
1-3 hrs. (arranged)
Required for students who intend to graduate with departmental honors. Research project is designed and executed by the
student in consultation with and under the direction of the instructor. EXPECTATION: Cumulative GPA of 3.0 or higher and a
GPA of 3.5 or higher in courses counting toward the major. CONSENT: Department chair. PREREQUISITE: Senior standing.
OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
4930 Senior Seminar
1 hr. (1, 0)
Capstone course for the major. Students will integrate concepts, knowledge, skills, methods, approaches, and practical
experience from their major studies. Applies to liberal arts speaking-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: Senior standing.
OFFERED: Sem. II.

POSC COURSES
2020  Introduction to World Politics
3 hrs. (3,0)
Introduction to the study of politics, peace and conflict transformation, and American national security through a survey of
historical and contemporary world politics. Examines the conceptual, theoretical, and empirical foundations of political
science and international relations including power, democracy and authoritarianism, war, human rights, cyber competition,
and international cooperation. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2100 American National Government
3 hrs. (3, 0)
An introductory study of national government in the United States. Examines the major institutions and processes of
the American political system, including constitutional design, federalism, public opinion, voting and elections, political
parties, interest groups, Congress, the presidency, and the courts. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2120 State and Local Government
3 hrs. (3, 0)
A comparative examination of the institutional structure, political processes, and public policies of state and local
government systems. The functions of state and local government are examined in relation to the federal government.
OFFERED: On demand.
2200 Public Policy
3 hrs. (3, 0)
An introduction to the theory and practice of policymaking and public administration as it relates to selected policy
problems facing national, state, and local governments. Policy areas covered may include healthcare, education, fiscal,
cybersecurity, and national defense. PREREQUISITE: POSC 2400.  OFFERED: Sem. II.
2210 Introduction to Legal Studies
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduces the structure and basic decision processes of the American legal system, as well as a study of the historical
and social development of the legal profession in America from the colonial period to the present. Particular focus is on
examination of the central issues and processes of the legal system from the perspective of their everyday working
relationships and how the court works. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2024-25.
2400 Social Science Research Methods
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Provides a foundation for reading and interpreting research done by social scientists, as well as doing research and writing
in more advanced courses. Focuses on principles for research design and the collection, analysis, and presentation of data.
Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2420 Applied Statistics Lab
1 hr. (1, 0)
Introduction to the statistical analysis of political, economic, and policy data using the R programming language.
COREQUISITE: Concurrent enrollment in MATH 2120. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2580 Principles of Geography
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduction to geography, emphasizing five major themes: the physical environment, natural resources, and agricultural
pursuits; demographics, immigration, sequent occupance, and settlement patterns; the impact of natural and human-
made disasters; cultural, economic, and political development; and the interaction between people of different cultures
and environments. Required of all social studies secondary education majors. OFFERED: Summer; Sem. I, 2024-25.
2810 Campaign Internship
1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Placement on a local political campaign under professional supervision. Forty-five hours of field experience required for
each hour of credit. Open to non-majors. CONSENT: Instructor. REPEAT: May be repeated; total credit not to exceed 4
hours. GRADE: CR/NC. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2024-25.
2840 Model Diplomacy and Simulation Conferences
1 hr. (1, 0)
Maximizes the learning opportunities inherent in participation in Model United Nations, Model Arab League, Model NATO,
and other diplomatic or security simulation conferences. Students develop skills in diplomatic behavior and writing, conduct
individualized research, and gain expertise related to their assigned roles. Requires participation in functions outside of the
traditional classroom environment. Open to non-majors. PERMISSION: Instructor. REPEAT: May be repeated; total credit
not to exceed 4 hours. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
3010 History of Political Thought
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examination of major works in the development of political thought from ancient Greece through the 20th century. Theorists
studied include Plato, Aristotle, St. Augustine, Machiavelli, Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, and Mill. Particular emphasis on the
practical consequences of ideas for contemporary leaders in politics and society. PREREQUISITE: Sophomore standing.
SAME AS: HIST/PHIL 3010. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2023-24.
3140 Elections, Public Opinion, and Democracy
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Study of American political values, attitudes, and beliefs, and the factors that influence their development; the role of public
opinion in American democracy; and the structural, psychological, and sociological factors associated with participation in
the political process. Topics include party identification, turnout, models of vote choice, and survey research methods.
PREREQUISITE: POSC 2400 and upper-division standing. EXPECTATION: Completion of MATH "2120" and "POSC 2420".
OFFERED: Sem. II, 2024-25.
3211 The Congress
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Study of the Congress, focusing upon its organizational structure, processes, and political behavior of its members. Particular
emphasis on representation, congressional elections, congressional committees, party leadership, House-Senate differences,
and legislative processes. Applies to liberal arts speaking-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: POSC 2400 and upper-
division standing. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2023-24.
3212 The Presidency
3 hrs. (3, 0)
An examination of the selection, tenure, succession and leadership of the American chief executive. Topics include
presidential elections, presidential power, and presidential relations with Congress, the bureaucracy, and the courts. Applies
to liberal arts speaking-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: Upper-division standing. OFFERED: On demand.
3250 Constitutional Law
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Survey of development of constitutional law through Supreme Court decisions. Topics include judicial review, federalism, the
powers of congress and the president, equal protection, and due process. PREREQUISITE: Upper-division standing.
OFFERED: On demand.
3300 International Security
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines the major theories, concepts, and principles of international security, especially as they relate to global stability and
conflict resolution. Topics include international alliances, mediation, bargaining, war termination, military effectiveness, and
other security issues. Also provides a framework to view government policy through a theoretical lens and understand how
policymakers utilize theory to make decisions regarding national security. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2024-25.
3310 Political Violence and Terrorism
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines the causes and consequences of political violence from an interdisciplinary perspective, with an emphasis on case studies
of modern terrorism and counterterrorism policy. Also studies the relationship between faith, morality, and the ethical conduct of
foreign policy. PREREQUISITE: Grade of C- or better in POSC 2020 and upper-division standing. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2023-24.
3320  Civilian Perspectives on Political Violence
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Explores the causes and consequences of political violence from the civilian perspective. Draws on insights from political
science, sociology, psychology, history, and contemporary literature to understand why people participate in violent acts and
the impact of political violence on the civilian population. PREREQUISITE: Upper-division standing. OFFERED: On demand.
3330 American Foreign Policy
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Study of the formulation and execution of foreign policy in the United States, together with an examination of the substantive
issues and perspectives of American foreign policy since World War II. PREREQUISITE: Upper-division standing. OFFERED:
Sem. I, 2024-25.
3350 Homeland Security
3 hrs. (3, 0)
An overview of the changes in American foreign and domestic policy in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.
Topics covered include the reorganization of government bureaucracies, ongoing debates over balancing security with civil
liberties, interagency cooperation to prevent terrorism, risk-based assessment, border security, and disaster management.
SAME AS: CRIM 3350. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3360 War, Peace, and Security
3 hrs. (3,0)
A survey of the causes and consequences of war in its various forms and the major theoretical and methodological approaches
to the study of war in the field of peace science and security studies. In particular, a review of domestic, state, and system
factors and the political correlates of war and conflict processes. Special emphasis on interstate wars, but civil wars, extra
state wars, and emerging “grey zone” conflicts are considered. Also explores peace, peace-making, and the cessation of
hostilities. PREREQUISITE: Upper-division standing. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2024-25.
3370 Intelligence and Security Studies
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduces the intelligence cycle (planning, collection, processing, analysis, and dissemination), the role of the intelligence
community in the making and implementation of foreign policy, and a broad overview of the field of security studies.
Intelligence needs are discussed with respect to both public and private sector actors. Also examines the moral and legal
constraints on national security professionals. Applies to liberal arts speaking-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: Grade
of C- or better in POSC 2020 and upper-division standing. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3400 Comparative Politics
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduces students to the causes and consequences of political institutions and provides a comparative analysis of selected
democratic and nondemocratic systems. PREREQUISITE: Upper-division standing. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2023-24.
3450  Politics of the Modern World
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Explores issues and theoretical concepts from the fields of comparative politics, international relations, and public policy of
relevance to current events. Course will examine the politics of five (5) nations currently in the news, exploring topics such as
education, development, migration, religion, poverty, debt, corruption, public health, human rights, technology, political
participation, conflict, and other contemporary issues. PREREQUISITE: Upper-division standing. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2024-25.
3510 International Political Economy
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduces students to the study of how politics and economics interact at the global, regional and national level. Covers the
major theories related to political economy; global monetary and trade relations; the role of multinational corporations,
international organizations, and NGOs; issues of globalization and development; the international flow of labor and capital;
state- and nation-building; and human rights. Particular emphasis on understanding contemporary issues facing the global
economy. EXPECTATION: ECON 2010. PREREQUISITE: Upper-division standing. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2023-24.
4650 Advanced Readings and Research
1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Intensive study of a subject in the field of political science not specifically covered by other courses. Area of study is defined by
the student and instructor with departmental approval. EXPECTATION: cumulative GPA of 3.0 or higher. CONSENT:
Instructor. PREREQUISITE: Upper-division standing; at least 18 hours of political science coursework. REPEAT: May be
repeated; total credit not to exceed 4 hours. OFFERED:  On demand.
4800 Government Internship
1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Placement in a government agency or party organization under professional supervision. Requires 45 hours of field experience
for each hour of credit. CONSENT: Instructor. PREREQUISITE: Upper-division standing; at least 18 hours of political science
coursework. REPEAT: May be repeated; total credit not to exceed 4 hours. GRADE: CR/NC. OFFERED: Sem. I, II; Summer.
4810 Legal Internship
1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Placement in a legal setting under professional supervision. Requires 45 hours of field experience for each hour of credit. Open
to non-majors. CONSENT: Instructor. PREREQUISITE: upper-division standing. REPEAT: May be repeated; total credit not
to exceed 4 hours. GRADE: CR/NC. OFFERED: Sem. I, II; Summer.
4820 International Internship
1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Placement under professional supervision in either a government agency or a non- governmental organization, in a position
focused on global issues. Requires 45 hours of field experience for each hour of credit. Open to non-majors. CONSENT:
Instructor. REPEAT: May be repeated; total credit not to exceed 4 hours. GRADE: CR/NC. OFFERED: Sem. I, II, Summer.
4860 Public Policy Practicum
3 hrs. (3, 0)
Students work as a team to conduct policy research for an external client under faculty supervision. An experiential learning
opportunity for students developing their knowledge and skills in a real-world setting. CONSENT: Instructor.
PREREQUISITE: Upper-division standing. OFFERED: On demand.
4915 Honors Research
3 hrs. (arranged)
Required for students who intend to graduate with departmental honors. Research project is designed and executed by the
student in consultation with and under the direction of the instructor. EXPECTATION: Cumulative GPA of 3.0 or higher and a
GPA of 3.5 or higher in courses counting toward the major. CONSENT: Department chair. PREREQUISITE: Senior standing.
OFFERED: Sem. I.
4930 Senior Seminar
1 hr. (1, 0)
Capstone course for the major. Students will integrate concepts, knowledge, skills, methods, approaches, and practical
experience from their major studies. PREREQUISITE: Senior standing. OFFERED: Sem. II.

HNRS COURSES
2110 Honors Literature and History 5 hrs. (5, 0)
Focuses on historical investigation and reading and writing on a common theme. EXPECTATION: C- or better, to fulfill the
Written Communication portion of the Liberal Arts Core Curriculum.
2125 The Scholar as Servant Leader 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Focuses on the stories of great men and women who were cast into positions of leadership and analyzes what is to be
understood of their personal formation and qualities as leaders and servants. Applies to liberal arts speaking-intensive
requirement.
2210 Scientific Discoveries and Paradigm Shifts 4 hrs. (3, 2)
Examines the nature of science, the history and philosophy of science, and the experiential, hands-on practice of science.
“Paradigm shifts” are explored as they relate to how science helps us understand our world.
3221 Traditionalism and Globalization 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines the bridges and barriers among various cultures of the world through a historical analysis. Applies to liberal arts
writing-intensive requirement.
3000 Dance and the Human Response 3 hrs. (3, 0)
An integrated appreciation/experiential dance course that investigates how dance is an important element of social, political,
personal and religious expression across time and cultures, and engages students in the practice of a few specific dance forms.
3325 Christ and Culture 3 hrs. (2, 0)
Organized as a seminar in historical theology that considers the various relationships between Christians and their culture.
Readings in primary and secondary sources, as well as journal articles, will inform seminar discussions.
4910 Honors Senior Seminar 1 hr. (1, 0)
Honors scholars will develop and complete an original research project which makes a unique scholarly contribution, under
the direction of an academic mentor.

PEHS COURSES
1000 Fitness and Wellness for Life 2 hrs. (1, 2)
Provides a base upon which students may build healthy bodies through understanding of and participation in fitness/leisure
activities. Surveys key fitness/wellness concepts in the lecture portion of class.
1050 Bowling 1 hr. (0, 2)
Fee required. OFFERED: 2023-24.
1060 Weight Training 1 hr. (0, 2)
1100 Beginning Swimming 1 hr. (0, 2)
1120 Golf 1 hr. (0, 2)
NOTE: Six-week class only; meets daily.
1130 Scuba 1 hr. (0, 2)
Earn Scuba Educators International Open Water Diver certification through this education-oriented classes. Classes occur
in the classroom and pool. Required course fee covers full certification cost. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2023-24. GRADE: CR/NC.
1150 Badminton 1 hr. (0, 2)
NOTE: Six-week class only; meets daily.
1190 Mind-Body Fitness 1 hr. (0, 2)
Provides opportunity to experience yoga-like stretches and poses while learning deep- breathing relaxation techniques and
centering activities.
1200 Co-Curricular Activity 1 hr. (0, 2)
Provides academic credit for participation in intercollegiate sports activities, including cheerleading. Credit must be taken in
the primary semester of competition. Does not count toward PEHS major or minor. REPEAT: May be repeated in a different
activity only; total credit not to exceed 2 hours. GRADE: CR/NC.
1220 Tennis 1 hr. (0, 2)
NOTE: Six-week class only; meets daily.
2000 Intermediate Swimming 1 hr. (0, 2)
2020 American Red Cross Lifeguarding 1 hr. (0, 2)
Provides instruction in the American Red Cross lifeguarding program, which can lead to ARC certification. EXPECTATION:
Swimming proficiency at ARC Level VII.
2040 Water Safety Instructor 1 hr. (0, 2)
Provides instruction in the American Red Cross water safety program, which can lead to ARC certification. EXPECTATION:
Swimming proficiency at ARC Level VII.
2260 Advanced Conditioning for Sports Performance 1 hr. (0, 3)
Provides instruction in and supervision of planned, ongoing exercises and training regimens (strength, anaerobic, and aerobic)
for the purpose of sports performance enhancement. Open to all students. REPEAT: May be repeated; total credit not to
exceed 4 hours. GRADE: CR/NC. NOTE: Weeks and days the class meets vary by section and semester. OFFERED: Every
semester according to sport.
1450 First Aid 2 hrs. (2, 1)
Students earn American Red Cross Responding to Emergencies certification upon successful completion (includes first aid,
community CPR, and AED). Credit may not be earned in both PEHS 1450 and ATRG 1460. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
1550 Care and Prevention of Injuries and Illnesses 3 hrs. (2, 1)
Introduces the basic concepts of prevention and care of injuries and illnesses including emergency procedures. Upon
completion the student may become first aid and CPR certified through the American Red Cross. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2340 Psychology of Coaching 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Applies scientific principles to coaching at different levels of competition. Discusses motivation, personality differences,
communication, and the effect of winning and losing. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2024-25.
3030 Techniques of Coaching Volleyball 1 hr. (1, 1)
OFFERED: Sem. I, 2023-24.
3040 Techniques of Coaching Soccer 1 hr. (1, 1)
OFFERED: Sem. I, 2023-24.
3050 Techniques of Coaching Football 1 hr. (1, 1)
OFFERED: Sem. I, 2023-24.
3060 Techniques of Coaching Track 1 hr. (1, 1)
OFFERED: Sem. II, 2024-25.
3070 Techniques of Coaching Basketball 1 hr. (1, 1)
OFFERED: Sem. II, 2023-24.
3080 Techniques of Coaching Baseball 1 hr. (1, 1)
OFFERED: Sem. I, 2024-25.
3340 Sociology of Sport 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines sports and their part in the lives of people, communities, and our society. Encourages students to ask critical
questions regarding how sports impact the world in which we live. Investigates the influence of sports on children, gender,
race, social class, media, the economy, and religion. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3410 Sports Administration 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Develops skills in the organization and administration of interscholastic athletics, including philosophy, scheduling, budget,
equipment care, awards, legal aspects, and facilities. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3490 School Health Organization 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Develops skills in the organization and management of health programs in the school, including classroom, school health
services, and related community-based health services. OFFERED: Sem. II. LAST OFFERED: 2023-24.
4850 Practicum in Physical Education or Sport 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Provides opportunity for independent work or field experience in settings like camps, agencies, city parks and recreation
centers, or other physical activity locations. CONSENT: Instructor. EXPECTATION: Played on a high school or college athletic
team at the varsity level. REPEAT: May be repeated for a total of 8 hours. GRADE: CR/NC. OFFERED: Every semester as
needed. LAST OFFERED: 2023-24.
4860 Practicum in Health 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Provides opportunity for independent work or field experience in teaching health in area schools. CONSENT: Instructor.
EXPECTATION: Must be accepted into Teacher Education Preparation Program. REPEAT: May be repeated for a total of 8
hours. PRE-/COREQUISITE: PEHS 3100 or PEHS 3490. GRADE: CR/NC. OFFERED: Every semester as needed. LAST
OFFERED: 2023-24.

ATRG COURSES
1530 Theory of Conditioning of Athletes 3 hrs. (2, 0)
Investigates the physiological background, techniques/methods, and precautions of conditioning athletes. Analyzes nutrition,
ergogenic aids, gender, age, and climatic issues. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4440 Clinical Experience in Athletic Training VI 1 hr. (0,1)
Guided experiences in the treatment of general medical conditions and sports performance of athletes. Students will be
tested throughout the course in both real-time and practice settings. PREREQUISITE: Athletic training major in good
standing. OFFERED: Sem. I, II. LAST OFFERED: 2023-24.
4460 Administration of Athletic Training 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Develops skills in the organization and administration of an athletic training/sports medicine program, including philosophy,
budget, facilities, equipment, insurance, legal aspects, records, employment, personnel, and structure of the National
Athletic Trainers Association. PREREQUISITE: Athletic training major in good standing; senior standing. OFFERED: Sem. I.
LAST OFFERED: 2023-24.
4500 Clinical Experience in Athletic Training VII 1 hr. (0, 1)
Guided experiences in the organization and administration of the athletic training profession, including ethics, risk
management, legal aspects, professional development, and athletic training management. Students will be tested
throughout the course in both real-time and practice settings. PREREQUISITE: ATRG 3440; athletic training major in good
standing. OFFERED: Sem. I, II. LAST OFFERED: 2023-24.
4550 Research in Athletic Training 1 hr. (2, 0)
The need for quality evidence-based practice is growing in all allied health professions. Student athletic trainers must be
prepared to understand and utilize the evidence related to all aspects of athletic training. Likewise, students must learn how to
add to the body of knowledge within athletic training. A variety of research methods will be discussed, including both qualitative
and quantitative, as they relate to athletic training and health care. Students will begin a yearlong independent research project.
Fee required. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. OFFERED: Sem. I. LAST OFFERED: 2023-24.
4850 Practicum in Athletic Training 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Provides opportunity for independent work or field experiences in the sports medicine field. PREREQUISITE: Athletic training
major in good standing. CONSENT: Instructor. REPEAT: May be repeated for a total of 8 hours. GRADE: CR/NC. OFFERED:
Every semester as needed. LAST OFFERED: 2023-24.
4910 Seminar in Athletic Training 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Overview of research methodology in athletic training. Prepares students for the BOC examination and entry into the
profession. Capstone course in athletic training. Selected topics of current interest in sports medicine. Requires the
development and presentation of an independent research project. Applies to liberal arts speaking-intensive requirement.
PREREQUISITE: Senior athletic training major in good standing. Fee required. OFFERED: Sem. II. LAST OFFERED: 2023-24.
EXSC COURSES
1360 Introduction to Exercise Science 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Explores the discipline and sub-disciplines represented within exercise science. Examination of the historical and cultural
aspects of exercise science as well as current trends and future developments, including professional development and
certification. Fee required. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2140 Nutrition in Health and Disease 4 hrs. (3, 2)
Introductory view of the relationship between nutrition and disease. Covers the methodology used to determine nutritional
and health status and how evidence is gathered to determine links between nutrition and the prevention of specific diseases
and conditions, such as cardiovascular disease, cancer, diabetes, obesity, gastrointestinal disorders, and osteoporosis are
covered in depth. Emphasis on the scientific method and how scientific processes allow these facts to be known. OFFERED:
Sem. I, II.
2440 Stress Management 3 hrs. (3, 1)
Investigates stressors in the personal, work, and social environments and the interconnectedness of health and stress.
Discusses the physiological aspects of the stress response. Explores various coping strategies for stress management.
OFFERED: Sem. I.
2455 Foundations of Exercise Leadership 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Emphasizes fundamentals necessary to design safe and appropriate cardiovascular and strength training programs for
personal-training clients based on exercise prescription principles. Develops applicable teaching methodology in various
activity and lecture situations. Fee required. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2550 Health, Exercise, and Aging 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Examines the health-related physiological dimensions of aging and the role of lifestyle activity and exercise as strategy for
coping with the changes. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2580 Sports Nutrition 3 hrs. (2, 1)
Explores principles of nutrition as they relate to athletes and athletic competition, including the role of athletic trainers and
coaches in implementing sound sports nutrition programs to promote optimal health and performance for athletes. Includes
topics such as pre-event and post-event meal planning, nutritional assessment, nutritional counseling, carbohydrate loading,
electrolyte drinks, ergogenic aids, protein and vitamin supplementation, recognition of eating disorders, and physiological
aspects of nutrition as they relate to athletic competition. Fee required. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
3100 Eating Disorders 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Analysis of factors involved in etiology, assessment, medical consequences, treatment, and prevention of eating disorders.
OFFERED: Sem. II.
3200 Nutrition in the Life Cycle 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Addresses specific nutritional needs at various stages of the human life cycle: lactation, infancy, childhood, adolescence, and
adulthood, including old age. The most common nutritional concerns, their relationship to food choices and health status, and
strategies to enhance well-being at each stage of the life cycle are emphasized. PREREQUISITE: EXSC 2140 or EXSC 2580.
OFFERED: Summer.
3300 Health Implications of Obesity 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Study of obesity and being overweight with special emphasis on diet, nutrition, and exercise. Modes of prevention and
treatment will also be discussed. PREREQUISITE: EXSC 2140 or EXSC 2580. OFFERED: Summer.
3470 Physiology of Exercise I 4 hrs. (3, 2)
Studies physiological changes in the human organism as a result of physical exercise, including immediate and chronic
responses of the body to exercise, physiological limitations to exercise, and limitations of present physiological knowledge for
total understanding of exercise response. Practical applications of physiology to coaching and teaching. PREREQUISITE:
BIOL 2420. Fee required. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3480 Physiology of Exercise II 4 hrs. (3, 2)
An advanced course in the area of exercise and human performance. Which provides further in-depth examination of the
physiological mechanisms responsible for both the acute and chronic changes which occur with exercise. PREREQUISITE:
EXSC 3470. Fee required. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3520 Biomechanics I 4 hrs. (3, 2)
Examines the scientific principles basic to human motion: both anatomical and biomechanical. Includes a laboratory
experience. PREREQUISITE: BIOL 2410. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3530 Biomechanics II 4 hrs. (3, 2)
Continues to explore and apply biomechanical principles to human movement through lecture and laboratory experiences.
Topics include the Newtonian mechanics, kinematics, and kinetics of human motion through applied knowledge of anatomy
and physics. PREREQUISITE: EXSC 3520. FIRST OFFERED: Sem. II.
4010 Advanced Resistance Training and Conditioning 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Analyzes advanced principles of skeletal muscle physiology and bioenergetics in the application of strength training and
conditioning programs designed for athletes and recreational exercisers. PREREQUISITE: EXSC 3470 and ATRG 1530.
OFFERED: Sem. II.
4050 EKG and Cardiovascular Disease 3 hrs. (2,1)
Introduction to the basic principles and interpretation of the electrocardiograph (EKG) as it relates to clinical and fitness
programs. Students learn how to record EKGs, vital signs, recognize cardiac rhythms and will learn the importance of an EKG
and how EKG rhythms provide important data for the diagnosis of heart conditions. Will cover the many risk factors
associated with coronary artery disease and the management and treatment of cardiovascular disease. PREREQUISITE:
EXSC 3470. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4150 Exercise Testing and Prescription 4 hrs. (3, 2)
Provides an in-depth study of the theoretical basis and applied knowledge required for graded exercise testing and
individualized exercise prescription. Includes electrocardiograph techniques/interpretation, pharmacological considerations,
test data interpretation, and emergency procedures. PREREQUISITE: EXSC 3470. Fee required. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4160 Clinical Experience in Exercise Testing and Prescription 1 hr. (0, 2)
Provides laboratory experiences designed to present and refine skills in conducting various health fitness assessments (e.g.
resting and exercise blood pressure, body composition, submaximal aerobic capacity, maximal graded exercise stress tests,
EKG placement and rhythm recognition). Students will also demonstrate the ability to prescribe physical activity and exercise
programs to maintain and promote good health. The implications of test results and application to exercise prescription will
be discussed. PREREQUISITE: EXSC 4150; exercise science major. Fee required. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
4650 Independent Research in Exercise Science 1-3 hrs. (0, 3)
Provides opportunity for independently executed investigations, normally by students with upper-division standing. REPEAT:
May be repeated; credit not to exceed 6 hours. OFFERED: Every semester as needed.
4800 Internship in Exercise Science 4 hrs. (arranged)
Intended for students to observe and gain practical experience in a professional environment in which they plan to work as a
career. Students are required to complete 4 credits of internship before graduation. CONSENT: Instructor. PREREQUISITE:
EXSC 4150. GRADE: CR/NC. Fee required. REPEAT: May be repeated. OFFERED: Every semester as needed.
4850 Practicum in Exercise Science 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Provides opportunity for independent work or field experience in settings of personal training, agencies, or clinics in the
exercise science field. CONSENT: Instructor. PREREQUISITE: Exercise science major; junior standing. REPEAT: May be
repeated for a total of 8 hours. GRADE: CR/NC. OFFERED: Every semester as needed.
4910 Research in Exercise Science 3 hrs. (3, 0)
The need for quality evidence-based practice is growing in all allied health professions. Students must be prepared to
understand and utilize the evidence related to all aspects of professional practice. A variety of research methods will be
discussed, including both qualitative and quantitative. Students will begin a yearlong independent research project.
OFFERED: Sem. I.
4920 Seminar in Exercise Science 3 hrs. (2, 0)
Investigates selected topics of current interest in exercise and health science. Capstone course in exercise science. Requires a
written and oral presentation of a creative project involving either applied, experimental, or library research. Applies to liberal
arts writing and speaking-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: Exercise science major; senior standing. Fee required.
OFFERED: Sem. II.
PETE COURSES
1300 Introduction to Sports, Physical Activity, and Recreation 2 hrs. (2, 1)
Introduces foundational concepts in sports, physical activity, physical education, and recreation, including historical and
philosophical orientations, current issues, and career opportunities. Fee required. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2250 Motor Behavior 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines the forces that influence the acquisition of motor skill and movement patterns. Surveys growth and development
patterns. Identifies characteristics of skilled movement forms. Reviews factors which impact the learning of skills like
knowledge of results and performance. Discusses motivational patterns and sport interests. Surveys the sub discipline of
motor learning. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3710 Instructional Strategies (K-5) 3 hrs. (3, 1)
Examines and develops instructional strategies for teaching physical education in grades K-5. The development of
fundamental movement patterns and foundational movement concepts will be examined as well. Includes teaching practicum
with children ages 4 to 12 years. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3720 Sports, Physical Activity, and Recreation for Special Populations 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduces students to a variety of physical, mental, and emotional disabilities, including characteristics and behavior
patterns. Physical activities and recreational activities, which are developmentally appropriate for all age groups and
populations will be discussed, including their physical and social benefits. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2023-24.
3750 Instructional Strategies (6-12) 3 hrs. (3, 1)
Provides laboratory experience in teaching methodology of physical education for grades 6-12. Requires planning and
implementing lessons using a variety of teaching strategies. Considers sociological and psychological issues in student
interactions. EXPECTATION: At least six hours of activity classes. PREREQUISITE: Junior standing; SPRL 1350, 2350, 2450.
OFFERED: Sem. I. LAST OFFERED: 2023-24.
4260 Directed Experience in Teaching Physical Education 3 hrs. (1, 3)
Provides students with field experiences in teaching physical education within public schools prior to the student-teaching
semester. Applies content knowledge, management strategies, motivational ideas, and pedagogical skills that they have learned
in previous courses. Allows a real-life teaching situation so that students can test their skills with the guidance of a veteran public
school teacher as a mentor. PREREQUISITE: Teaching major. PETE 3710, 3750. GPA of 2.75 or higher. COREQUISITE: PETE
4300. EXPECTATION: Passed Praxis Core Exam. Fee required. OFFERED: Sem. I. LAST OFFERED: 2024-25.
4300 Curriculum Development and Assessment in Physical Education 3 hrs. (3, 2)
Examines the integration of content, instruction, and assessment to the principles and practices of program development.
Requires the creation of teaching documents that shape the physical education curriculum. Provides a field experience that
promotes the application of curriculum development in three age-level settings. Reviews administrative issues facing physical
education teachers. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: Teaching major. PETE 3710, 3750.
GPA of 2.75 or higher. COREQUISITE: PETE4260. EXPECTATION: Passed Praxis Core Exam. OFFERED: Sem. I. LAST
OFFERED: 2024-25.
4850 Practicum in Physical Education Teaching 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Provides opportunity for independent work or field experiences in physical education teaching in area schools. CONSENT:
Instructor. PREREQUISITE: Physical education teaching major; junior standing. REPEAT: May be repeated for a total of 8
hours. GRADE: CR/NC. OFFERED: Every semester as needed. LAST OFFERED: 2024-25.
4900 Technology Applications in Sport, Physical Activity, and Recreation 2 hrs. (2, 1)
Investigates and applies techniques and practice in the use of technology-based media, which supports and enhances
sport, physical activity, and recreation programs. Emphasizes computer and smartphone applications that support
teaching, coaching, and recreation (e.g., databases, PowerPoint, screencast, geocaching, etc.). Applies to liberal arts
speaking-intensive requirement. OFFERED: Sem. I.
SPRL COURSES
1350 Physical Activity Cluster I - Focus on Team Sports 3 hrs. (0, 4)
Develops content knowledge and instructional skills in selected team sports such as basketball, team handball, football,
soccer, volleyball, softball, and ultimate. Emphasizes skill development, instructional strategies, rules and strategies,
management, and assessment. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2450 Physical Activity Cluster III - Focus on Recreational Activities & Outdoor Pursuits 3 hrs. (0, 4)
Develops content knowledge and instructional skills in recreational and outdoor activities such as archery, golf, bowling,
badminton, pickleball, tennis, Frisbee golf, adventure education, and outdoor pursuits. Emphasizes skill development,
instructional strategies, rules and strategies, and management. Fee required. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2550 Youth and Adult Sports Programming 2 hrs. (2, 1)
Introduces planning, programming, and implementation of sports programs for youth and adults within such organizations as
recreation centers, YMCAs, churches, camps, and businesses. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3150 Recreational Leadership 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Examines the essential elements and basic principles of organization and leadership of recreational and leisure programs,
including planning and conducting organized programs in private and public agencies. Special emphasis will be given to the
role of face-to-face leadership within recreational organizations. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3250 Legal Aspects of Sport and Recreation 3 hrs. (3, 0)
An examination of the laws and policies governing the various aspects of sport and sport business and their relationship to
personal and professional ethics. The role of regulatory commissions and organizations in sport will be explored. OFFERED:
Sem. II.
3300 Management of Sport Facilities and Events 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Designed to give students information and knowledge on the operation and management of athletic and recreational
facilities. In addition, event planning, sponsorship, budgeting, management, and evaluation of athletic and recreational
events will be emphasized. Fee required. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4850 Practicum in Sport and Recreational Leadership 3 hrs. (arranged)
Introduces planning, programming, and implementation of sports programs for youth and adults within such
organizations as recreation centers, YMCAs, churches, camps, and businesses. CONSENT: Instructor. PREREQUISITE:
Sport and recreational leadership major; junior standing. REPEAT: May be repeated up to 6 hours. GRADE: CR/NC.
OFFERED: Every semester as needed.
LART COURSES
1000 College Survival Skills 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Provides an opportunity for students to learn and adopt methods to be successful in undergraduate work. Deals with basic
academic, study, and life skills, and attitudes necessary for collegiate success. OFFERED: Sem. I, II, Summer.
1010 Strategies for Academic Success 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduces the concept of how emotional intelligence (EQ) and personal learning preferences affect the student’s ability to
think critically and therefore improve learning. Provides an opportunity to assess and develop basic EQ skills and study
strategies necessary for academic success, including textbook reading, note-taking, test-taking, time management,
communication skills, collegiate writing skills, presentation skills, and career planning. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
1020 Strategies for Academic Success for Adult Learners 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduces adult students to strategies necessary for academic success, including time management, note-taking, test-taking,
reading strategies, communication skills, collegiate writing skills, and research skills. Introduces the concept of how emotional
intelligence (EQ) affects the ability to think critically and achieve success. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
1050 First-Year Experience Seminar 1 hr. (1, 0)
A holistic orientation during which students reflect, connect, and grow intellectually, socially, and spiritually as part of AU’s
community. Students reflect upon AU’s five core values and its distinctive Christian character while also connecting to campus
resources necessary for their success. Students grow as whole people by considering how their core values, individual
strengths, and vocational call can work together to benefit their personal and professional future. GRADE: CR/NC. OFFERED:
Sem. I, II.
1100 Critical-Thinking Seminar 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Cultivates critical-thinking, communication, and community-building skills common to most other university-level classes and
useful for pursuing truth and living lives of faith and service. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
1200 Career and Life Planning 1 hr. (2, 0)
Addresses the role of decision-making skills in choosing a college major. Students assess interests, personality, skills, and
values to assist them in finding the “best fit” among the majors and career options they are researching. Students also learn
effective problem-solving skills that can be used over a lifetime for career and life-planning decisions. PREREQUISITE:
Designed for undecided freshman or sophomore students, but open to juniors and seniors with instructor’s consent.
OFFERED: Sem. I.
2900 Student-Leadership Seminar 1 hr. (1, 0)
Students will explore the discipline of leadership. With a biblical framework, applicable themes will give students practical
ways to reflect on their strengths and grow in their leadership skills. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
4500 Critical Thinking and Professional Development 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Focuses on transforming learning from the classroom to the real world through the assessment and development of the 6
major areas and 16 subcomponents of emotional intelligence (EQ) and the 8 Competencies for a Career-Ready Workforce
(National Association of Colleges and Employers). Students incorporate a variety of methods to enhance the critical-thinking
skills and EQ skills necessary to positively affect decision-making skills and personal, collegiate, and professional relationships
that define success. Applies to liberal arts speaking-intensive and experiential requirements. OFFERED: Sem. I, Summer.

INCS COURSE
3850 Domestic/Global Experience 0 hrs. (arranged)
Participation in an intercultural service/learning experience. Offered in conjunction with a Tri-S program. CONSENT:
Instructor. OFFERED: Sem. I, II; Summer.

MATH COURSES
1000 Introductory Algebra 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Basic algebra course designed to prepare students for college-level mathematics courses. Topics include whole numbers,
fractions, decimals and percentages, ratios and proportions, polynomials, algebraic solutions of linear and quadratic
equations, word problems, and systems of equations. Does not apply toward mathematics major or minor. GRADE: CR/NC.
OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
1100 Elementary Mathematics-Numeration Systems 4 hrs. (4, 0)
Elementary foundations course for students preparing for elementary and middle school education. Includes deductive
reasoning, the algebra of sets, numeration systems, properties of natural numbers, integers, rational numbers, real numbers,
and data analysis. Does not apply toward mathematics major or minor. OFFERED: Sem. I.
1110 Elementary Mathematics-Geometry 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Includes point-set geometry, linear and angular measurement concepts, area and volume, transformational geometry, and
probability. Designed particularly for elementary and middle school education majors. Does not apply toward mathematics
major or minor. OFFERED: Sem. II.
1220 Advanced Algebra and Trigonometry 3 hrs. (3, 0)
A course designed in order to fully prepare students for MATH 2010. Topics include right triangle trigonometry, trigonometric
identities and equations, complex numbers, laws of sines and cosines, trigonometric, exponential, and logarithmic functions,
analytic geometry, and conic sections. Does not apply toward mathematics major or minor. OFFERED: Sem. I.
1250 Explorations in Mathematics 3 hrs. (3, 0)
A course designed for students to explore different areas of college-level mathematics. Students will appreciate the relevance
of mathematics through real-life applications. Emphasis will be placed on critical reasoning, problem solving, and the clear
communication of mathematical ideas. Topics will be chosen from mathematics of finance, mathematical modeling,
probability and statistics, voting theory, infinity, and logic. Does not apply toward mathematics major or minor. OFFERED:
Sem. I, II.
1300 Finite Mathematics 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Topics include introduction to counting techniques, probability, systems of linear equations and matrices, linear
programming, Markov chains, and the mathematics of finance. Does not apply toward mathematics major or minor.
OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
1400 Applied Calculus 4 hrs. (4, 0)
Topics include functions, limits, derivatives, applications of derivatives, integration, and applications of integration. Functions
considered are polynomial, rational, logarithmic, and exponential functions. Emphasis is on computational skill and problem
solving. Applications are taken from management, life sciences, and social sciences. Does not apply toward mathematics
major or minor. EXPECTATION: Two years of high school algebra. PREREQUISITE: Not open to students with a grade of C or
better in MATH 2010 or its equivalent. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
2010 Calculus I 4 hrs. (4, 0)
Introduction to plane analytic geometry, functions, limits, continuity, differentiation of algebraic and trigonometric functions,
application of the derivative, and indefinite and definite integrals. EXPECTATION: Two years of high school algebra, plane
geometry, and trigonometry, MATH 1220, or passing score on Calculus Readiness Exam. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2020 Calculus II 4 hrs. (4, 0)
Continuation of MATH 2010. Attention given to methods of integration of algebraic and transcendental functions, curves
given in polar coordinates, curves given by parametric equations, applications of integration, introduction to ordinary
differential equations, and infinite sequences and series. PREREQUISITE: Grade of at least C- in MATH 2010. An appropriate
AP score may waive the prerequisite; see department chair. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2120 Introductory Statistics with Applications 4 hrs. (4, 0)
Descriptive statistics; binomial, normal, and chi-square distributions; sampling distributions; estimation; hypothesis testing;
simple linear regression; and analysis of variance. EXPECTATION: Two years of high school algebra. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2200 Discrete Mathematical Structures 4 hrs. (4, 0)
Topics include Boolean algebra, computer logic, relations and functions, logic and proof techniques, combinatorics, algebraic
structures, and graph theory. SAME AS: CPSC 2250. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2300 College Geometry 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Presents an axiomatic basis for Euclidean geometry and provides insight into the interdependence of various theorems and
axioms. Topics include incidence and order properties, congruence, absolute and non-Euclidean geometry, the parallel
postulate, and the real numbers and geometry. PREREQUISITE: MATH 2010. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2023-24.
3010 Linear Algebra 4 hrs. (4, 0)
Introduction to algebra and geometry of R3 and its extension to Rn
. Topics include vector spaces and linear transformations,
systems of linear equations and their solutions, matrices and determinants, eigenvalues, eigenvectors. Applications of these
topics will also be demonstrated. PREREQUISITE: Grade of at least C- in MATH 2010. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3020 Calculus III 4 hrs. (4, 0)
Continuation of MATH 2020. Attention given to multi-dimensional calculus and its applications. Topics include partial
differentiation, multiple integration, three-dimensional analytic geometry, and vector calculus. PREREQUISITE: MATH grade
of at least C- in 2020, grade of at least C- in 3010. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3100 Differential Equations 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Methods of solving ordinary differential equations and their applications to life sciences, physics, and chemistry. Topics
covered will include first and second order homogenous and nonhomogeneous equations, first order systems, Laplace
transforms, series solutions, and an introduction to partial differential equations. PREREQUISITE: Grade of at least C- in
MATH 2020. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3200 Mathematical Models 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Formation and study of mathematical models used in business, social, and biological sciences. Mathematical topics include Nperson games, networks, Markov processes, application of graphs and digraphs, apportionment, and group decision-making.
OFFERED: Sem. II, 2024-25.
3300 Numerical Analysis 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduction to numerical algorithms fundamental to scientific and mathematical computer use. Includes root finding
methods; polynomial interpolation; numerical integration and differentiation; matrix equations; numerical solutions to
differential equations. PREREQUISITE: CPSC 2020, MATH 2020. SAME AS: CPSC 3300. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3400 Mathematics of Finance 3 hrs. (3, 0)
A course designed to introduce the fundamental concepts of financial mathematics with an emphasis on interest theory.
Topics include mathematical foundations of the following: present and accumulated values, annuities, loans, bonds, financial
markets, arbitrage, and financial derivatives. Serves as a foundation for the second actuarial exam (FM/2). PREREQUISITE:
MATH 2020. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2024-25.
4000 Problem Seminar 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Introduction to research techniques based on problems from parts of the regular curriculum such as calculus, linear algebra,
probability, and statistics. Emphasis on problems from the required core of the curriculum — problems that are integrative in
nature. Applies to liberal arts speaking-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: Junior/Senior standing. OFFERED: Sem. I,
2023-24.
4010 Mathematical Statistics 4 hrs. (4, 0)
Probability distributions, expectation, mean, variance, moment generating functions, special distributions, unbiasedness,
maximum likelihood, confidence intervals, and hypothesis testing. PREREQUISITE: MATH 3010. OFFERED: Sem. I.
4100 Real Analysis 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Careful study of the real number system with attention given to the study of real-valued functions, metric spaces, sequences,
continuity, differentiation, and integration. PREREQUISITE: MATH 3010. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2024-25.
4200 Abstract Algebra 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Consideration of fundamental concepts of modern algebra. Includes groups, rings, integral domains, and fields along with
isomorphisms, homomorphisms, normal subgroups, and quotient groups. PREREQUISITE: MATH 3010. OFFERED: Sem. I,
2023-24.
4650 Independent Study 1-3 hrs. (arranged)
Selected topics in higher mathematics. Total combined credit from MATH 4650 and 4900 may not exceed 12 hours.
CONSENT: Department chair.
4700 Methods in Teaching Mathematics 2 hrs. (2, 0)
PREREQUISITE: MATH 3020. COREQUISITE: EDUC 4710. OFFERED: Sem. I.
4900 Seminar 1-3 hrs. (arranged)
Seminars in algebra, analysis, topology, set theory, complex variables, non-Euclidean geometry, and applied mathematics.
Total combined credit in MATH 4650 and 4900 may not exceed 12 hours. CONSENT: Department chair. OFFERED: With
sufficient demand.

MLAN COURSES
2000 Language and Society 4 hrs. (4, 0)
Introduces the study of language in the context of historical, grammatical, biological, and social issues. Our nationalities, our
family histories, our speech communities, our social standings, and our education all influence the ways in which we use
language. Examines the many ways people use and manipulate language according to their individual background to make
themselves understood and/or to achieve specific goals in different social settings. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3400 The French- and Spanish-Speaking Caribbean 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Explores the dynamic convergence of cultures, races, and religions that comprise the French- and Spanish-speaking
Caribbean. Primary focus on the cultures of Haiti, the French Antilles, Cuba, Puerto Rico, and the Dominican Republic,
through their history, literature, language, politics, art, and religious expression. Emphasis on the complex interrelation of
these elements, which have formed the contemporary identity of the region. Taught in English. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3500 Immersive Experience: Cultural, Linguistic, and Personal 1 hr. (1, 0)
Designed for the language majors studying abroad or completing an intensive language/culture experience domestically, this
course provides orientation prior to the experience, prepares them for life abroad or in their immersive experience, and helps
them process the experience while engaged in it and upon return to campus. CONSENT: Department Chair. PREREQUISITE:
FREN/SPAN 2020 or instructor permission. GRADE: CR/NC. LAST OFFERED: 2023-24.
4900 Senior Seminar in Cultural Studies 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Addresses openness to truth and Christian commitments and practices from a global perspective of modern languages and
cultures. Includes required readings, in-depth discussions, and a major project and presentation. Taught in English. Required
of all Spanish majors. Applies to liberal arts writing and speaking-intensive requirement. CONSENT: Instructor. OFFERED:
Sem. I.

FREN COURSES
1010 Elementary French I 4 hrs. (3, 1)
Emphasizes development of fundamental language skills (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) and appreciation of
Francophone cultures. Individual online or outside language laboratory work required. PREREQUISITE: Placement.
OFFERED: Sem. I.
1020 Elementary French II 4 hrs. (3, 1)
Emphasizes development of fundamental language skills (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) and appreciation of
Francophone cultures. Individual online or outside language laboratory work required. PREREQUISITE: Placement or FREN
1010. OFFERED: Sem. II.

GERM COURSES
1010 Elementary German I 4 hrs. (3, 1)
Emphasizes development of fundamental language skills (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) and appreciation of
Germanic cultures. Individual online or outside language laboratory work required. PREREQUISITE: Placement. OFFERED:
Sem. I.
1020 Elementary German II 4 hrs. (3, 1)
Emphasizes continued development of fundamental language skills (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) and
appreciation of Germanic cultures. Individual online or outside language laboratory work required. PREREQUISITE:
Placement or GERM 1010. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2010 Intermediate German I 4 hrs. (3, 1)
Communicative tasks and culture-oriented readings. Continued development of basic skills in reading, writing, listening, and
speaking. Individual online or outside language laboratory work required. PREREQUISITE: Placement or GERM 1020.
OFFERED: With sufficient demand.

SPAN COURSES
1010 Elementary Spanish I 4 hrs. (3, 1)
Emphasizes development of fundamental language skills (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) and appreciation of
Spanish-speaking cultures. Individual online or outside laboratory work required. PREREQUISITE: Placement. OFFERED:
Sem. I, II.
1020 Elementary Spanish II 4 hrs. (3, 1)
Emphasizes continued development of fundamental language skills (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) and
appreciation of Spanish-speaking cultures. Individual online or outside laboratory work required. PREREQUISITE: Placement
or SPAN 1010. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2010 Intermediate Spanish I 4 hrs. (3, 1)
Increases language proficiency in the areas of listening, speaking, reading, and writing through a review of beginning Spanish
so that learners can navigate typical social situations and communicate about past, present, and future daily activities in
Spanish. Also emphasizes understanding the diverse Spanish-speaking cultures through authentic materials. Individual online
or outside laboratory work required. PREREQUISITE: Placement or SPAN 1020. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2020 Intermediate Spanish II 4 hrs. (3, 1)
Increases language proficiency in the areas of listening, speaking, reading, and writing, so that learners can speak with ease
about past, present, and future experiences relevant to a variety of settings in Spanish. Also emphasizes understanding the
diverse Spanish-speaking cultures through authentic materials. Introduction to literary readings. Individual online or outside
laboratory work required. PREREQUISITE: Placement or SPAN 2010. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
210x Spanish for the Professions 3 hrs.
Designed for students who will interact with Spanish-speakers in their careers, these courses will give students the linguistic
and cultural knowledge needed to communicate on the job in Spanish at the intermediate level. Only one section of SPAN
210X may be counted toward completion of the Spanish major or Spanish minor. EXPECTATION: SPAN 2010.
2101 Spanish for Health Care 3 hrs. (3, 0)
OFFERED: Semester II.
2102 Spanish for Ministry 3 hrs. (3, 0)
OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
2103 Spanish for Social Work and Criminal Justice 3 hrs. (3, 0)
OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
2104 Spanish for Business 3 hrs. (3, 0)
OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3010 Spanish Composition 4 hrs. (4, 0)
Builds upon intermediate Spanish to introduce students to authentic readings, short films, and music at the early advanced
level. It emphasizes the skill areas of reading and writing to help students develop their communicative abilities for such
common tasks as blogging, storytelling, reporting upon events, and persuading others in a formal essay. Students will work
towards the goal of having their language be understood by native speakers who do not regularly interact with non-natives.
Required of all Spanish majors and minors. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: Placement
or SPAN 2020. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
3020 Spanish Conversation 4 hrs. (3, 1)
Designed to increase students’ abilities to deal orally and culturally with a variety of subjects related to everyday life,
employment, current events, and travel. Includes review of Spanish grammar, development of more fluent command of oral
patterns, and more active control of vocabulary. Practice with native Spanish speakers required in a practicum setting.
Required of all Spanish majors and minors. Applies to liberal arts speaking-intensive requirement. EXPECTATION: SPAN 2020.
OFFERED: Sem. II.
3140 Spanish Phonetics 3 hrs. (2, 1)
Provides a survey of topics in Spanish phonetics and phonology, designed to help the non-native speaker develop more
accurate pronunciation and intonation. Introduction to phonetic transcription, basic concepts of linguistic science, and
contrasts with English pronunciation patterns. Requires speaking and listening activities outside of class. Required of all
Spanish majors. PREREQUISITE: SPAN 2020. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3200 Advanced Spanish Grammar and Translation 3 hrs. (3, 0)
In-depth review of grammar with the goal of refining students’ understanding and use of written Spanish. Includes oral and
written exercises, vocabulary-building exercises, and translations. Emphasis on finer points of Spanish grammar as
compared to English. PREREQUISITE: SPAN 3010, 3020. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3240 Strategies for Advanced Spanish Proficiency 1-2 hrs. (1-2, 0)
Course purpose is to increase communicative proficiency in Spanish in multiple domains (speaking, listening, reading,
writing) and to provide the life-long learner with strategies for maintaining and continuing to grow in these language skills.
Includes speaking practice with a native speaker language coach and the development and implementation of an action plan
for the semester, individualized according to the needs and preferences of each student. REPEAT: May be repeated once
with instructor permission for a maximum of 2 hours. PREREQUISITE: SPAN 3010 or 3020.
3400 Spanish Civilization and Culture 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Geography and cultural history of Spain. Present political situation, education, art, music, and everyday life. PREREQUISITE:
SPAN 3010, 3020.
3440 Latin American Civilization 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Survey of Spanish-American culture, pre-Columbian to the present. Socioeconomic problems and relationships with the United
States. PREREQUISITE: SPAN 3010, 3020. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4300 Literature of the Hispanic World 3-4 hrs. (3-4, 0)
Survey of the most influential literary texts from Spain and Latin America which investigates the relationship of mutual
influence that exists between literature, culture, and historical events. PREREQUISITE: SPAN 3010, 3020. OFFERED: Sem. I.
4500 Special Topics 3-4 hrs. (3-4, 0)
Group study on selected topics. CONSENT: Department chair.
4550 Intensive Experience in Spanish 1-6 hrs. (arranged)
Students will participate in an internship, practicum, or other intensive language experience to be approved by the Department
of Modern Languages that gives them the linguistic and cultural challenges that will improve their listening, speaking and
cross-cultural proficiencies and competencies. Students will enroll in at least one hour of SPAN 3240 prior to or at the start of
this course. May be repeated for a total of 6 hours to fulfill study abroad requirement. PREREQUISITE: SPAN 3010, 3020.
OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
4650 Directed Individual Study 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Readings or special interest project to help majors coordinate their work in other Spanish courses. May be completed in a
Spanish-speaking country. CONSENT: Department chair.
4660 Directed Individual Study 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Readings or special interest project to help majors coordinate their work in other Spanish courses. May be completed in a
Spanish-speaking country. CONSENT: Department chair.

MUSC COURSES
1000 Music Literacy 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Development of basic skills and concepts in reading and writing music notation with emphasis on meter, rhythm, scales, keys,
chords, and intervals.
1010 Theory I 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduction to the study of diatonic harmony and voice-leading and review of fundamental musical concepts. Emphasis on
formal analysis of baroque music. OFFERED: Sem. I.
1020 Theory II 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Continuing study of diatonic harmony and voice-leading with an introduction to chromatic harmony. Emphasis on formal
analysis of classical music. PREREQUISITE: MUSC 1010. OFFERED: Sem. II.
1030 Aural Comprehension I 1 hr. (2, 0)
Development of skills in sight-reading and ear-training for diatonic materials of tonal music. Emphasis on melodic, harmonic,
and rhythmic dimensions. COREQUISITE: MUSC 1010. OFFERED: Sem. I.
1040 Aural Comprehension II 1 hr. (2, 0)
Continuing development of skills in sight-reading and ear-training for diatonic tonal music with introduction of basic
chromatic materials. Emphasis on melodic, harmonic, and rhythmic dimensions with consideration of textural and timbral
aspects. COREQUISITE: MUSC 1020. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2010 Theory III 3 hrs. (3, 0)
In-depth study of chromatic harmony and voice-leading. Emphasis on formal analysis of 19th-century music. PREREQUISITE:
MUSC 1020. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2020 Theory IV 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Survey of compositional techniques in 20th-century music. Emphasis on learning and applying new analytic strategies
developed for contemporary music. PREREQUISITE: MUSC 2010. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2030 Aural Comprehension III 1 hr. (2, 0)
Continued development of ear-training in melodic, rhythmic, and harmonic structures. Emphasis placed on chromatic
materials. COREQUISITE: MUSC 2010. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2040 Aural Comprehension IV 1 hr. (2, 0)
Continued development of ear-training in melodic, rhythmic, and harmonic structures. Emphasis placed on 20th-century
materials. COREQUISITE: MUSC 2020. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3030 Choral Arranging 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Methods and techniques of arranging and scoring for choral ensembles of various sizes and voicings. Includes use of computer
notation software. PREREQUISITE: MUSC 1020, 1040. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3040 Orchestration 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Study of characteristics of orchestral instruments. Introduction to band, symphonic, and jazz scoring. Practical experience in
arranging for small combinations and full instrumental groups. Includes use of computer notation software. PREREQUISITE:
MUSC 1020, 1040. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3100 Counterpoint 2 hrs. (2, 0)
A survey of melodic and voice-leading procedures for music of the late 16th and 18th centuries. Focuses on solving
contrapuntal problems and composing pieces in historical styles. PREREQUISITE: MUSC 1020, 1040.
2110 Introduction to Music Literature 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Introductory study of music literature. Required for music majors; not recommended for students who do not read standard
music notation. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2200 Art as Experience 3 hrs. (3, 0)
An interdisciplinary introduction to performing and visual arts through first-hand experiences attending live performances
and, when possible, participating in the activity and talking with the artists. Includes study of aesthetics, history, and craft.
OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
2210 Music, the Arts, and Culture 3 hrs. (3, 0)
An examination of major works of Western art music that employ elements of art, literature, film, drama, and dance, with
emphasis on opera, oratorio, choral symphony, program symphony, ballet, and film music genres. A study of the processes by
which selected works were conceived, composed, prepared, performed, received, and understood as expressions of the
human experience. Does not count toward music major. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2220 Music in Society 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Studies in music to provide a basis for understanding and appreciating artistic musical expression. Does not count toward
music major. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2330 Introduction to World Music 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Provides a framework for experiencing and understanding music from a variety of cultures, Western and non-Western. Focus
on belief systems, social organization, cultural contexts, and musical materials for the purpose of identifying similarities and
differences between cultures. OFFERED: Sem. II. EXPECTATION: ability to read standard music notation.
3110 History of Music: Medieval/Renaissance 3 hrs. (3, 0)
General historical survey of music from classical antiquity through the Renaissance. Applies to liberal arts writingintensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: MUSC 2110. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3120 History of Music: Baroque/Classic 3 hrs. (3, 0)
General historical survey of music from 1650 to 1800. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE:
MUSC 2110. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3130 History of Music: 19th and 20th Centuries 3 hrs. (3, 0)
General historical survey of Western Art music from the 19th century to the present. Applies to liberal arts writingintensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: MUSC 2110. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3170 History of Music: Popular Music in the 20th Century 3 hrs. (3, 0)
General historical survey of popular music from the late 19th century to the present, with emphasis on Western popular
music. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: MUSC 2110. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3180 History of Music: Musical Theatre 3 hrs. (3, 0)
General historical survey of lyric theatre — opera, operetta, revue, musical theatre — from the 17th century to the present.
Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: MUSC 2110. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3380 Piano Literature 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Introduction to piano literature by historical style periods. PREREQUISITE: MUPF 1710, 2710. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3390 Song Literature 3 hrs. (3, 0)
A study of English, Italian, German, French, and American song literature since the late Renaissance. Emphasis on stylistic
interpretation and vocal appropriateness. Music performed by class participants. Recordings are also utilized.
EXPECTATION: Four semesters of voice study. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2024-25.
3150 Art, Faith, and Culture 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Philosophical, sociological, historical, and theological perspectives on music and worship in the church with emphasis on
understanding the role of music in expressions of faith. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2023-24.
3160 Sacred Music: Past and Current Uses 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Survey of how sacred song has been and is currently used in worship settings in a variety of times and cultures. Emphasis on
the administration, selection, rehearsal, and use of sacred music in the 21st century church. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2023-24.
3800 Internship in Church Music 3 hrs. (arranged)
In-depth experience in a local church with an experienced minister involved full time in church music. PREREQUISITE: MUSC
1010, 1030. GRADE: CR/NC. REPEAT: May be repeated up to 3 hours. OFFERED: Each semester.
1650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Opportunities for individualized study as agreed upon by student and faculty member. REPEAT: May be repeated for credit.
2650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Opportunities for individualized study as agreed upon by student and faculty member. REPEAT: May be repeated for credit.
3650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Opportunities for individualized study as agreed upon by student and faculty member. REPEAT: May be repeated for
credit.
4650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Opportunities for individualized study as agreed upon by student and faculty member. REPEAT: May be repeated for
credit.
4660 International Experience in the Arts 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Designed to provide academic credit for coursework and assignments completed in conjunction with an international
experience offered through the Tri-S program. REPEAT: May be repeated for credit.
4900 Seminar in Selected Topics 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Special music course offerings as determined by faculty. REPEAT: May be repeated for credit.
4950 Senior Project 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Senior capstone performance or creative project for the Bachelor of Arts in Music. A proposal for the senior project must
be submitted for approval. See Music, Theatre, & Dance Handbook for guidelines and deadlines. CONSENT: Department.
OFFERED: Each semester.
4955 Senior Presentation 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Senior capstone presentation for the Bachelor of Arts in Music. A proposal for the senior presentation must be submitted for
approval. See Music, Theatre, & Dance Handbook for guidelines and deadlines. Applies to liberal arts speaking-intensive
requirement. CONSENT: Department. OFFERED: Each semester.

MUBS COURSES
2010 Introduction to the Music Business 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Overview of major players in the recording industry: record labels, Billboard charts, music distribution, and professional trade
organizations. Also explores types of producers, artist management, booking, and concert promotion. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2020 Introduction to Music Publishing 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Overview of major players in the publishing industry. Copyright basics and revenue streams, including licensing music for
recordings, performances, ringtones, television, film, video games, etc. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2050 Jazz and Commercial Arranging 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Techniques of arranging for large and small studio/jazz ensembles. PREREQUISITE: MUSC 1020, 1040. OFFERED: With
sufficient demand.
2070 Songwriting 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Techniques, philosophy, and principles of composing songs for various markets with emphasis on communication
through effective lyrics. Related aspects of publishing, marketing, promotion, copyright law will also be discussed.
PREREQUISITE: MUSC 1010, 1030. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3100 Artist Development 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Explores the development of the musical artist within the context of the music industry. The many forces of the music
business that influence and shape the artist and the artistic product are investigated. PREREQUISITE: MUBS 2010, 2020.
OFFERED: Sem. II.
3210 Recording Techniques 3 hrs. (3, 1)
Introduction to audio technology, studio recording equipment, signal flow, studio session procedures, and recording
production. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3220 Advanced Recording Techniques 2 hrs. (2, 1)
Guided experiences in audio recording techniques. Emphasis on recording projects using digital multi-track recording; MIDI
sequencing; digital signal processing; and computer- based editing, mixing, and mastering. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3310 Legal Aspects of the Music Business 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Selected topics in copyright management, music licensing, and publishing contracts. PREREQUISITE: MUBS 2010, 2020.
SAME AS: MUBS 3320. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3350 Music Marketing 3 hrs. (3, 0)
In this speaking-intensive course, students will identify the marketing mix tools that are available for a music marketer to use
when developing a music brand and affiliate marketing plan. Students will understand the theoretical and practical mechanisms
involved in understanding the needs, wants and classifications of music consumption and will gain an appreciation of how
internal competencies and the external environment impact the execution of music marketing plans. Applies to liberal arts
writing and speaking-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: MUBS 2010, 2020. SAME AS: MUBS 3330. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3370 Record Production 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Examines the role of the producer and music production techniques required to create a successful recording.
PREREQUISITE or COREQUISITE: MUBS 3220, may register concurrently with MUBS 3220. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3380 Concert Booking and Promotion 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Examines the role of the concert promoter, booking agents, and support organizations. PREREQUISITE: MUBS 2010, 2020.
OFFERED: Sem. II.
3450 Live Sound Production 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Students explore the acoustical, musical, and technical aspects of live performance to learn how to present the best possible
sound to an audience. Emphasizes instrumental and vocal sound production, microphones, equalization, and dynamics
processing, enabling students to build their own mixes that conform to a high standard for sonic quality, blend, and
authenticity. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3470 DIY for Musicians 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Practical application of skills necessary for a successful career as a musician, songwriter, or producer. Explores developing a
career plan, finding employment opportunities, networking, and the creation of professional quality promotional materials.
PREREQUISITE: Music majors and minors, junior standing. OFFERED: Every year.
3500 Current Topics in Music Business 1 hr. (1, 0)
Guided writing assignments and class presentations focusing on current topics of interest to students of the music business.
The writing process will involve developing a topic proposal, an abstract, an annotated list of sources, and a project outline,
as well as composing a moderate-length term paper to be presented to the class. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive
requirement. PREREQUISITE: MUBS 2010, 2020. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3550 Audio Enhancement and Authentication 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Students explore digital evidence tools, including Electric Frequency Analysis (ENF) for validating audio recordings,
adaptive filters for noise reduction, and discrete Fourier transforms to aid in the recovery of digital audio. Emphasizes
authenticity of audio evidence and enhancement to improve speech intelligibility, audibility of low-level sounds, and
identification of sonic evidence. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
4500 Songwriter Showcase 1 hr. (arranged)
Senior songwriters present a showcase of original works. Intended for songwriting majors only.
4800 Internship in Music Business 1-3 hrs. (arranged)
In-depth experience in selected music industry tailored to the ability and needs of individual students. PREREQUISITE:
MUBS 2010, 2020. REPEAT: May be repeated. GRADE: CR/NC. OFFERED: Sem. I, II; Summer.
4850 Practicum in Audio Forensics 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Capstone audio forensics project for Music Business majors in the Audio Forensics track. A proposal for the project must be
submitted to the department for approval and should include the collection, interpretation, and presentation of audio
evidence from a sound recording. OFFERED: Sem. I, II; Summer.
4870 Practicum in Record Production 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Capstone recording project for Music Business majors in the Record Production track. A proposal for the project must be
submitted to the department for approval and should include tracking, editing, mixing, and mastering of a recording to be
commercially released. OFFERED: Sem. I, II; Summer.
4900 Recording Label Seminar 1-2 hrs. (1-2, 0)
Senior capstone course for music business majors. Focuses on selection, recording, management, and promotion of record
label artists and projects. EXPECTATION: Typically taken for two semesters in senior year. REPEAT: May be repeated;
maximum of 4 hours of credit toward music business major. PREREQUISITE: MUBS 2010, 2020. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
4950 Recording Project 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Senior capstone recording project for the Audio Forensics and Record Production tracks in the Music Business major. The
recording project must be specific to the track, and a proposal must be submitted to the department for approval.
PREREQUISITE: MUBS 3210, 3220. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
1650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Opportunities for individualized study as agreed upon by student and faculty member.REPEAT: May be repeated up to 4 hours.
2650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Opportunities for individualized study as agreed upon by student and faculty member.REPEAT: May be repeated up to 4 hours.
3650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Opportunities for individualized study as agreed upon by student and faculty member.REPEAT: May be repeated up to 4 hours.
4650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Opportunities for individualized study as agreed upon by student and faculty member.REPEAT: May be repeated up to 4 hours.
4660 International Experience in the Arts 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Designed to provide academic credit for coursework and assignments completed in conjunction with an international
experience offered through the Tri-S program. REPEAT: May be repeated up to 4 hours.

MUED COURSES
1000 Introduction to Music Education 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Overview of the professional opportunities and challenges of teaching music in public and private schools. Includes field
experiences. Grade of C or better required. OFFERED: Sem. II.
1100 String Techniques 1 hr. (2, 0)
OFFERED: Sem. I.
1200 Woodwind Techniques 1 hr. (2, 0)
OFFERED: Sem. I.
1300 Brass Techniques 1 hr. (2, 0)
OFFERED: Sem. II.
1400 Percussion Techniques 1 hr. (2, 0)
OFFERED: Sem. II.
2110 Music for the Elementary Classroom 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Basic skills, materials, and methods for using music to aid child development, enhance learning, and encourage creativity in
the elementary classroom. EXPECTATION: Elementary education major. OFFERED: Each semester.
2470 Introduction to Conducting 2 hrs. (3, 0)
Fundamentals of conducting, including beat patterns and styles, baton technique, starts, stops, cues, symmetric and
asymmetric meters, dynamic shaping, use of left hand, and score reading. PREREQUISITE: MUSC 1010. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2510 Singer’s Diction I 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Fundamentals and usage of the International Phonetic Alphabet as applied to Italian and German. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2520 Singer’s Diction II 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Fundamentals and usage of the International Phonetic Alphabet as applied to French and English. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3100 Music in the Middle School 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Materials and methods used for middle school general music and beginning choral and instrumental instruction. Includes
study of early adolescent student development as it relates to music. Grade of C or better required. EXPECTATION:
Successful completion of UDPE. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3110 Music in the Elementary School 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Materials and methods of teaching music in the elementary school. Observation opportunities for music majors. Applies to
liberal arts speaking-intensive requirement. EXPECTATION: Successful completion of UDPE. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3120 Vocal Music in the Secondary School 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Materials and methods of teaching choral music in the secondary school. Observation opportunities for music majors.
EXPECTATION: Successful completion of UDPE. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3130 Instrumental Music Education 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Materials and methods available for instrumental groups at elementary and secondary levels. Observation opportunities for
music majors. EXPECTATION: Successful completion of UDPE. COREQUISITE: MUSC 4710. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3330 Instrumental Pedagogy 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Basic principles of instrumental playing, materials, and methods for teaching various instruments from elementary to
advanced students. EXPECTATION: Successful completion of UDPE. PREREQUISITE: MUED 1100, 1200, 1300. OFFERED:
Sem. II.
3350 Voice Pedagogy 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Preparation in methods used in the art of singing through the organization of vocal terminology and techniques. Includes
teaching experience. Applies to liberal arts speaking-intensive requirement. EXPECTATION: Successful completion of UDPE.
OFFERED: Sem. I.
3360 Issues in Voice Pedagogy 1 hr. (1, 0)
Seminar focuses on special problems and topics in voice pedagogy from MUED 3350. Areas covered include class voice
instruction, mentored voice teaching experiences, master-class techniques, and studio management. COREQUISITE: MUED
3350. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3370 Piano Pedagogy 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Representative methods and materials for early years of keyboard study. Includes teaching experience. EXPECTATION:
Successful completion of UDPE. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3460 Advanced Instrumental Techniques 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Focus on performance techniques and pedagogy related to technically demanding instruments. Designed to give students an
in-depth understanding of highly specialized instruments. EXPECTATION: Successful completion of UDPE. PREREQUISITE:
MUED 1200, 1300. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3470 Advanced Choral Conducting 2 hrs. (3, 0)
Advanced conducting technique, choral diction, choral tone, body alignment, breathing technique, interpretation, rehearsal
technique, and stylistic elements. PREREQUISITE: MUSC 2020, MUED 2470. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3480 Advanced Instrumental Conducting 2 hrs. (3, 0)
Baton technique, score reading, performance, rehearsal techniques, psychology of conducting. EXPECTATION: Ability to
play an orchestral instrument. PREREQUISITE: MUED 2470. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3930 Seminar in German Diction 1 hr. (1, 0)
Seminar focuses on special problems and topics in German lyric diction. Conducted in a master-class format, the seminar
includes both oral and written participation. PREREQUISITE: MUED 2510, 2520. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3940 Seminar in French Diction 1 hr. (1, 0)
Seminar focuses on special problems and topics in French lyric diction. Conducted in a master-class format, the seminar
includes both oral and written participation. PREREQUISITE: MUED 2510, 2520. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
4700 Methods of Teaching Music in the Public Schools 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Taught in conjunction with the professional semester. Materials and methods adapted to the specific areas and levels in which
students are involved in student teaching. PREREQUISITE: MUED 3110, 3120, 3130. OFFERED: Each semester.
1650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Opportunities for individualized study as agreed upon by student and faculty member.REPEAT: May be repeated up to 4 hours.
2650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Opportunities for individualized study as agreed upon by student and faculty member.REPEAT: May be repeated up to 4 hours.
3650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Opportunities for individualized study as agreed upon by student and faculty member.REPEAT: May be repeated up to 4 hours.
4650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Opportunities for individualized study as agreed upon by student and faculty member.REPEAT: May be repeated up to 4 hours.
4660 International Experience in the Arts 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Designed to provide academic credit for coursework and assignments completed in conjunction with an international
experience offered through the Tri-S program. REPEAT: May be repeated up to 4 hours.

MUPF COURSES
1010 Class Lessons in Voice I 1 hr. (1, 0)
OFFERED: Sem. I.
1020 Class Lessons in Voice II 1 hr. (1, 0)
OFFERED: Sem. II.
1030 Class Lessons in Piano I 1 hr. (1, 0)
Beginning piano for students not majoring or minoring in music. Enrollment limited to the number of available keyboards.
OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
1040 Class Lessons in Piano II 1 hr. (1, 0)
Beginning piano for students not majoring or minoring in music. Enrollment limited to the number of available keyboards.
OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
1050 Keyboard Class I 2 hrs. (2, 0)
For majors and minors with limited piano background. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
1060 Keyboard Class II 2 hrs. (2, 0)
For majors and minors who have completed MUPF 1050 with a grade of C- or better, are enrolled in private piano, or have
exempted MUPF 1050 by examination. EXPECTATION: Grade of C- or better in MUPF 1050 or exempted by examination.
OFFERED: Each semester.
1410 Class Lessons in Guitar I 1 hr. (1, 0)
REPEAT: May be repeated. OFFERED: Each semester.
1420 Class Lessons in Guitar II 1 hr. (1, 0)
REPEAT: May be repeated. OFFERED: Each semester.
1500 World Drumming 1 hr. (1, 0)
Experiences in learning history and performance techniques of world percussion. Areas of study will include Latin-American,
Afro-Cuban, African, and Brazilian drumming, along with cultural and folkloric history. No previous percussion experience or
instrument required.
1520 Accompanying I 0-1 hrs. (1, 0)
Study in the art of keyboard accompaniment for voice or instrumental solos and small ensembles. REPEAT: May be repeated.
OFFERED: Sem. I.
1530 Accompanying II 0-1 hrs. (1, 0)
Study the art of keyboard accompaniment for voice or instrumental solos and small ensembles. REPEAT: May be repeated.
OFFERED: Sem. II.
2030 Advanced Small-Group Piano I 1 hr. (1, 0)
OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
2040 Advanced Small-Group Piano II 1 hr. (1, 0)
OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
2060 Improvisation 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Study of techniques and materials for improvisation through performance. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
2140 Embodied Performing: Introduction to the Alexander Technique 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Covers the principles, history, practical and performance-related application of the Alexander Technique. Body mapping,
performance practice, and self-care explored through the lens of the Alexander Technique. SAME AS: MUTR 2140, THEA
2140, DANC 2140. OFFERED: Sem. I.
4910 Seminar in Audition Techniques 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Seminar on the techniques of the audition process. Auditions covered include graduate school, opera, concert/oratorio, and
musical theatre. Conducted in a master-class format, the seminar includes both oral and written participation. SAME AS:
MUTR 4910. OFFERED: Sem. I.
1650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Opportunities for individualized study as agreed upon by student and faculty member.REPEAT: May be repeated up to 4 hours.
2650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Opportunities for individualized study as agreed upon by student and faculty member.REPEAT: May be repeated up to 4 hours.
3650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Opportunities for individualized study as agreed upon by student and faculty member.REPEAT: May be repeated up to 4 hours.
4650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Opportunities for individualized study as agreed upon by student and faculty member.REPEAT: May be repeated up to 4 hours.
4660 International Experience in the Arts 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Designed to provide academic credit for coursework and assignments completed in conjunction with an international
experience offered through the Tri-S program. REPEAT: May be repeated for credit.

MUTR COURSES
1650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Opportunities for individualized study as agreed upon by student and faculty member. REPEAT: May be repeated up
to 4 hours.
2140 Embodied Performing: Introduction to the Alexander Technique 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Covers the principles, history, practical and performance-related application of the Alexander Technique. Body mapping,
performance practice, and self-care explored through the lens of the Alexander Technique. SAME AS: MUPF 2140, THEA
2140, DANC 2140. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2250 Stage Diction I — Fundamentals 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Introduces and develops speech techniques for the actor, specifically in the areas of relaxation, posture and alignment,
respiration, phonation, registration, resonance, and articulation. SAME AS: THEA 2250. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2410 Voice and Movement for the Actor I 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Introduction to voice and movement techniques for the actor. Areas of focus include freeing the voice, developing connection
to breath, kinesthetic awareness, relaxation, alignment, resonance and articulation. SAME AS: THEA 2410. OFFERED: Sem.
II.
2420 Voice and Movement for the Actor II 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Further studies in voice and movement techniques for the actor. Areas of focus include Laban effort actions and archetypes.
SAME AS: THEA 2420. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Opportunities for individualized study as agreed upon by student and faculty member. REPEAT: May be repeated up to 4
hours.
3210 Musical Theatre Styles I 2 hrs. (2, 0)
A practical application course which focuses on learning the ways in which musical and textual understanding informed the
interpretation and performance of acting through song from the 1920s to the early 1960s. Applies to liberal arts speakingintensive requirement. SAME AS: THEA 3210. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3220 Musical Theatre Styles II 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Practical application focusing on the ways in which musical and textual understanding informed the interpretation and
performance of acting through song from the mid-1960s to the present. SAME AS: THEA 3220. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3410 Voice and Movement for the Actor III 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Advanced speech techniques for the actor. Continued exploration of connecting text to breath in context with awareness of
the whole body. Areas of focus include The Alexander Technique, International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA), and beginning
dialects. SAME AS: THEA 3410. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Opportunities for individualized study as agreed upon by student and faculty member.REPEAT: May be repeated up to 4 hours.
4500 Musical Theatre Showcase 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Overview studio course for graduating musical theatre majors. Coursework involves repertoire from genres of musical
theatre appropriate for each individual. Culminates in a showcase performance presented at the end of the semester.
SAME AS: THEA 4500. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Opportunities for individualized study as agreed upon by student and faculty member.REPEAT: May be repeated up to 4 hours.
4660 International Experience in the Arts 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Designed to provide academic credit for coursework and assignments completed in conjunction with an international
experience offered through the Tri-S program. REPEAT: May be repeated for credit.
4910 Seminar in Audition Techniques 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Covers the techniques of the audition process, including graduate school, theatre/musical theatre summer stock,
Shakespeare, television, and film. Conducted in a master-class format, requiring both oral and written participation.
SAME AS: MUPF 4910. OFFERED: Sem. I.

THEA COURSES
1170 Lyric Theatre Workshop 0-1 hrs. (arranged)
Admission by audition. REPEAT: May be repeated. SAME AS: MUPF 1170.
1650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Opportunities for individualized study as agreed upon by student and faculty member. REPEAT: May be repeated up to
4 hours.
2110 Acting I 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduces the fundamentals of the acting process through exercises and scene study. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2120 Acting II 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Study of acting in theatrical realism. Stanislavski and Meisner based training. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2140 Embodied Performing: Introduction to the Alexander Technique 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Covers the principles, history, practical and performance-related application of the Alexander Technique. Body mapping,
performance practice, and self-care explored through the lens of the Alexander Technique. SAME AS: MUPF 2140, MUTR
2140, DANC 2140. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2210 Stagecraft 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduces basic stagecraft practices through lectures, labs, and practical experience, including safe and proper use of power
and hand tools, scenery building, scene painting, theatrical lighting, basic stage management, properties, and sound.
OFFERED: Sem. I.
2220 Theatre Genres and Analysis 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Introduction to the concepts and techniques of script analysis through the study of the historical genres of theatre. OFFERED:
Sem. I.
2250 Stage Diction I — Fundamentals 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Introduces and develops speech techniques for the actor, especially in the areas of relaxation, posture and alignment,
respiration, phonation, registration, resonance, and articulation. SAME AS: MUTR 2250. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2350 Introduction to Acting 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Designed to introduce students to the fundamental principles of performance. Emphasis on Spolin-styled theatre games and
developing competent improvisational skills. Open to all students. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2410 Voice and Movement for the Actor I 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Introduction to voice and movement techniques for the actor. Areas of focus include freeing the voice, developing
connection to breath, kinesthetic awareness, relaxation, alignment, resonance and articulation. SAME AS: MUTR 2410.
OFFERED: Sem. II.
2420 Voice and Movement for the Actor II 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Further studies in voice and movement techniques for the actor. Areas of focus include Laban effort actions and archetypes.
SAME AS: MUTR 2420. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2500 Appreciation of Theatre 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Development of dramatic literacy through examination of a wide variety of dramatic themes and forms. Study and
participation in dramatic criticism and theory. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
2650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Opportunities for individualized study as agreed upon by student and faculty member.REPEAT: May be repeated up to 4 hours.
2890 Acting/Production Practicum 1 hr. (arranged)
Practical experience in theatre, particularly related to productions in the university’s theatrical season. Open to all students.
REPEAT: May be repeated; total credit not to exceed 8 hours. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
3010 History of Theatre I: Beginnings to Romantics 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Chronological survey of the various arts, crafts, theory/criticism, and literature of Western theatre from its earliest origins to
the mid-1500s. Open to all students. OFFERED: 2024-25.
3020 History of Theatre II: Romantics to Present 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Chronological survey of the various arts, crafts, theory/criticism, and literature of Western theatre from the mid-1500s to the
present. Attention also given to film and performance art. Open to all students. OFFERED: 2024-25.
3110 Acting III 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Advanced studies in acting focusing on modern texts by contemporary playwrights. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3120 Acting IV 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Advanced studies in acting focusing on classical texts and heightened language, including Shakespeare, Restoration, Shaw,
Ibsen, and Chekhov. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3210 Musical Theatre Styles I 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Practical application focusing on learning the ways in which musical and textual understanding inform the interpretation and
performance of acting through song, from the 1920s to the early 1960s. Applies to liberal arts speaking-intensive requirement.
SAME AS: MUTR 3210. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3220 Musical Theatre Styles II 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Practical application focusing on the ways in which musical and textual understanding inform the interpretation and
performance of acting through song, from the mid-1960s to the present. SAME AS: MUTR 3220. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3300 Acting Methods 3 hrs. (3, 3)
Designed for majors who have demonstrated superior performance skills. Focus will be on the American method school of
acting, utilizing extensive scene study. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3400 Directing 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Covers directing techniques and theories for the theatre, including selecting, analyzing, casting, and rehearsing plays for
production. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3410 Voice and Movement for the Actor III 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Advanced speech techniques for the actor. Continued exploration of connecting text to breath in context with awareness of
the whole body. Areas of focus include The Alexander Technique, International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA), and beginning
dialects. SAME AS: MUTR 3410. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3500 Scene Design 3 hrs. (3, 2)
Study of theories and practices of set design for the stage, including modern construction practices. Open to all students.
OFFERED: Sem. II.
3550 Lighting Design 3 hrs. (3, 2)
Study of theories and practices of theatrical lighting. Open to all students. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2024-25.
3650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Opportunities for individualized study as agreed upon by student and faculty member.REPEAT: May be repeated up to 4 hours.
4500 Musical Theatre Showcase 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Overview studio course for graduating musical theatre majors. Coursework involves repertoire from genres of musical theatre
appropriate for each individual. Culminates in a showcase performance presented at the end of the semester. SAME AS:
MUTR 4500. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Opportunities for individualized study as agreed upon by student and faculty member.REPEAT: May be repeated up to 4 hours.
4660 International Experience in the Arts 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Designed to provide academic credit for coursework and assignments completed in conjunction with an international
experience offered through the Tri-S program. REPEAT: May be repeated for credit.
4800 Senior Project 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Students complete a portfolio and present a final performance/production. The latter requirement also may be filled through
an approved internship with a professional theatre company. Students wishing to advance to a Master of Arts program may
also complete a paper for presentation at an approved conference. EXPECTATION: All required coursework. OFFERED: With
sufficient demand.
4900 Seminar in Theatre Studies 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Specialized focus on various periods of theatrical history, performance genres, and/or theory. Topics vary. Open to all
departmental majors (others with instructor’s approval). REPEAT: May be repeated. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
4910 Seminar in Performance Practices 3 hrs. (3, 1)
Specialized focus on both the study and practice of various performance skills/arts. Topics vary. Open to departmental majors
and minors (others with instructor’s approval). REPEAT: May be repeated. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.

DANC COURSES
1120 Tap I 1 hr. (2, 0)
Introduces students to a wide variety of movement and a foundation for developing basic skills and tap technique for dance
majors and non-majors. Tap shoes required. REPEAT: May be repeated for credit. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
1150 Dance Repertory 0-1 hrs. (arranged)
Performance ensemble and practical technical training for participation in annual staged dance productions, a department
holiday concert, and touring. Auditions for performances are open to all dance majors, minors, and non-majors. Concurrent
enrollment in a technique course required. GRADE: CR/NC. REPEAT: May be repeated for credit. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
1160 Dance Production 0-1 hrs. (arranged)
Students provide technical, organizational, and practical assistance with mainstage productions. Open to all dance majors,
minors and non-majors. GRADE: CR/NC. REPEAT: May be repeated for credit. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
1220 Modern I 1 hr. (2, 0)
Introduces students to a wide variety of movement and creates a foundation for development of basic skills and technique
for dance majors and non-majors. REPEAT: May be repeated for credit. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
1320 Jazz I 1 hr. (3, 0)
Introduces a wide variety of movement and creates a foundation for development of basic skills and jazz technique for
dance majors and non-majors. REPEAT: May be repeated for credit. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
1420 Ballet I 1 hr. (2, 0)
Introduces a foundation for the development of basic skills and ballet technique for dance majors and non-majors.
REPEAT: May be repeated for credit. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
1580 Dance Improvisation I 1 hr. (2, 0)
Introduces spontaneous creation through words, sketches, sounds, and movement. Explores the topics of“body in space”
and use of “negative space.” Focuses on individual improvisation, body awareness, and the student’s ability to work within
a given structure, time, and space. Group improvisation introduced at the end of the course. Open to non-majors. No dance
experience necessary. OFFERED: Sem. I.
1590 Dance Composition I 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Introduces the basics of composition and choreography for solo work, including Laban’s space, time and effort/ energy principles.
Evolving use of compositional tools including symmetry, asymmetry, unison, counterpoint, canon, round, retrograde, chaos,
tempo, and syncopation. Includes basics of musical phrase work, theatrical staging, and directing.OFFERED: Sem. II.
1650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Expanded experience in a topic area of student choice with approval from the dance area coordinator.REPEAT: May be repeated
up to 4 hours.
2110 Musical Theatre Dance Forms 1 hr. (2, 0)
Designed for the singing actor. Focuses on development of a repertoire of fundamental “singer-mover” dance steps while
learning the historical range of styles from vaudeville to contemporary music theatre. REPEAT: May be repeated for credit.
OFFERED: Sem. II.
2120 Tap II 1 hr. (2, 0)
Continuation of Tap I, designed for the intermediate to advanced student with at least one semester of tap. Introduce
students to more in-depth exercises designed to promote vocabulary and skill level, as well as the development of
performance technique. REPEAT: May be repeated for credit. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2140 Embodied Performing: Introduction to the Alexander Technique 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Covers the principles, history, practical and performance-related application of the Alexander Technique. Body mapping,
performance practice, and self-care explored through the lens of the Alexander Technique. SAME AS: MUPF 2140, MUTR
2140, THEA 2140. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2220 Modern II 1 hr. (2, 0)
Continuation of Modern I, designed for the intermediate-level dance major or minor. Advances techniques and basic
principles of modern dance. PREREQUISITE: Dance majors; open to non-majors with departmental permission. REPEAT:
May be repeated for credit. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2320 Jazz II 1 hr. (3, 0)
Continuation of Jazz Dance I, designed for the intermediate dance major or minor. Introduces more complex styles, skills,
and principles of jazz technique. PREREQUISITE: Dance majors; open to non-majors with departmental permission.
REPEAT: May be repeated for credit. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2420 Ballet II 1 hr. (2, 0)
Continuation of Ballet I designed for the intermediate dance major or minor. Develops advancing technique, fine motor
control, style, and skills. PREREQUISITE: Dance majors; open to non-majors with departmental permission. REPEAT: May
be repeated for credit. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2580 Dance Improvisation II 1 hr. (2, 0)
Focuses on the concept of “bodies in space” and develops the ability to sense the relative position of neighboring parts and
bodies. Students sharpen their ability to improvise within a group setting while remaining aware of motif, structure, and
cohesiveness. Introduces use of contact improvisation. PREREQUISITE:DANC 1580. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2590 Dance Composition II 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Further exploration of choreographic concepts of Laban’s time, space, shape, energy, and dynamics. Focus on small group
composition. PREREQUISITE: DANC 1590. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Expanded experience in a topic area of student choice with approval from the dance area coordinator. REPEAT: May be
repeated up to 4 hours.
2850 Practice in Teaching 1 hr. (1, 0)
Students gain experience with teaching students in a laboratory setting, developing and using rubrics and syllabi. Students are
evaluated by instructors and peers, and engage in self-evaluation and reflection. Students will develop the means to guide
students in experiential, analytical, and creative exercises. REPEAT: May be repeated up to 4 credits.
3000 Global Dance Forms 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Dance, symbolism, and the mind-body-spirit triad are used to explore diverse cultures and the inseparable nature of art, life,
and sacred and secular practices. No previous dance experience required. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3010 Dance History I 3 hrs. (3, 0)
The history of Western dance from Biblical and Grecian dance to the early 20th century, including the rise of ballet, Baroque
dance, Romantic and Classical ballet, and the artistic diaspora following the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia. OFFERED: Sem. II,
2024-25.
3020 Dance History II 3 hrs. (3, 0)
The history of Western theatrical dance from 1900 to the present day, exploring the major artistic movements and
philosophies that gave rise to forms such as Neoclassical Ballet, Modern Dance, Tap, Jazz, Musical Theater, Postmodernism,
and Hip Hop among others. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2023-24.
3050 Dance Pedagogy I 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Explores the basic structures and theories of teaching beginning and intermediate modern and ballet techniques, responsible
flexibility/strength training, communicating with related constituencies, and issues of gender, diversity, and cultural
sensitivity in the dance class. Applies to liberal arts speaking-intensive requirement. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2023-24.
3055 Dance Pedagogy II 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Explores pedagogical approaches for teaching intermediate and advanced modern and ballet techniques, physical/social
adolescent development, classroom management/assessment strategies, mindful awareness of the specific needs of male
and female dancers, and non-European dance form appreciation and application. PREREQUISITE: DANC3050. OFFERED:
Sem. II, 2023-24.
3060 Movement Analysis 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Uses a system of observation and notation to aid students in understanding dance, health, and the science of movement.
Emphasizes whole-person education (psychological, physical, sociological, spiritual). Introduces the Alexander Technique,
Bartenieff Fundamentals, Laban Movement Analysis, Feldenkrais Technique, Yoga, and Pilates as somatic practices.
PREREQUISITE:DANC 4500 OR BIOL 2410. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2024-25.
3120 Tap III 1 hr. (2, 0)
Continuation of Tap II, this advanced course includes syncopated rhythms, progressive step combinations and “hoofers” and
“tapper” stylistic expression. REPEAT: May be repeated for credit. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3220 Modern III 1 hr. (2, 0)
Continuation of Modern II, this intermediate course includes the application of more complex technique principles, with a
focus on select techniques including Graham, Horton, and Humphrey/Limón. REPEAT: May be repeated for credit.
OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
3320 Jazz Dance III 1 hr. (3, 0)
Continuation of Jazz II, this advanced course covers syncopated rhythms, progressive step combinations, regional stylistic
differences and prepares students for jazz improvisation and commercial dance practices. REPEAT: May be repeated for
credit. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3420 Ballet III 1 hr. (2, 0)
Continuation of Ballet II, this advanced course presents a deeper kinesthetic understanding of ballet fundamentals and
sharpens physical technique through extension of line, upper body coordination, complex rhythm forms of movement, and
advanced petite, grand allegro and variations. REPEAT: May be repeated for credit. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
3510 Period Dance 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Introduces European and American social dance. Research and execution of movement from representative historical periods.
No dance experience necessary. REPEAT: May be repeated for credit. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2024-25.
3520 Pointe 1 hr. (2, 0)
Study of basic and advanced technique of pointe work. Designed for the student with several years of ballet training. Includes
pointe exercises at the barre, center work, and variations. COREQUISITE:DANC 2420, 3420, or 4420. REPEAT: May be
repeated for credit. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
3530 Partnering for Ballet and Modern Dance 1 hr. (2, 0)
Study of the basic technique of partnering work, including pas de deux in ballet and effort/energy lifts/weight sharing in
modern dance. Designed for students at intermediate- or advanced-level in ballet and modern dance technique. REPEAT:
May be repeated for credit. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2024-25.
3580 Dance Improvisation III 1 hr. (2, 0)
Explores the technique of contact improvisation. Students continue to develop their sense of space, time, and proprioception
while exploring the levels of physical relationships, communication and the physical laws that govern gravity, momentum and
inertia to form a continuous motion conversation. PREREQUISITE: DANC 2580. REPEAT: May be repeated for credit.
OFFERED: Sem. I, 2024-25.
3590 Dance Composition III 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Explores the ideas of rise and fall, arching themes, storylines, abstraction, choreography for hire, and site-specific works.
Includes character development, relationships between dancers, music selection. PREREQUISITE: DANC 2590. OFFERED:
Sem. II.
3650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Expanded experience in a topic area of student choice with approval from the dance area coordinator. REPEAT: May be
repeated up to 4 hours.
4060 Motor Control 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Explores the neural control mechanisms by which humans plan and execute movement through the integration of the
nervous, sensory, and muscular systems. Students study how the brain organizes, stores, and accesses information to create
and coordinate a range of motor skills. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2023-24.
4220 Modern IV 1 hr. (2, 0)
Continuation of Modern III, this advanced course emphasizes speed, retention, variation, and advanced study in the
techniques of Graham, Horton, and Humphrey/Limón. PREREQUISITE: DANC 3220. REPEAT: May be repeated for credit.
OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
4320 Jazz Dance IV 1 hr. (3, 0)
A continuation of Jazz III, this advanced-level course emphasizes technique and improvement of dance rhythms, dynamics,
special awareness, and projection as a means of creating style, aesthetic, and performance quality. REPEAT: May be repeated
for credit. PREREQUISITE: DANC 3320. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
4420 Ballet IV 1 hr. (2, 0)
A continuation of Ballet III, this advanced course emphasizes foot and arm movement and body placement using barre, center
work, and choreography. Complex retention and high-performance quality required at all times. PREREQUISITE: DANC 3420.
REPEAT: May be repeated for credit. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
4500 Dance Anatomy and Kinesiology 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Basic principles of anatomy and kinesiology and an investigation of the human body and how it works through dance and
movement. Importance placed on functionality of joints, ligaments, tendons, and of musculoskeletal, sensory, and nervous
systems. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2024-25.
4590 Dance Composition IV 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Topics include non-rhythmical music, ambient music, environmental music, improvisation as a choreographic tool, and sitespecific works. Students craft original works, culminating in a student dance concert. PREREQUISITE: DANC 3590.
OFFERED: Sem. II.
4650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Expanded experience in a topic area of student choice with approval from the dance area coordinator. REPEAT: May be
repeated up to 4 hours.
4660 International Experience in the Arts 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Designed to provide academic credit for coursework and assignments completed in conjunction with an international
experience offered through the Tri-S program. REPEAT: May be repeated for credit.
4800 Internship in Dance 1-3 hrs. (arranged)
In-depth experience in a selected dance-related business tailored to the abilities and needs of the individual student.
PREREQUISITE:Upper-division standing. REPEAT: May be repeated up to 3 hours. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
4900 Seminar in Selected Topics 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Special dance courses as determined by the faculty. REPEAT: May be repeated for credit.
4910 Seminar in Professional Praxis for Dancers 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Focus on preparation for the professional world. Topics covered include graduate school, dance company, and musical
theatre. Conducted in a masterclass format, the seminar includes both oral and written participation, and the completion of a
professional portfolio. PREREQUISITE: Upper-division standing. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2024-25.

NURS COURSES
1210 Nutrition for Healthy Living 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Explores principles of nutrition as they relate to physical fitness. Content includes important nutritional elements and
their relationship to maintaining health. Required activities include personal health assessment skills, nutritional
assessment, and aerobic activities. Not required for nursing major but highly recommended. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2130 Is Nursing for me? 1 hr. (1, 0)
Discussion of history and contemporary issues of nursing and their impact on current nursing practice is included in study.
Relationship between the nursing major, the liberal arts, and support science courses will be explored. Designed to assist
students in determining if nursing is the correct career choice. Not required for nursing major but highly recommended.
This class is not open to juniors or seniors. GRADE: CR/NC. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2140 Introduction to Nursing 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Introduces the practice of nursing from the perspective of the profession. Focuses on understanding nursing terminology,
roles, socialization, values, rights, and responsibilities. Expanding on historical influences develops a working knowledge of
current health-care delivery and legal concerns. With approval by the dean of the School of Nursing, may be taken
concurrently with NURS 2241. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2170 Skills and Procedures Boot Camp 2 hrs. (1, 1-13)
Introduces novice nursing students to basic skills and procedures in preparation for the clinical experiences. The skills and
procedures obtained in this course include: The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) training, and the
protection of patient’s rights, infection control, handwashing, Personal Protective Equipment (PPE), fire safety, patient safety
and ergonomics (ambulation, active and passive range of motion, restraints), communications skills, and vital signs: blood
pressure, temperature, pulse, respirations, pulse oximetry, pain, height and weight). Additional skills and procedures include:
activities of daily Living (ADL’s) (positioning/turning/ transfers/ restraints, personal hygiene, bed making, proper feeding
techniques, skin care, pressure prevention), care of assistive devices (hearing aids, artificial eyes, eyeglasses, and dentures), and
the use of compression stockings. This course is intended for students that do not have previous patient care and health care
training (Certified Nursing Assistant, Emergency Medical Technician, or Licensed Practical Nurse) GRADE: CR/NC. OFFERED:
Sem. I.
2231 Fundamentals I 5 hrs. (4, 3-45 clinical hrs.)
Introduces student to nursing process through the AUSON Conceptual Framework focusing on individuals, families,
communities, and populations. Students learn to conduct comprehensive and focused physical, behavioral, psychological,
spiritual, socioeconomic, and environmental assessments of health and illness utilizing developmentally and culturally
appropriate approaches. Basic psychomotor skills for delivery of efficient, safe, and compassionate care introduced and
utilized with patients as students are considered novices and exhibit concrete thinking. Admission to program required.
PREREQUISITE: BIOL 2410, 2420; PSYC 2000. COREQUISITE:NURS 2250, PSYC 2510, BIOL 2230. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2241 Fundamentals II 5 hrs. (3, 6-90 clinical hrs.)
Builds on the content of Fundamentals I in the continuing study of individuals, families, communities, and populations
through use of the AUSON Conceptual Framework. The clinical component continues the development of comprehensive
and focused physical, behavioral, psychological, spiritual, socioeconomic, and environmental assessments of health and
illness utilizing developmentally and culturally appropriate approaches. Basic psychomotor skills for the delivery of efficient,
safe, and compassionate care continue to be introduced and utilized with patients as students are considered novices and
exhibit concrete thinking. Begins the study of the preparation and administration of medication in a safe care environment
that results in high-quality patient outcomes. PREREQUISITE: NURS 2231, NURS 2250, PSYC 2510, BIOL 2230.
COREQUISITE: CHEM 1000, NURS 2340. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2250 Foundational Strategies for NCLEX Success 1 hr. (1, 0)
Focuses on foundational nursing concepts toward developing a framework for critical thinking and National Council
Licensure Exam (NCLEX) test taking strategies. Course will utilize test-taking resources to improve critical thinking and
analyzing test questions. Students will develop strategies for studying, including applying course content into NCLEX
questions, as well as strategies for managing test anxiety and for increasing test-taking skills. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2270 Pathophysiological Basis for Pharmacology in Nursing 4 hrs. (3.0, 2-30 lab hrs.)
Builds on the content and experiences of the introductory nursing courses. Includes consideration of individuals, families,
communities, and populations through the use of the AUSON Conceptual Framework. Partners with the Fundamental course
to continue the study of preparation and administration of medication in a safe care environment that results in high-quality
patient outcomes. Course will summarize and discuss physiological processes including absorption, distribution, metabolism,
and excretion of drugs. Drug action and interactions will be discussed. Appropriate dosage calculation must be demonstrated
by the student. PREREQUISITE: NURS 2231, PSYC 2510, BIOL 2230. COREQUISITE: CHEM 1000, NURS 2241. OFFERED:
Sem. II.
2340 Personal and Community Health Nursing 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Uses the AUSON Conceptual Framework to analyze risks to health for individuals and population groups in the community
setting. Students will learn strategies in primary, secondary, and tertiary prevention to apply to community health needs.
Topics include environmental health issues, poverty, health disparities, equity, and the social determinants of health.
PREREQUISITE: NURS 2231, NURS 2250, PSYC 2510, BIOL 2230. COREQUISITE: CHEM 1000, NURS 2241. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3351 Adult Health I 6 hrs. (3, 9-135 clinical hrs.)
Builds on the content of 2000-level nursing courses and support courses. Focuses on the application of the AUSON Conceptual
Framework and nursing process for patients, families, and communities. Implementation of evidence-based nursing
interventions for managing acute and chronic care of patients and promoting health is included in study. Basic psychomotor
skills for the delivery of efficient, safe, and compassionate care continue to be introduced and utilized with patients as students
now function as advanced beginners and are to apply critical/ creative-thinking strategies. PREREQUISITE: CHEM 1000, NURS
2241, NURS 2340, NURS 2270. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3361 Adult Health II 6 hrs. (3, 6-90 clinical hrs.)
Builds upon the content and experiences from Adult Health 1. Emphasis on application of the AUSON Conceptual Framework
and nursing process with individuals, families, communities, and populations. Implementation of evidence-based nursing
interventions for managing acute and chronic care of patients and promoting health. Emphasizes communication with all
members of the health-care team, including patient and patient’s support network. Practical experiences focus on increasing
clinical reasoning skills. The application of critical/creative thinking is used as students practice as advanced beginners.
PREREQUISITE: NURS 3351. COREQUISITE: NURS 3391. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3391 Evidence-Based Research 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduces nursing research with an in-depth study of the steps of the research process. Analysis of nursing research studies
will occur. Explores research design and application of evidence-based practice methodology. Students critique research
articles and develop a proposal related to a topic of significance to the practice of nursing. It is recommended that the math
requirement be met prior to enrolling in the course. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE:
NURS 3351 and ENGL 1120 or RN License. COREQUISITE: NURS 3361. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3400 Nursing Remediation 1-6 hrs. (arranged)
Offered to nursing students who have been absent for more than one calendar year from their last clinical experience.
Remediation may include, but is not limited to: Kaplan resources, simulation, and appropriate skills level check off.
3850 Practicum in Nursing 1-3 hrs. (arranged)
Individualized study, clinical experiences, research, and/or project. CONSENT: Dean, School of Nursing and Kinesiology.
REPEAT: May be repeated. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
4451 Adult Health III 7 hrs. (4, 9-135 clinical hrs.)
Builds on the 2000- and 3000-level nursing courses and support courses. Focused application of the AUSON Conceptual
Framework and nursing process with clients with complex medical issues. Patient care includes individuals, families,
communities, and populations. Integration of evidence-based nursing interventions is required in the design of nursing
systems. Students come to the course as advanced beginners, and through the integration of creative/critical judgment
processes of analysis/synthesis, the development of competence in practice is begun. PREREQUISITE: NURS 3361, NURS
3391. COREQUISITE: NURS 4470. OFFERED: Sem. I.
4470 Seminar in Nursing 4 hrs. (4, 0)
Professional standards of moral, ethical, and legal conduct are discussed. Students assume accountability for personal and
professional behaviors by reflecting on one’s own beliefs and values as they relate to professional practice. Students
identify personal, professional, and environmental risks that impact personal and professional choices on vulnerable
populations. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: NURS 3361, NURS 3391.
COREQUISITE: NURS 4451. OFFERED: Sem. I.
4510 Entry into Professional Nursing Practice 1 hr. (1, 0)
Builds upon foundational strategies in preparation for the NCLEX exam and entry into professional practice. Each student will
examine and review his/her computerized test-taking strategies, and a careful analysis if issues related to test-taking abilities
will be completed, along with focus reviews and other NCLEX preparation resources. Will also discuss the process for licensure
application and job-seeking strategies. PREREQUISITE: NURS 4451, 4470. COREQUISITE: NURS 4521, 4950, 4960, 4970.
4521 Child Health 4 hrs. (3, 3-45 clinical hrs.)
Builds on the experiences of prior courses and required synthesis and analysis of all previously learned material as the student
progresses into specialized content of caring for children and families within the AUSON Conceptual Framework. The roles of
the pediatric nurse are examined within health promotion, health maintenance, and health restoration. Developmental and
family-centered nursing-care concepts are integrated with liberal arts knowledge to identify nursing-care needs of children.
PREREQUISITE: NURS 4451 (If a student has a didactic failure in NURS 4451 they may continue to NURS 4521. If a student has a
clinical failure in NURS 4451, the student may not continue in NURS 4521); NURS 4470. COREQUISITE: NURS 4950, NURS 4960,
NURS 4970. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4950 Intercultural Capstone 4 hrs. (2, 6-90 clinical hrs.)
Emphasizes the value of human diversity in order to provide safe, high-quality care. Discussion of the health care provider’s
practice in a multicultural environment providing culturally appropriate care across settings is included. Students are expected
to immerse themselves in a culture other than their own through an intercultural experience. EXPECTATION: Students should
plan for transportation costs and other expenses, which may vary from $500 to $3,500. CONSENT: Instructor. PREREQUISITE:
NURS 4451, NURS 4470. COREQUISITE: NURS 4521, NURS 4960, NURS 4970. SAME AS: PUBH 4950. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4960 Leadership Capstone 4 hrs. (2.5, 4.5-67.5 clinical hrs.)
Builds on previous nursing courses as the student moves toward becoming a competent generalist nurse, who is a provider,
designer, manager, and coordinator of care. Includes a practicum, which allows the student to integrate new practice-related
knowledge and skills. Critically analyzes leadership principles and management strategies and how they affect the organization
and influence patient outcomes. Examines and applies total quality improvement processes and tools which impact patient
4970 Clinical Capstone 2 hrs. (0.5, 4.5-67.5 clinical hrs.)
Builds on all prior nursing courses as the student will have the opportunity to demonstrate competencies consistent with the
program outcomes. In collaboration with the faculty and a preceptor in a chosen care setting, the student will apply critical
thinking, academic knowledge, and clinical skills in a real-life working environment. The purpose of this clinical immersion is
for the student to formulate an understanding of expectations in preparation for the transition from student to novice nurse.
PREREQUISITE: NURS 4451, NURS 4470. COREQUISITE: NURS 4521, NURS 4950, NURS 4960. OFFERED: Sem. II.

RNBSN COURSES
1050 Role Transition 3 hrs. (3, 0)
The role of the professional baccalaureate generalist is explored including strategies for success as a lifelong learner. Moral,
ethical, and legal standards of conduct and nursing values are discussed. Students will be introduced to nursing theorists,
governing bodies and evidenced-based standards that inform professional baccalaureate nursing practice. Introduces
students to tools utilized for the discovery of current nursing and medical research. Investigates the students’ abilities to
function as a part of a team and in collaboration with team members and interprofessional partners. The relationship
between the ability to deliver quality patient care and personal renewal and health is explored. PREREQUISITE: RN License.
1100 Population Based Health Care 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Utilizes the AUSON Conceptual framework to analyze risks of health for population groups, including individuals within groups.
Advocacy strategies for vulnerable populations is investigated. Strategies of primary, secondary, and tertiary prevention will
be explored and applied to community health needs. Explores determinates of health, poverty, health disparities, equity,
community partnerships, environmental effects on health, and population protection during health emergencies and disasters.
Clinical observational experience in community settings are included. PREREQUISITE: RN License.
1151 Informatics in Healthcare Nursing 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines the role of the professional baccalaureate nurse’s role in health information technology. Topics will include
nursing’s role in using and supporting information system technology to maximize healthcare safety and quality. Moral,
ethical, and legal standards of conduct and regulatory compliance will be discussed. Examines use of electronic health
records and Health information Exchanges. Explores regulation and methods used to protect patient data and health care
systems within networks and cyber security. Use of databases, media, and computer applications are discussed including
analysis of application processes. Discusses emerging and future health care technologies such as Artificial Intelligence,
internet, genomics, emerging technologies, protecting data, network and Online Security, Electronic Health records.
PREREQUISITE: RN License or Dean’s permission.
2350 Quality and Safety in Nursing Systems 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduces students to Nursing Systems thinking utilizing the AUSON Conceptual Framework. Introduces effective
communication and patient teaching and empowerment techniques. Explores the benefits and hazards of intra and
interprofessional communication, including communication through technology in the delivery of quality, safe patient
centered care. Evaluates personal autonomy and accountability, as well as system functioning in the delivery of quality, safe,
patient centered care. Collaboration while providing patient-centered, evidence-based care is emphasized to improve
practice and patient outcomes. Explores cultural, ethical, legal, and moral implications to delivering compassionate, safe,
and quality care. PREREQUISITE: RN License.
3391 Evidenced Based Research 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduces nursing research with an in-depth study of the steps of the research process. Analysis of nursing research studies
will occur. Explores research design and application of evidence-based practice methodology. Students critique research
articles and develop a proposal related to a topic of significance to the practice of nursing. It is recommended that the math
requirement be met prior to enrolling in the course. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE:
RN License.
4310 Health Care Policy 3 hrs. (3,0)
Introduces the professional baccalaureate nurse to health policy based on social ethical, cultural, economic, and political
issues which affect the delivery of health and nursing services. Concepts include the decision-making process, analysis of
policies related to national, state, and local health goals and outcomes; standards development; and regulatory and
professional organizations. Emphasis is placed on the impact of policy decisions on professional nursing practice and health
services. PREREQUISITE: RN License or Dean's permission.
4475 Nursing Seminar: Issues, Trends and Ethics 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Moral, ethical, and legal conduct is explored in relation to professional nursing standards. Encourages students to reflect on
beliefs and values as they relate to personal and professional behaviors. Practicing civil discourse students assume
responsibility for their professional behaviors and decision-making. Ethical theories and ethical/ legal dilemmas are explored in
relation to patient rights and the profession of nursing. Current issues and trends are investigated and discussed. Assists
students in self-awareness by exploring current issues such as mindfulness, emotional intelligence, and biases.
PREREQUISITE: RN License.
4561 Nursing Leadership for the Registered Nurse 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Builds on previous nursing courses as students continue to develop as a nurse who is a provider, designer, manager, and
coordinator of care. Discovers how personal and organizational leadership principles and management affects outcomes of
organizations and patients. Investigates the total quality improvement processes as well as other tools impacting patient safety
through student application. Acquires how these processes and tools are utilized in meeting and maintaining regulatory
requirements. Analyzes the handling and management of human and financial resources in relation to promoting safe, quality
patient care and optimizing professional practice. The nurse as consumer advocate is emphasized. A semester project will be
completed with a healthcare leader. PREREQUISITE: RN License, NURS 3391.
4541 Diversity Capstone 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Builds on previous nursing courses to cultivate individual cultural intelligence and cultural humility of diverse populations.
Explores the effects of personal bias, the navigation of systems, cultural components to delivering safe, high quality of
care. Discusses concepts related to global health emphasizing historical context, cultural norms, and socioeconomic
factors. Investigates the gaps of current research for a diverse and/or vulnerable population and develops a project to
disseminate to a professional health care system addressing an identified gap in care for a selected diverse population.
Students will continue to develop culturally congruent nursing practice in a diverse cultural environment in providing
appropriate care based upon cultural humility through service learning. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive
requirement. PREREQUISITE: RN License, NURS 3391.
4490 Professional Development and Transition Capstone 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Demonstrates students’ competency in the BSN Essential domains through the documentation of knowledge gained in
previous courses and experience in the clinical setting. Clinical experience is documented in students' Professional Portfolio
either through employment verification or through a clinical experience completed in collaboration with the faculty and
preceptor in a chosen care setting. Self-analysis and reflection will substantiate students’ clinical judgment and reasoning
advancement. Explores potential employment opportunities and professional developmental goals. PREREQUISITE: RN
License, previous RN-BSN program courses.
3560 Complementary and Alternative Therapies 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduces students to different holistic therapeutic modalities such as massage and guided imagery. Explores herbal
therapies as complementary and alternative to western traditional pharmacotherapies. Newer treatments in the areas of
genomics, personalized medicine, and supplementary diagnostic procedures will also be investigated.
3570 Emergency Room Nursing Care 3 hrs. (2, 3-45 clinical hours)
Introduces students to the basics in emergency and trauma care for patients across the lifespan. Discusses common
emergent and critical care issues among patients found in an emergency department. Uses triaging principles and protocols
to give understanding to the prioritization and flow of patient care. Discusses focused health assessments appropriate for
patients presenting health problems. Neonatal, pediatric, and adult Basic and Advanced Cardiac Life Support concepts,
including cardiac rhythms, will be reviewed. Explores legal, ethical and moral dilemmas that present commonly in the
emergency department. Focuses on appropriate collaboration and communication within the emergency department team.
Explores specific assessments, equipment and concepts applied in critical care areas.
3580 Enriching Clinical Reasoning and Judgment 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Utilizes current knowledge in assessment, anatomy, pathophysiology, and pharmacology to explore common patients, define
presenting symptoms such as shortness of breath, abdominal pain, and headache. Case studies allow students to further
develop knowledge by exploring the primary patient problem supported by assessment findings, anatomy, and
pathophysiology concepts. Utilizing clinical reasoning and judgment, students will explore nursing and pharmacological
interventions in relation to the primary patient problem. Nursing systems thinking will be utilized to explore patient issues in
relation to quality and safe care. Required for RNs who have been out of nursing practice for five years or more.

CHEM COURSES
1000 Introduction to Chemistry 4 hrs. (3, 2)
A survey approach to the study of chemistry examining the methods of science as applied to the study of inorganic, organic,
and biochemistry. Emphasis on understanding chemical principles and their application to the environment, with some use
of numerical computations. Not applicable toward chemistry major or minor. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2110 General Chemistry I 4 hrs. (3, 2.5)
Basic introduction to theory and practice of chemical principles with emphasis on atomic structure, chemical bonding,
stoichiometry, thermochemistry, and physical states of matter. EXPECTATION: Students entering general chemistry
normally have at least one year of high school chemistry and two years of high school algebra. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2120 General Chemistry II 4 hrs. (3, 2.5)
Further studies of chemical principles including kinetics, oxidation-reduction and acid-base reactions, inorganic complexes,
and nuclear chemistry. EXPECTATION: Students entering this class should have completed CHEM 2110 or equivalent.
OFFERED: Sem. II.
2210 Organic Chemistry I 4 hrs. (3, 3)
Bonding theory, composition, and constitution of carbon frameworks and functional groups, nomenclature, stereochemistry,
and introduction to reactions and reaction mechanisms. PREREQUISITE: CHEM 2110. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2220 Organic Chemistry II 4 hrs. (3, 3)
Reactions, mechanisms, and synthesis of various functional groups. Spectroscopy, including NMR, IR, and UV-VIS.
PREREQUISITE: CHEM 2210. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3100 Analytical Chemistry 4 hrs. (3, 3)
Review of equilibrium and its relationship to gravimetric and volumetric analysis. Statistical methods and an introduction
to environmental chemistry. Several instrumental techniques are introduced. PREREQUISITE: CHEM 2110. OFFERED:
Sem. I, 2024-25.
3140 Instrumental Analysis 4 hrs. (3, 3)
A study of modern instrumental methods, including UV-VIS, AAS, GC, GC/MS, HPLC, IR, NMR, Voltammetry, and X-ray,
with special emphasis on chromatography. EXPECTATION: Completion of CHEM 3100. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2023-24.
4090 Inorganic Chemistry 4 hrs. (3, 3)
Molecular structure and bonding, symmetry, structures of solids, d-metal complexes, band theory, organometallics, and
advanced topics. EXPECTATION: Completion of CHEM 2110 and 2220. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
4100 Organic Spectroscopy 4 hrs. (3, 3)
A look at the instrumentation used to identify organic compounds. An emphasis is placed on identifying organic compounds
from various spectra. Students will gain hands-on experience in FT-NMR (1H, 13C, 2D), FT-IR, GC-MS, UV-Vis, and the
interpretation of their spectra. PREREQUISITE: CHEM 2210. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2023-24.
4110 Thermodynamics and Kinetics 4 hrs. (3, 2)
Emphasis on engineering concepts related to classical thermodynamics. Provides the tools necessary in designing and
analyzing thermal systems and processes. Topics covered include internal energy, enthalpy, entropy, and conservation of
energy. EXPECTATION: PHYS 2240, CHEM 2110, MATH 3100. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2024-25.
4120 Quantum Theory 4 hrs. (4, 0)
Provides a background and introduction to quantum theory, as well as applications to various systems such as the hydrogen
atom. Additionally, students are exposed to problem solving techniques, such as perturbation theory and the variational
method, as well as their applications to a range of physical systems. PREREQUISITE: CHEM 2210. SAME AS: PHYS 4130.
OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
4210 Biochemistry I 4 hrs. (3, 4)
Introduction to fundamental principles of biochemistry. Lectures and project-oriented laboratories emphasize concepts of
macromolecular structure, aspects of enzymology, and intermediary metabolism. PREREQUISITE: BIOL 2240, CHEM 2220.
SAME AS: BIOL 4210. OFFERED: Sem. I.
4220 Biochemistry II 4 hrs. (3, 2)
Further discussion of particular metabolic pathways in animals and plants with an overall emphasis on control of metabolism
and regulation of pathways. PREREQUISITE: BIOL/CHEM 4210. SAME AS: BIOL 4220. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2023-24.
4510 Senior Physical Science Practicum I 1 hr. (1, 0)
Assessment of the student’s development as a chemistry/biochemistry major. In addition, students will study and discuss
nuances, potential careers, résumé building and job seeking, graduate schools, laboratory safety, and the relationship of
science and Christianity. Required of all chemistry/biochemistry majors. SAME AS: PHYS 4510. OFFERED: Sem. I.
4520 Senior Physical Science Practicum II 1 hr. (1, 0)
Assessment of student’s development as a chemistry/biochemistry major. Continuation of Senior Physical Science Practicum I.
An introduction to the scientific literature and grant writing. Required of all chemistry/biochemistry majors. EXPECTATION:
CHEM 4510 should be completed. SAME AS: PHYS 4520. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Individual study or research in advanced areas of interest. EXPECTATION: At least second year standing in the department;
consent of a chemistry faculty advisor. REPEAT: May be repeated; no more than 8 hours may be counted toward the major.
4910 Science Seminar I 1 hr. (1, 0)
Techniques and practice of written and oral technical communication with respect to experimental or library research
projects. Required of all science majors. Both CHEM 4910 and 4920 must be completed to receive advanced writing
competency (writing-intensive) credit. PREREQUISITE: Science major. SAME AS: BIOL/PHYS 4910. OFFERED: Sem. I.
4920 Science Seminar II 1 hr. (1, 0)
Techniques and practice of written and oral technical communication with respect to experimental or library research
projects. Required of all science majors. Both CHEM 4910 and 4920 must be completed to receive advanced writing
competency (writing-intensive) credit. EXPECTATION: Completion of CHEM 4910. PREREQUISITE: Science major. SAME
AS: BIOL/PHYS 4920. OFFERED: Sem. II.

ENGR COURSES
2001 Introduction to Engineering (Lecture) 1 hr. (1, 2)
Provides prospective engineers an understanding of what it means to be an engineer. Students will participate in teambased project management, be introduced to engineering ethics, learn about different engineering disciplines and develop
practical skills related to technical writing and engineering problem solving. COREQUISITE: ENGR 2002, 2003, and MATH
1220 or MATH 2010. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2002 Introduction to Mechanical and Civil Laboratory 1 hr. (0, 2)
Introduces students to mechanical engineering concepts and equipment. Key areas of interest are measurement, machining,
welding, and other forms of manufacturing. Other topics include both 2-D and solid modeling, additive manufacturing, and
laser cutting. COREQUISITE: MATH 1220 or MATH 2010. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2003 Introduction to Electrical and Computer Laboratory 1 hr. (0, 2)
Students are exposed to a variety of topics in basic electronics and embedded systems fundamentals. Provides hands-on
experience for students to understand the operation of power supplies, function generators, oscilloscopes, and many basic
electronic components. COREQUISITE: MATH 1220 or MATH 2010. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2010 Statics 2 hrs. (2, 2)
Introduction to analyzing forces in isolated and connected rigid-body systems, as well as vector analysis, forces, moments,
resultants, two and three-dimensional equilibrium, trusses, beams, and frames. Emphasis is given to non-accelerating bodies
and frames. PREREQUISITE: PHYS 2240, ENGR 2310 or CPSC 2030. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2030 Circuit Analysis 3 hrs. (2, 2)
Deals with the analysis of DC and AC electric circuits. Students will learn basic laws, analysis techniques, and circuit theorems.
Includes integrated laboratory experience that reinforces classroom content with hands-on experiments. Also makes
extensive use of computer tools for circuit analysis. PREREQUISITE: ENGR 2003 or ENGR 2200. COREQUISITE: MATH 2020,
ENGR 2310. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2060 Engineering Ethics 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Challenges students to consider ethical implications implicit in the decisions made by engineers as they design products
ranging from automobiles, to healthcare devices, to software, to appliances. Much of the course will be dedicated to case
studies, and in doing so students will develop a structured methodology for engaging their profession with an ethically sound
moral compass. Meets the Civil Discourse and Critical Reasoning Liberal Arts requirements. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2070 Thermodynamics 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Emphasis on engineering concepts related to classical thermodynamics. Provides the tools necessary in designing and
analyzing thermal systems and processes. Topics covered include internal energy, enthalpy, entropy, and conservation of
energy. PREREQUISITE: PHYS 2240, CHEM 2110. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2080 Service through Engineering and Technology 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduction to humanitarian engineering and social entrepreneurship, focusing on challenges and opportunities present
throughout society. Frugal innovation and alternative resources are applied to these challenges in under-developed and
under-represented societies. Explanation is given to demonstrate the moral obligations engineers have to improve quality of
living and the environment. Emphasis is given to service learning with the effects and consequences therein. Foundational
concepts in third-world development, empowerment strategies, and cultural humility form a key part of this course to prepare
students for work in service of under-represented or under-developed societies. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2023-24.
2090 Systems Engineering 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Focuses on various aspects of systems engineering, including risk analysis, engineering economics, project planning, and the
product development lifecycle. Heavily project based. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE:
ENGL 1120. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2110 Dynamics 2 hrs. (2, 2)
Introduction to kinematic and kinetic analysis of particles, systems of particles, and rigid bodies; position, velocity, acceleration,
non-rotating and rotating frames of reference, Newton’s laws, work, energy, impulse, momentum, conservative and
nonconservative systems, as well as inertial and noninertial reference frames. PREREQUISITE:PHYS 2240. COREQUISITE:
ENGR 2010. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2200 Foundations of Digital Electronics 2 hrs. (1, 2)
Introduction to circuit analysis, electronics, and digital logic. The laboratory exposes students to implementation of circuits
and instrumentation. Concludes with a brief introduction to single board computers. PREREQUISITE: CPSC 2030 or 2320.
OFFERED: Sem. II.
2310 Computational Problem Solving 3 hrs. (2, 2)
Introduces the students to a high-level programming language and uses it to perform data analysis, data manipulation, and
complex data visualization. Problem solving is taught throughout the course by focusing on computational methods and
interaction with the physical world. COREQUISITE: PHYS 2240 (requirement waived if PHYS 2140 has already been
completed with a C- or better), and MATH 2010. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3030 Signals and Controls 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduces modeling and analysis of dynamic systems as an application of differential equations. Also introduces classical
control techniques, including the analysis and design of linear time-invariant control systems using frequency and time
domain techniques. Makes extensive use of computer-aided simulations, analysis and design techniques. PREREQUISITE:
ENGR 2030, 2110, 2310, MATH 3100. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3080 Engineering Design for Service 3 hrs. (1,4)
Students will design and implement a project utilizing engineering skills to complete a service project. Prepares students to
participate on a service trip and includes an experiential component for field work on a service trip specific to the class
projects. PREREQUISITE: ENGR 2090. OFFERED: Sem II. 2023-24.
3100 Mechanics Lab 2 hrs. (0,4)
Incorporates a hands-on experience of topics in mechanics, such as materials’ property measurement, solid mechanics, and
kinematics, with introductory simulation techniques. Students will perform laboratory experiments to gain practical knowledge
of different mechanical systems. In addition, computational techniques with dynamic simulation will be introduced to design
and analyze mechanical systems to meet design requirements for a project. PREREQUISITE: ENGR 3110. COREQUISITE:
ENGR 3510. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2024-25.
3110 Kinematics and Robotics 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Focuses on analysis of position, velocity, and acceleration of various mechanisms, such as the slider-crank and four-bar
mechanisms. Students will be able to design kinematic mechanisms based on the user’s requirements to achieve the ideal
paths of the particular points of interest. The kinematics will be applied to manipulator analysis with an introduction to inverse
kinematics. PREREQUISITE: ENGR 2110, MATH 3100. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3160 Vibrations 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Introduces the time domain analysis of mechanical vibration including the free and forced response of undamped and
underdamped systems. Also includes the modeling and analysis of single and multiple degree of freedom mechanical systems
and the design of damping and isolation systems. The course makes extensive use of computer-aided simulations for analysis
and design. PREREQUISITE: ENGR 2110, MATH 3100. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2024-25.
3180 Materials and Processes 3 hrs. (3, 0)
An introduction to the science of engineering materials. The primary focus is on the relationships between processing,
structure, properties, and performance of metals, ceramics, polymers, and composites. Students will learn to interpret stressstrain diagrams, phase diagrams, and isothermal transformation diagrams, and to evaluate the fitness of various materials for
engineering applications. PREREQUISITE: CHEM 2110, PHYS 2240. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2023-24.
3190 Thermodynamics: Cycle Analysis 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Focuses on cycles as related to classical thermodynamics. Topics covered include the cycles of Carnot, Otto and Diesel,
Brayton, Rankine as well as modifications and variations to these. Investigations as to how efficiency is affected by reversible
versus irreversible components is examined. PREREQUISITE: ENGR 2070. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3220 Electronics 3 hrs. (2, 2)
An introduction to semiconductor electronic devices and basic theory and application. Topics include semiconductor materials
and diodes, diode circuits, field-effect transistors (FETs), bipolar-junction transistors (BJTs), and discrete transistor amplifiers.
PREREQUISITE: ENGR 2030. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2024-25.
3230 Analog Circuit Design 3 hrs. (2, 2)
Continuation of Electronics to include amplifier design and analysis including discrete and integrated circuit topologies. Other
topics include the design and analysis of differential amplifiers, multi-stage amplifiers, power amplifiers, op-amp circuits,
feedback circuits, and the frequency response of amplifier circuits. Additional applications of electronics may be covered.
PREREQUISITE: ENGR 3220, 3030. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2024-25.
3240 Electromagnetics I 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Engineering applications of vector calculus and Maxwell’s equations to electrostatic and magnetostatic, boundary-value
problems in electrostatic, and time varying fields, transmission lines, and single-stub matching. SAME AS: PHYS 4210.
PREREQUISITE: MATH 3020, 3100, PHYS 2250. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3250 Electromagnetics II 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Engineering applications of phasors and Maxwell’s equations to time varying fields and propagation of uniform plane waves.
Exercises introduce field-plotting, transmission line concepts using waveguides. Introduction to the network analyzer,
polarization, and waves. PREREQUISITE: ENGR 3240, ENGR 3030. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3260 Embedded Systems 3 hrs. (2, 3)
An introduction to the fundamentals of embedded systems, including microcontrollers, peripheral interfacing, basic
communications, interrupts, and real-time operating systems. Includes practical laboratory experiences using serial and
parallel interfaces of microcontrollers to communicate with sensors and actuators. PREREQUISITE: CPSC 2420, ENGR 3270.
OFFERED: Sem. II. 2023-24.
3270 Digital Logic 3 hrs. (2, 3)
An introduction to the fundamental concepts of digital logic, logic gates, such as AND, OR, and NOT, using transistors. The
logic level covers a design technique in which logic gates are used to design digital components. The system level covered for
typical Intel or Motorola microprocessors, which are designed by interfacing memory and I/O chips. In order to synthesize
digital logic circuits, description languages such as Verilog or VHDL will be utilized. The laboratories allow students to design
and implement systems with discrete logic gates and FPGAs. PREREQUISITE: ENGR 2003 or ENGR 2200; and MATH 2010 or
MATH 2200. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2023-24.
3280 Microcontrollers 3 hrs. (2, 2)
Students learn how to program microcontrollers to perform basic tasks, make use of timers, interrupts, and communicate
between embedded devices using serial communication. Students are also introduced to memory allocation and handling,
real-time operating systems (RTOS), and device drivers. PREREQUISITE: CPSC 2500 or CPSC 2320; and ENGR 2003 or ENGR
2200. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2023-24.
3330 Geotechnical Engineering 3 hrs. (2, 2)
Focuses on the properties and analysis of soils used in engineering. Topics include soil classification, compaction, swelling and
shrinkage as well as the implication of soil for civil engineering design. The lab provides hands-on experiments intended to
reinforce and verify lecture content. PREREQUISITE: MATH 2020. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2025-26.
3340 Structural Analysis 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Covers analyses of structural systems. Particular topics include deflections, superposition, and the analysis of determinate
beams, trusses and frames and indeterminate beams and forms. PREREQUISITE: ENGR 3510. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2026-27.
3350 Surveying 3 hrs. (2, 2)
Introduction to surveying instruments, methods, and related computer applications. Includes instruction in measurement
techniques, mapping, and surveying computations. PREREQUISITE: MATH 2020; ENGR 2002. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2025-26.
3510 Solid Mechanics 3 hr. (3, 0)
Covers deformation analysis for determining stresses and strains. Topics include elasticity, plasticity, bending, fracture,
buckling, and thermal stresses. Analysis of diverse structures under various loading conditions will be considered.
PREREQUISITE: ENGR 2010. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3850 Engineering Projects Laboratory 1 hr. (0, 2)
Provides students, from all levels, practical engineering experiences in the laboratory and field setting. Students will develop
problem solving and engineering design skills as they work on engineering projects alongside the instructor. REPEAT: May be
repeated for credit. PREREQUISITE: ENGR 2001, 2002, 2003; or consent of instructor. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
4020 Mechatronics System Design 4 hrs. (3, 2)
Mechatronics is the multidisciplinary union of mechanical, electrical, and computer engineering. It employs knowledge from
these disciplines to explore mechanics, electrical sensing, control, and actuation, and computer programming of mechatronic
devices. Students will design, build and program electro-mechanical devices to autonomously perform specific tasks.
Students may also gain experience with Programmable Logic Controllers for industrial control applications. PREREQUISITE:
ENGR 2030 or 2200 and CPSC 2320 or 2500. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2023-24.
4030 Advanced Control 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Covers linear state space control including full state feedback and observer-based design. May also include an introduction to
topics including robust control, optimal control, adaptive control, digital control or nonlinear control. PREREQUISITE: ENGR
3030. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
4050 Data Communications 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Low level communication protocols and design considerations such as congestion control, collision detection and avoidance,
multiple access schemes (e.g., CDMA, FDMA, TDMA). Applied information theory such as forward error correction codes,
erasure codes, channel capacity, and data compression. Connections are drawn between the OSI networking stack and topics
covered in this course. PREREQUISITE: MATH 2200, 4010, and ENGR 3030 or CPSC 2500. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
4100 Thermal Fluids Lab 2 hrs. (0,4)
Incorporates a hands-on experience of topics in the thermal-fluid sciences (fluid mechanics, thermodynamics, and heat/mass
transfer). Specific topics covered include flow visualization, flow measurement, internal and external friction flow, conduction,
convection, convective mass transfer, and radiation. Also introduces simulation topics in computational fluid dynamics and
finite element analysis. PREREQUISITE: ENGR 3190 and ENGR 4130. COREQUISITE: ENGR 4160. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4110 Machine Design 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Addresses the machine part design process from the nature of design to prediction of possible failure of machine parts based
on force and stress analysis and estimated deflection, and materials properties. Other considerations can be included, such as
the manufacturing aspect in the part design. PREREQUISITE: ENGR 3110, ENGR 3510. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4120 Computational Mechanics 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Utilizes the numerical capabilities of the modern computer to simulate physical phenomenon. Topics include the finiteelement method, finite-difference schemes, and optimization techniques. Introduces round-off errors and error propagation,
as well as convergence determination. PREREQUISITE: ENGR 2310, 3510, 4130, and CPSC 2320 or 2500. OFFERED: With
sufficient demand.
4130 Fluid Mechanics 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Covers the principles of fluid flow, conservation of mass, conservation of momentum, and conservation of energy via integral,
differential, and dimensional analysis methods. Students will apply these principles to laminar and turbulent flow in internal,
external, and open channel flow configurations. A brief introduction to compressible flow is also included. PREREQUISITE:
ENGR 2110, MATH 3100. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4160 Heat and Mass Transfer 4 hrs. (3, 2)
Covers heat transfer processes including conduction, convection, and thermal radiation. Students will apply principles of
conservation to thermal energy systems to solve steady-state and transient problems both analytically and computationally.
A brief introduction to commercial finite element software is included. PREREQUISITE: ENGR 2070, 4130. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4230 Power Systems 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Introduces the fundamentals of theory and operation of electromechanical devices, including magnetic circuits, transformers
as well as DC and AC rotating machines. Principles of electrical power generation, transmission, and distribution, three-phase
power circuits, and power system analysis are also discussed. PREREQUISITE: ENGR 2030, 3030. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2023-24.
4240 Communications Theory 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Fundamental components in communications systems are covered. Emphasis on the effect of noise in a system and how to
mitigate its effect on transmission and receiving. System design and integration is utilized to understand the practical nature
of development of such systems. Aspects include the utilization of automatic gain control and phase lock loops. Modulation
techniques such as amplitude modulation, frequency modulation, and quadrature modulation are covered. PREREQUISITE:
ENGR 3030, MATH 4010. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2023-24.
4250 Digital Signal Processing 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Focuses on the sampling and reconstruction of continuous signals via digital systems. The z-transform is used for FIR and IIR
filter design. Relation between the z-transform and fourier transform is utilized for further signal analysis. The DFT and FFT
are covered, as well as algorithmic implementations and utilization for filter design. Nyquist-Shannon sampling theorem,
decimation, and interpolation are also covered. Signal processing filters and algorithms are implemented on CPUs, DSPs,
and/or FPGAs. PREREQUISITE: ENGR 3030, MATH 4010. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2024-25.
4320 Fluids Lab for Civil Engineers 1 hrs. (0, 2)
Incorporates hands-on experience of civil engineering related topics in fluid mechanics and water resources including flow
visualization, flow measurement, viscosity, turbines, frictional losses and pipes. COREQUISITE: ENGR 4130. OFFERED:
Sem. I, 2026-27.
4330 Water Resources Engineering 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Focuses on the hydrologic aspects of water, including an introduction to hydraulics and hydrology. Students will both analyze
and design water resource systems. PREREQUISITE: ENGR 4130. OFFERED: Sem. I, 2026-27.
4340 Structural Design (concrete) 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Presents an approach to the design and analysis of concrete structural members including rectangular sections for bending
and shear, column design, and reinforced concrete using rebar. PREREQUISITE: ENGR 3340. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2026-27.
4350 Structural Design (steel) 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Presents an approach to the Load and Resistance Factor Design (LRFD) methodology for steel structural members in tension,
compressing, bending and connections. PREREQUISITE: ENGR 3340. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2026-27.
4360 Transportation Engineering 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduces transportation engineering with a focus on highway design and traffic analysis. Covers design of highways,
pavement design, traffic flow, traffic surveys, highway capacity and level of service analysis. PREREQUISITE: ENGR 3350.
OFFERED: With Sufficient Demand.
4950 Engineering Senior Design I 2 hrs. (0, 4)
Applications of design principles to a capstone engineering project. Team-based projects include developing design
specifications, conceptual designs, and final designs. Project requirements include significant oral and written communication
components. Examples of projects include inter-collegiate competition, industry-sponsored applied research, and service
projects. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. EXPECTATION: Senior standing; engineering major.
PREREQUISITE: ENGR 2090. OFFERED: Sem. I.
4960 Engineering Senior Design II 2 hrs. (0, 4)
Building on ENGR 4950. Applications of design principles to a capstone engineering project. Projects are team based and
include developing design specifications, conceptual designs, and final designs. Project requirements include significant oral
and written communication components. Students are required to attempt the Fundamentals of Engineering exam. Applies
to liberal arts writing and speaking-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: ENGR 4950. OFFERED: Sem. II.

PHYS COURSES
1000 Physical Science 4 hrs. (3, 2)
Introduction to selected topics in physical science including: the laws of motion, energy, electricity, atoms and molecules,
wave properties (light and sound), and duality (wave-particle and matter-energy). These scientific principles are studied as
they relate to real-world applications and current events. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
1020 Earth and Space Science 4 hrs. (3, 2)
Introduction to the study of geology, weather, and space science, with an emphasis on the phenomena that pertain to the
earth’s crust and atmosphere and the methods used to form our understanding of these dynamic systems. May be taken
alone or as a supplement to PHYS 1000. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
1030 Teaching STEM in the Elementary Classroom 3 hrs. (0, 4)
Introduces concepts in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM). Equips students to create and execute
their own hands-on experiences exploring these concepts. Taken almost exclusively by education majors in order to prepare
them to address these important topics in their careers. OFFERED: Sem. II.
1240 Introduction to Astronomy 4 hrs. (3, 2)
Introduction to understanding planets, stars, and galaxies of our universe with emphasis on what they are, how they live
and die, and how they are studied. Students will also gain an appreciation for the night sky and the type of observations
that can be made. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
2140 General Physics I (Algebra Based) 4 hrs. (3, 2)
Introduces major concepts of physics and their mathematical foundations, with a primary emphasis on Newtonian
mechanics. EXPECTATION: Students enrolling should demonstrate sufficient knowledge of college algebra. OFFERED:
Sem. II.
2150 General Physics II (Algebra Based) 4 hrs. (3, 2)
Continuation of General Physics I, with a primary emphasis on electricity, magnetism, optics, and modern physics.
EXPECTATION: PHYS 2140 or equivalent should be completed, and students should demonstrate sufficient knowledge of
college algebra. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2240 General Physics I (Calculus Based) 4 hrs. (3, 4)
Introduces major concepts of physics and their mathematical foundations, with a primary emphasis on momentum, energy,
and rotational dynamics. EXPECTATION: Students taking this course typically have completed at least one year of high
school physics. COREQUISITE: MATH 2010. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2250 General Physics II (Calculus Based) 4 hrs. (3, 2)
Continuation of General Physics I, with a primary emphasis on electricity, magnetism, and optics. PREREQUISITE: PHYS
2240 and MATH 2020, both with a C- or better. OFFERED: Sem. I.
4130 Quantum Theory 4 hrs. (4, 0)
Provides a background and introduction to quantum theory, as well as applications to various systems, such as the hydrogen
atom. Additionally, students are exposed to problem-solving techniques, such as perturbation theory and the variational
method, as well as their applications to a range of physical systems. PREREQUISITE: PHYS 3130, MATH 3020. SAME AS:
CHEM 4120. OFFERED: Sem. II, 2023-24.
4210 Electricity and Magnetism 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Engineering applications of vector calculus and Maxwell’s equations to electrostatic and magnetostatic, boundary-value
problems in electrostatic, and time varying fields, transmission lines, propagation of uniform plane waves, and single-stub
matching. EXPECTATION: PHYS 2250 and MATH 3020, 3100 are normally completed. SAME AS: ENGR 3240. OFFERED:
Sem. I.
4650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Individual research in advanced areas of interest. REPEAT: May be repeated; total credit not to exceed 8 hours. OFFERED:
With sufficient demand.

PSYC COURSES
2000 General Psychology 3 hrs. (3, 0)
An introduction to the scientific study of mental processes and behavior. Topics include history, biological basis of behavior,
sensation, perception, development, learning, memory, motivation, emotion, social, abnormal, and counseling. Required of all
psychology majors and minors. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2010 Research Methods in Psychology 3 hrs. (3, 0)
An introduction to psychological research methods and discipline-specific writing, with an emphasis on in-class exercises. Required
of all psychology majors. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: Psychology major or minor.
OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2050 Psychological Propaedeutics 4 hrs. (4, 0)
An introduction to the philosophical foundations of psychology. Topics include will, mind, sense, cognition, dreams, mental
faculties, imagination, memory, and the unconscious. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
2100 Interpersonal Relationships 4 hrs. (4, 0)
An introduction to the social skills that increase interpersonal effectiveness in courtship, marriage, work, and play. Methods used
may involve role playing, personal feedback, video recording, and group discussion. GRADE: CR/NC. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2110 Educational Psychology 3 hrs. (2, 0)
An introduction to the application of psychological principles to the challenges of teaching and learning. Examines the theoretical
and applied aspects of learning, motivation, human development, personality, and measurement and evaluation. SAME AS: EDUC
2110. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2440 Applied Statistics and Introduction to Research 4 hrs. (4, 0)
An examination of basic statistical techniques with emphasis on interpreting research literature, practical applications in
psychology, business and political science, and use and interpretation of appropriate computer software. EXPECTATION: Basic
Mathematics proficiency at a high school level. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2510 Developmental Psychology 4 hrs. (4, 0)
An introduction to the study of psychological growth and development of the individual from a lifespan approach. Child and
adolescent development will be emphasized. A holistic approach to physical, cognitive, affective, and personality development;
parenting; and stages of grief and dying are used. Theorists considered may include Piaget, Erikson, Kohlberg, Mahler, and KublerRoss. PREREQUISITE: PSYC 2000. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2850 Practicum in Leadership Skills 2 hrs. (1, 2)
An introduction to training assertiveness, communication, helping, and negotiation skills. Students receive direct feedback on their
performance and gain experience in co-leadership and team building. Required for youth leadership development majors.
CONSENT: Instructor. PREREQUISITE: PSYC 2100. GRADE: CR/NC. SAME AS: EDUC/SOCI 2850. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
3010 Social Psychology 4 hrs. (4, 0)
An examination of the behavior of individuals in society, including the study of attitudes, beliefs, prejudice, aggression,
leadership, and altruism. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: PSYC 2000. SAME AS:
SOCI/PUBH 3030. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3030 Psychiatric Rehabilitation 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Involves exploring mental health services used to help individuals with severe mental illnesses achieve the best outcomes
possible. Focus on evidence-based practices, but discusses a variety of other factors shaping how services are provided,
including cultural factors, stigma, and the role of advocacy groups. A repeated theme will be to ask how to implement
humane, practical, feasible, culturally competent, cost-effective, and replicable services. PREREQUISITE: PSYC 2000.
OFFERED: Sem. II, 2024-25 (alternating years).
3040 Group and Institutional Dynamics 3 hrs. (3, 0)
A practical approach to the theory and training of small and large groups and their leadership. Focus on leading groups in
schools, churches, hospitals, agencies, and industry. Group types covered include discussion, task, and personaldevelopment groups. PREREQUISITE: PSYC 2000. GRADE: CR/NC. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3060 The Emotions 4 hrs. (4, 0)
Our emotions influence almost every part of our lives, including our perceptions, decision-making, and relationships with
others. Course briefly examines motivation and how emotion differs from it and the various theories of emotion. It also
examines the complex components of emotion, from antecedent event, through appraisal and arousal, to attribution and
action. Numerous specific emotions are examined in light of this. PREREQUISITE: PSYC 2000. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3100 Human Brain Dysfunction 4 hrs. (4, 0)
Within a framework of neuropsychology, an introduction to brain dysfunction, including language disruption, memory
disruption, and the effects of stroke, tumor, and traumatic brain injury. PREREQUISITE: PSYC 2000. OFFERED: Sem. II,
2023-24 (alternating years).
3120 Abnormal Psychology 4 hrs. (4, 0)
An exploration of differing perspectives on abnormal behavior and how these impact the resulting classification and treatments.
PREREQUISITE: PSYC 2000. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3200 Living the Christian Faith in a Post-Christian World 3 hrs. (3, 0)
An examination of the interface of biblical principles as developed through the inductive study of contemporary approaches
to understanding the world. Emphasizes the impact of such principles on faith and action. Meets Liberal Arts Civil Discourse &
Critical Reasoning. Applies to liberal arts speaking-intensive requirement. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3210 Behavioral Neuroscience 4 hrs. (3, 2)
Introduces the biological foundations of animal and human behavior, including human neuropsychology, the study of brain
disease, and how the environment (including toxins) contributes to changes in the brain. The laboratory component
stresses the human brain and the student’s ability to recognize its various components. EXPECTATION: PSYC 2010
strongly recommended. PREREQUISITE: PSYC 2000. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3220 Organizational Behavior and Theory 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Stresses behavior in relation to organizational theories, knowledge, and the application of theories related to individual,
group, and organizational performance. Emphasis on understanding the managerial process from a behavioral perspective.
PREREQUISITE: PSYC 2000. SAME AS: BSNS 4010. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3240 Experimental Design 4 hrs. (4, 0)
An introduction to complex analysis of variance and covariance. Focuses on intermediate statistical methods of data
analysis. The class is for students planning to do graduate work in psychology. PREREQUISITE: PSYC 2440 or MATH 2120.
OFFERED: Sem. II, 2023-24 (alternating years).
3310 Psychological Tests 3 hrs. (3, 0)
An introduction to the principles and practices of individual and group testing in aptitude, intelligence, interest, and
personality. Theory, construction, evaluation, interpretation, uses, and limits of psychological tests are emphasized.
Specific topics include reliability, validity, norms, test construction, and selection. EXPECTATION: PSYC 2440 strongly
recommended. PREREQUISITE: PSYC 2000. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3330 Cognitive Psychology 4 hrs. (4, 0)
An examination of the theoretical and empirical consideration of cognitive processes. Topics include attention, memory,
problem-solving, and language. Corresponding topics from neuroscience will also be included. PREREQUISITE: PSYC
2000. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3400 Memory 4 hrs. (4, 0)
Introduces the theory and application of human learning and memory. Students will learn evidence-based best practices
for learning and apply this knowledge to class, work or athletics. Memory failures such as forgetting, blocking, and the
intrusion of unwanted memories will be examined and solutions discussed. Christian perspectives of memory will be
considered. PREREQUISITE: PSYC 2000. OFFERED: Sem. II,
2024-25 (alternating years).
3450 Health Psychology 4 hrs. (4, 0)
Involves the application of psychological principles and research into the enhancement of health and to the prevention and
treatment of illness. Examines how biological, psychological, and social factors interact with and impact an individual’s
ability to make decisions that promote good health and help prevent illness. Topics may include the role of stress in illness,
specific illnesses (e.g. cancer, heart disease), and strategies for modifying lifestyle factors (e.g. smoking, weight control).
PREREQUISITE: PSYC 2000. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3500 Thought Life and Spiritual Growth 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Utilizes cognitive theory and spiritual principles to inform one’s interpersonal and professional growth. Presents a
convergence model of cognitive precepts and Judeo-Christian spiritual principles that can be utilized in such
transformation. A theoretical context will be provided and experiential techniques will be modeled for application. SAME
AS: SOCI 3500. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
4030 Counseling and Psychotherapy 4 hrs. (4, 0)
An examination of several approaches to treating abnormal behavior with an emphasis on developing practical
competence. PREREQUISITE: PSYC 2000, 3120. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4100 Leadership and Training Skills 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Equips students to lead small interpersonal skill-training groups using the skills of working with a co-leader, team building,
promoting a positive learning environment, agenda monitoring, and remaining task focused. Students will learn to train
others in the skills of communication, assertion, helping, and negotiation. CONSENT: Instructor. PREREQUISITE: PSYC
2850. REPEAT: May be repeated once for credit. GRADE: CR/NC. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
4110 History and Systems 3 hrs. (3, 0)
The study of the evolution of thought in psychology from its inception as an experimental science to the development of its
significant systems, issues, experiments, and theories of today. Provides good preparation for the Graduate Record
Examination in psychology. PREREQUISITE: PSYC 2000. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
4140 Personality Theory 4 hrs. (4, 0)
A critical evaluation of major theories of personality based on selected philosophical and theological perspectives. Theorists
considered include Freud, Sartre, Jung, and Lacan. PREREQUISITE: PSYC 2000. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
4150 Philosophical Issues for the Psychologist 3 hrs. (3, 0)
An examination of the differing methodological approaches of psychology and theology. The interface of science and a
Christian perspective is explored. PREREQUISITE: PSYC 2000. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
4210 Capstone: Psychological Issues for Youth 4 hrs. (4, 0)
A unifying experience for all youth leadership development majors to integrate their understanding of the problems of
youth, potential methods of prevention and guidance, and special topics unique to this age group. Students will prepare
presentations for use during their internship. Applies to liberal arts speaking-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: PSYC
2000, 2510, 2850; SOCI 3100. OFFERED: Sem. I.
4510 Capstone Research I 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Yearlong course (semesters I and II) provides an opportunity for students to design, propose, and implement individual research
projects. Students are expected to present their research findings to an appropriate audience. EXPECTATION: Students should be
prepared to cover part of the costs for their projects and any registration fees for conferences. CONSENT: Instructor. REPEAT: May
be repeated once for credit.
4520 Capstone Research II 2 hrs. (1, 2)
Continuation of Capstone Research I. Yearlong course (semesters I and II) provides an opportunity for students to design,
propose, and implement individual research projects. Students are expected to present their research findings to an
appropriate audience. EXPECTATION: Students should be prepared to cover part of the costs for their projects and any
registration fees for conferences. CONSENT: Instructor. PREREQUISITE: PSYC 4510. REPEAT: May be repeated once for
credit. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4650 Independent Study/Research Project 1-4 hrs. (1-4, 0)
A scheduled or specially arranged class for research or other individual study. Capstone research projects require two semesters
(semesters I and II). Applies to liberal arts speaking-intensive requirement. EXPECTATION: Students should be prepared to cover
part of the costs for their projects and any registration fees for conferences. CONSENT: Instructor. REPEAT: May be repeated; no
more than 8 hours may be applied toward the major. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
4800 Internship in Youth Leadership 2 hrs. (1, 2)
An opportunity for youth leadership development majors to practice the training and presentation skills and content learned in
prior courses in an applied setting relevant to the student’s career or personal goals. Required for youth leadership development
majors. PREREQUISITE: PSYC 4210. GRADE: CR/NC. CONSENT: Department. SAME AS: EDUC/SOCI 4800. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4900 Professional Issues for the Psychologist 1 hr. (1, 0)
Provides an assessment of the student’s development as a psychology major. In this course (to be taken during the first
semester of the senior year), students will discuss professional issues such as ethics in the practice of psychology and a
Christian response to these ethical principles. In addition, students will discuss strategies for applying to graduate schools and
job seeking. Formal assessment of the major will be completed in this course. Required of all psychology majors.
PREREQUISITE: Senior status. OFFERED: Sem. I.

PUBH COURSES
2010 Introduction to Public Health 3 hrs. (3,0)
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), public health is “the science and art of preventing disease,
prolonging life, and promoting health through the organized efforts and informed choices of society, organizations, public
and private communities, individuals.” This course introduces students to the growing and broad field of public health and the
key concepts and practice areas in public health. It provides students with fundamental knowledge of public health models,
history of public health, controversial issues in public health, social determinants of health, current and emergent practices in
public health, the role of politics and policymaking as inherent to public health in action, and how social movement have
advanced and continue to advance achievements towards public health goals. Students will be provided with opportunities to
engage in the discussion and activities that facilitate greater understanding of public health as a system, and a forum from
critical thinking and analysis of important public health issues. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2040 Personal & Community Health 3 hrs. (3, 0)
The relationship between one’s physical, psychological, and spiritual health, plus one’s culture and environment are central
to understanding the entire field of personal and community health. This class will utilize the Ecological Model to examine
personal health within the context of the social and physical environment. Health problems of different populations will be
studied in relation to historical/structural dimensions, normal development, disease processes, and access to health systems.
Core public health competencies will be addressed, with emphasis on the underlying scientific and social bases for public
health practice. SAME AS: BIOL 2040. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3010 Social Psychology 4 hrs. (4, 0)
Examines the behavior of individuals in society, including the study of attitudes, beliefs, prejudice, aggression, leadership,
and altruism. Applies to the liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: PSYC 2000. SAME AS: PSYC/SOCI
3010. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3020 Introduction to Epidemiology 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Focuses on how diseases are spread within populations of people and within communities. Also reviews the factors
associated with the prevention, detection, distribution, and elimination of diseases. Provides a foundation for understanding
the basic principles and methods of epidemiology, with an emphasis on critical thinking, analytical skills, and application to
clinical practice. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3030 Global Health 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Global health has been designated an area for study, research, and practice that places priority on improving health and
achieving equity in health for all people worldwide. The course will introduce students to key concepts of the global health
field and the critical links between global health and social and economic development, and facilitate an analysis of the
burden of disease and risk factors. Students will be introduced to the complex nature of social, economic, political and
environmental factors that affect the health of populations globally, gain a fuller understanding of the progress made in
addressing global health problems, and the significant challenges that remain, and critically examine global health
interventions. OFFERED: Sem. II
3260 Sociology of Health and Illness 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduces students to sociological perspectives vis-a-vis health, illness and the practice of medicine. Examines health,
illness, and health care institutions as social phenomena, the social causes and consequences of health, illness, and health
care. Emphasis on an understanding of the social forces that produce disease and health inequalities, the processes that
shape what gets recognized as disease, and the preferred means of treating it. SAME AS: SOCI 3260. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3510 Bioethics 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Seminar course examines ethical questions that arise in the relationships among life sciences, biotechnology, medicine,
politics, law, philosophy, and theology. Topics and case studies are selected and discussed in terms of the ethical issues they
present. These issues include beginning of life, death and dying, human and animal testing, and environmental stewardship.
Applies to Civil Discourse and Critical Reasoning component of Liberal Arts. PREREQUISITE:Junior standing. SAME AS:
BIOL 3510. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3700 Introduction to Social Research 4 hrs. (4, 0)
Introduction to methods and application of social research, including issues of conceptualization of variables, research
design, scientific sampling, quantitative and qualitative forms of analysis, evaluation research, and utilization of social
research in policy, program, and practice settings. Applies to the liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE:
SOCI 2010 or 2020 or 2100; upper-division standing. SAME AS: SOCI 3700. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
4350 Program Planning and Grant Writing 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Course rationale is based on the need in the nonprofit sector and social service agencies for highly competent professionals
who possess the requisite skills needed to: (1) assess community needs, especially those impacting children and families; (2)
think strategically and creatively about relevant program interventions; and (3) acquire competitive funding from
government agencies and private and public foundations. Course integrates several knowledge and skill areas including
research methods, program planning, proposal writing, budget planning, project implementation, and program evaluation
to assess the effectiveness of interventions. PREREQUISITE: Upper-division standing. SAME AS: SOCI/SOWK 4350.
OFFERED: Sem. I.
4360 Health Policy 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Health policies can have a profound effect on quality of life. As such, health policies are linked to accessibility, cost, quality of
health care, safety of food, water and environment, and the right to make decisions about health. This course will provide a
framework for understanding and analyzing a variety of health policy issues, and will introduce U.S. policy-making in the
legal system and will consider essential issues in health policy and law, including health insurance, individual rights in health
care, and health care access and quality. The purpose is to introduce students to the policy environment that influences and
shapes public health and the provision of health care service, to enhance understanding of the historical and political context
of health policy, and to develop strategies for analysis of health policy issues, as well as effective communication in the
policy environment. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4810 Community Health Internship 3 hrs. (3, 0)
A supervised field experience providing an opportunity for each student to apply his or her knowledge in a practice setting.
The internship will focus on strengthening competence in general community health and specialty skills through practical
experiences. A wide range of settings and opportunities may be suitable for an internship, given the program goals and
students’ interests and career goals. Placement selection may focus on special topics, such as women and children’s health,
infectious disease (HIV/AIDS, Malaria), refugee issues, world food issues, urban food systems, health and nutrition
promotion in schools and communities, community food systems, hunger and food security in local and global perspective,
food, nutrition, human rights, sustainable communities, and global health policies and initiatives. Internship locations might
include NGO, International Agencies (United Nations High Commission for Refugees), World Relief, World Vision,
Compassion International, SIFAT, World Hunger Relief Inc., Food Research and Action Center, and local non-profit or
governmental agencies. CONSENT: Instructor. SAME AS: SOCI 4810. OFFERED: Summer only.

CRIM COURSES
2510 The Nature of Crime and Social Deviance 4 hrs. (4, 0)
Examines the nature and extent of crime, juvenile delinquency, and social deviance in the United States. Special attention is
given to theoretical perspectives, scientific research and scholarship in criminology, and related factors offering explanations
for these behaviors. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: ENGL 1120. PREREQUISITE or
COREQUISITE: SOCI 2010 or SOCI 2020. SAME AS: SOCI 2510. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2520 Introduction to Criminal Justice 3 hrs. (3, 0)
An introductory examination of crime, the nature of criminal law, and the operation of criminal justice agencies in the United
States. Emphasis on issues related to the legal processing of criminal cases. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2560 Introduction to Criminal Forensic Science 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introductory course to criminalistics that explores the history and scope of forensic science. The scope of this course includes
discovery at a crime scene, the most important location of evidence; physical evidence; analytical techniques for organic and
inorganic materials; forensic toxicology; firearms, ammunition, unique tool marks, and various impressions (e.g., shoe prints,
fabric properties, and bloodstains). OFFERED: Sem. II.
3010 Victimology and Victim Studies 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines the role of the victim in criminal incidents and criminal justice case processing. Analysis of concerns related to victim
precipitation, victim blaming, and victim facilitation, as well as the consequences and after-effects of crime victimization. In
addition to traditional violent and property crimes, this course also looks at the areas of interpersonal abuse, including
domestic and family violence. Discussion of victims’ assistance, advocacy, compensation, and rights are also included.
OFFERED: Sem. II, 2024-25.
3020 Principles of Law Enforcement 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines the multi-faceted role of the police officer in society. Topics include the historical development of policing and police
work, police organization and patrol practices, police discretion, innovations in community policing, police corruption, career
issues, and reform efforts. PREREQUISITE: CRIM 2520. OFFERED: Sem. II 2023-24.
3030 Juvenile Justice 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Focuses on issues related to juvenile delinquency and justice processing involving youth. Examines the changing
definitions of adolescence in society, delinquent behavior and youth crime, major theoretical perspectives in the area,
the creation and development of the juvenile court, historical changes in the juvenile justice system, corrections,
aftercare, and treatment of juvenile offenders. PREREQUISITE: CRIM 2510, 2520. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3040 The Correctional System 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines corrections in all of its diversity — at the federal, state, and local levels, and via public as well as private agencies.
Attention concerns community-based corrections, probation and parole, jails, prisons, and trend patterns in organization and
day-to-day functioning of correctional agencies in the United States. PREREQUISITE: CRIM 2520. OFFERED: With sufficient
demand.
3050 Drugs and American Society 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines the sociological and criminal justice aspects of drugs, drug use, sales and trafficking, and related socio-legal policies.
Social control issues as well as concerns with education, prevention, and treatment are discussed. Historical perspective,
primarily within the context of the United States, as well as contemporary issues will be included. PREREQUISITE: CRIM
2520, SOCI 2010, or SOCI 2020 or upper-division standing. SAME AS: SOCI 3050. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3110 Criminal Law and Process 4 hrs. (4, 0)
Examines the historical development of substantive and procedural criminal law in the United States as well as how the law is
implemented in practice through the actions of criminal justice agencies. Issues of criminal law involving constitutional
questions and related landmark Supreme Court decisions are discussed and analyzed. PREREQUISITE: CRIM 2510, 2520.
OFFERED: Sem. I.
3350 Homeland Security 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Overview of American foreign and domestic policy changes in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. Topics
covered include the reorganization of government bureaucracies, ongoing debates over balancing security with civil liberties,
interagency cooperation to prevent terrorism, risk-based assessment, border security, and disaster management.
PREREQUISITE:Upper-division standing. SAME AS: POSC 3350.
3650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (1-4, 0)
Intensive research, study, or personal involvement in a criminal justice area not specifically covered by other courses.
CONSENT: Department chair. REPEAT: May be repeated; total credit not to exceed 8 hours. OFFERED: With sufficient
demand.
4120 Planned Change 4 hrs. (4, 0)
Examination and analysis of strategies for planned change and reform in the criminal justice area. Case studies of particular
issues related to policing, the courts, and/or corrections. CONSENT: Instructor. PREREQUISITE: CRIM 2520. OFFERED: With
sufficient demand.
4650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (1-4, 0)
Intensive research, study, or personal involvement in a criminal justice area not specifically covered by other courses. CONSENT:
Department chair. REPEAT: May be repeated; total credit not to exceed 8 hours. OFFERED:With sufficient demand.
4810 Criminal Justice Internship I 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Placement in a criminal justice agency under professional supervision. Planned for criminal justice majors and minors in their
junior or senior years. Forty hours of field experience required for each hour of credit. CONSENT: Instructor. PREREQUISITE:
CRIM 2510, 2520. REPEAT: May be repeated. OFFERED: Sem. I, II; Summer.
4820 Criminal Justice Internship II 1-4 hrs. (arranged)
Continuation of CRIM 4810. Forty hours of field experience required for each hour of credit. Internship normally completed at
an agency different from the agency for CRIM 4810. CONSENT: Instructor. PREREQUISITE: CRIM 4810. REPEAT: May be
repeated. OFFERED: Sem. I, II; Summer.
4900 Criminal Justice Seminar 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Senior capstone course involving intensive reading and discussion of materials focused on issues related to current topics on
crime, criminological theory, and applied policy, as well as career pursuits in criminal justice and related professional issues.
Applies to liberal arts speaking-intensive requirement. CONSENT: Instructor. PREREQUISITE: CRIM 2510, 2520; upperdivision standing. OFFERED: Sem. I.
4920 Honors Study 4 hrs. (arranged)
Intensive research, study, or personal involvement in a criminal justice area not specifically covered by other courses.
EXPECTATION: Open only to seniors with a 3.5 or higher GPA in CRIM courses counted toward the major. CONSENT:
Department chair. PREREQUISITE: Senior standing. REPEAT: May be repeated; total credit not to exceed 4 hours.
OFFERED: With sufficient demand.

SOCI COURSES
2010 Introduction to Sociology 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Presents the basic principles, concepts, and theoretical paradigms of sociology for analyzing social behavior, human
relationships, and social institutions. Introduces students to a sociological perspective and form of analysis for understanding
social life. Emphasizes “sociological imagination,” developing a perspective that strives to understand the intersection
between individual biography and social structural history. Surveys the main areas of study and concentration within the field
of sociology. OFFERED: Sem. I, II; Summer.
2020 Social Problems 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Sociological analysis of contemporary social problems. Designed to help students increase awareness and sensitivity toward
major social issues, recognize the impact of social problems on various groups of people within our society, and understand
how societal structures can serve to perpetuate or intervene to effectively resolve social problems. Credit for SOCI 2020 may be
earned by completing the Communities and Cultures Seminar at the Chicago Center. OFFERED: Sem. I, II; Summer.
2100 Family in Global and Diverse Context 3 hrs. (3, 0)
The scientific study of the role of the family as one of the oldest universal and foundational social institutions. Examines
variations in family functions, processes, strategies and structures; how macro influences, such as globalizations, impact the
family; explores family and health issues, the impact of policy and law on the family, work-family linkages; the changing
nature of family dynamics resulting from cultural transformations. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2200 Self and Society 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines the interrelationship of self and society in the everyday world of social interaction. Particular emphasis on
theoretical perspectives of the self and related conceptions of self-concept and self-esteem, social roles, and identity. The
importance of society in the development and expression of self is examined through a focus on socialization processes,
language, deviance, and gender. OFFERED: Summer.
2250 Cultural Anthropology 4 hrs. (4, 0)
Introduction to nature, organization, and functioning of human culture with attention to dynamics of cultural change. Major
concern is to develop understanding and appreciation of cultures other than one’s own. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
2450 Introduction to Issues in Race and Ethnicity 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduces students, through a relational perspective, to the origins and the ongoing sociological construction of the concepts
of race and ethnicity in America. Analyzes different types of race and ethnic relations in America, as well as racism, prejudice,
and discrimination as tools of exclusion. Evaluates minority and majority group responses and identifies cultural contributions
of ethnic groups. Incorporates a perspective of “sociological imagination,” where one considers the intersections between
individual biography and socio-structural history. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2510 The Nature of Crime and Social Deviance 4 hrs. (4, 0)
Examines the nature and extent of crime, juvenile delinquency, and social deviance in the United States. Special attention
given to theoretical perspectives, scientific research and scholarship in criminology, and related factors that offer explanations
for these behaviors. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: ENGL 1120. PREREQUISITE or
COREQUISITE: SOCI 2010 or SOCI 2020. SAME AS: CRIM 2510. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2850 Practicum in Leadership Skills 2 hrs. (1, 2)
Introduction to training assertiveness, communication, helping, and negotiation skills. Students receive direct feedback on their
performance and gain experience in co-leadership and team building. Required for youth leadership-development majors.
CONSENT:Instructor. PREREQUISITE:PSYC 2100. GRADE: CR/NC. SAME AS: EDUC/PSYC 2850. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
3010 Social Psychology 4 hrs. (4, 0)
Examines the behavior of individuals in society, including the study of attitudes, beliefs, prejudice, aggression, leadership,
and altruism. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: PSYC 2000. SAME AS: PSYC/PUBH
3010. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3050 Drugs and American Society 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines the sociological and criminal justice aspects of drugs, drug use, sales and trafficking, and related socio-legal policies.
Social control issues as well as concerns with education, prevention, and treatment are also discussed. Historical perspective,
primarily within the context of the United States, as well as contemporary issues will be included. PREREQUISITE: CRIM
2520, SOCI 2010, or SOCI 2020 or upper-division standing. SAME AS: CRIM 3050. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3100 Human Sexuality 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Nature and meaning of human sexuality as part of one’s total personality structure. Consideration of theological/ spiritual,
physiological, social, and cultural aspects of human sexual nature and behavior. Of particular value to people entering human
service professions, including pastoral counseling, social work, criminal justice, nursing, individual therapy, marriage and
family therapy, and related fields. PREREQUISITE: Sophomore or upper-division standing. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
3140 Parenting 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines parenting during each developmental stage of the family life cycle. Consideration of trends occurring in parentchild relationships, cultural variations in parenting, goals of parenting, discipline, communication and conflict resolution in
parent-child relationships, physical and sexual abuse of children, parenting in different types of families, and current theories
and programs designed to enable fathers and mothers to become more effective in their roles as parents. PREREQUISITE:
SOCI 2100. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3150 Family Diversity 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Focus on diversity in family structures in contemporary U.S. society. Variations of family patterns by race, ethnicity,
religion, social class, gender, and disability will be examined. Explores the social dynamics of family formation,
composition, functioning, and patterning. PREREQUISITE: SOCI 2010 or 2100. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3170 Sociology of Religion 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Sociological factors influencing expression of religion. SAME AS: RLGN 3170. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3200 Gender and Society 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Explores gender on both micro and macro sociological levels. Discussion includes basic terms and approaches in sociology,
dominant theoretical paradigms, and how gender is constructed by and affects various institutions in society. Incorporates
a variety of readings, media, and discussions, and will primarily be taught as a seminar. PREREQUISITE: SOCI 2010, or
SOCI 2020, or upper-division standing. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3210 Dynamics of Intimate Relationships 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examine the complex nature of the dating and mate selection process, and provide insight into the interaction between
social, cultural, cognitive, affective, and behavioral influences on intimate relationship formation, experiences, and
outcomes. Course is a blend of theoretical framework and perspective grounding and practical skills building to enhance
the quality of personal and intimate relationships. PREREQUISITE: SOCI 2100. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3220 Social Gerontology 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Includes theoretical frameworks, historical development of social policy, and social services related to aging. Provides
students the opportunity to explore the bio-psycho-social dimensions particular to the elderly; assess the socioeconomic,
physical, and psychological needs of the elderly; and develop intervention skills for obtaining, providing, and improving social
services on behalf of elderly individuals and their families. SAME AS: SOWK 3220. OFFERED:With sufficient demand.
3260 Sociology of Health and Illness 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Introduces students to sociological perspectives vis-a-vis health, illness and the practice of medicine. Examines health,
illness, and healthcare institutions as social phenomena, the social causes and consequences of health, illness, and health
care. Emphasis on understanding the social forces that produce disease and health inequalities, the processes that shape
what gets recognized as disease, and the preferred means of treating it. SAME AS: PUBH 3260. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3300 Family Law and Public Policy 3 hrs. (3, 0)
A comprehensive survey of laws and public policies pertaining to marriage and the family: laws relating to marriage,
divorce, family support, child custody, child protection rights, and family planning and public policy as it affects the family
in areas such as taxes, civil rights, social security, and economic support. SAME AS: SOWK 3300. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3400 Race and Ethnicity in America 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Explores critical issues related to the construction and meanings of the concepts of race and ethnicity as well as the nature
of stereotyping, prejudice, racism, discrimination, and historical exclusion, while also addressing processes of identity
formation. Also examines a variety of race and ethnic relations patterns, from colonialism, expulsion, and segregation to
integration, assimilation, and pluralism, taken historically by different racial and ethnic groups in America, as well as the
phenomenon of transnationalism and the emergence of trans-national communities in the United States and globally.
PREREQUISITE:Upper-division standing. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3470 Environmental Sociology 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines the interplay among the biophysical environment, social organization, and human social behavior with a focus on
the social and environmental consequences of the organization of daily life. Students will study how various societal
institutions and structures influence the definition of and response to the physical environment. PREREQUISITE: Upperdivision standing. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3500 Thought Life and Spiritual Growth 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Utilizes cognitive theory and spiritual principles to inform one’s interpersonal and professional growth. Presents a convergence
model of cognitive precepts and Judeo-Christian spiritual principles that can be utilized in such transformation. A theoretical
context will be provided and experiential techniques will be modeled for application. Of particular value for those entering
ministry and helping professions. SAME AS:PSYC 3500. OFFERED:With sufficient demand.
3650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (1-4, 0)
Intensive study of a sociological area not specifically covered by other courses. CONSENT: Department chair. REPEAT: May
be repeated; total credit not to exceed 4 hours. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3700 Introduction to Social Research 4 hrs. (4, 0)
Introduces methods and application of social research, including issues of conceptualization of variables, research design,
scientific sampling, quantitative and qualitative forms of analysis, evaluation research, and utilization of social research in
policy, program, and practice settings. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: SOCI 2010 or
2020 or 2100; upper-division standing. SAME AS: PUBH 3010. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
3820 Sociological Theory and Practice 4 hrs. (4, 0)
Overview of both classical and contemporary sociological theory development. Compares approaches among dominant
paradigms to selected areas of inquiry. Considers implications of sociology for social order and change. Explores both microand macro-levels of analysis. PREREQUISITE: SOCI 2010, upper-division standing. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3850 Family Science Career Exploration 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Participation under supervision in a social agency. Allows students to experience an orientation to a variety of approved
human service and government agencies. Requires 120 hours of field experience. CONSENT: Instructor. PREREQUISITE:
Sophomore or upper-division family science major. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
4020 Social Organizations and Institutions 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines the structure of social behavior at the micro and macro levels, as well as organizational processes. Also examines
complex organizations and social institutions, such as the family, government, work, religion, and education.
PREREQUISITE: SOCI 2010, 3820. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
4200 Social Stratification 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examines the origin, operation, and maintenance of various systems of stratification on both structural and interactional
levels. Also considers the characteristics and impact of social class division and related inequality in American society.
Theories of social stratification discussed. Applies to liberal arts speaking-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: SOCI 2010,
3700. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
4350 Program Planning and Grant Writing 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Course rationale based on the need in the nonprofit sector and social service agencies for highly competent professionals
who possess the requisite skills needed to: (1) assess community needs, especially those impacting children and families;
(2) think strategically and creatively about relevant program interventions; and (3) acquire competitive funding from
government agencies and private and public foundations. The course integrates several knowledge and skill areas including:
research methods, program planning, proposal writing, budget planning, project implementation, and program evaluation
to assess the effectiveness of interventions. PREREQUISITE: Upper-division standing. SAME AS: SOWK/PUBH 4350.
OFFERED: Sem. I.
4650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (1-4, 0)
Intensive study of a sociological area not specifically covered by other courses. CONSENT: Department chair. REPEAT:
May be repeated; total credit not to exceed 8 hours. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
4800 Internship in Youth Leadership 2 hrs. (1, 2)
Opportunity for youth leadership development majors to practice the training and presentation skills and content learned
in prior courses in an applied setting relevant to the student’s career or personal goals. Required for youth leadership
development majors. PREREQUISITE: PSYC 4210. GRADE: CR/NC. SAME AS: EDUC/PSYC 4800. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4810 Community Health Internship 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Supervised field experience providing student an opportunity to apply his or her knowledge in a practice setting. Focuses on
strengthening competence in general community health and specialty skills through practical experiences. A wide range of
settings and opportunities may be suitable for an internship, given the program goals and students’ interests and career
goals. Placement selection may focus on special topics, such as women and children’s health, infectious disease (HIV/AIDS,
Malaria), refugee issues, world food issues, urban food systems, health and nutrition promotion in schools and communities,
community food systems, hunger and food security in local and global perspective, food, nutrition, human rights,
sustainable communities, and global health policies and initiatives. Internship locations might include NGO, International
Agencies (United Nations High Commission for Refugees), World Relief, World Vision, Compassion International, SIFAT,
World Hunger Relief Inc., Food Research and Action Center, and local non-profit or governmental agencies. CONSENT:
Instructor. SAME AS: PUBH 4810. OFFERED: Summer only.
4820 Family Science Internship 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Part of a capstone experience for family science majors. Allows students to work under supervision in an approved agency
where classroom knowledge is applied to practical learning skills in a family life education setting. PREREQUISITE: SOCI
3140, 3250, 3700; SOWK 3200. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
4900 Sociology Seminar 1-4 hrs. (1-4, 0)
Intensive reading and discussion of materials in areas of interest not covered in other sociology courses. CONSENT:
Instructor. REPEAT: May be repeated; total credit not to exceed 8 hours. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
4910 Family Science Integrative Seminar 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Senior capstone course focusing on the discovery and application of knowledge about family including its history,
theories/frameworks, methodologies, emerging applications, and trends in a changing world. PREREQUISITE: SOWK 3200;
SOCI 3700, 4820. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
4920 Honors Study 4 hrs. (4, 0)
Intensive study of a sociological area not specifically covered by other courses. EXPECTATION: Open only to seniors with
a 3.5 or higher GPA in SOCI courses counted toward the major. CONSENT: Department chair. PREREQUISITE: Senior
standing. REPEAT: May be repeated; total credit not to exceed 4 hours. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
4950 Family Life Education Methodology, Professional Ethics and Practice 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Provides an understanding of the history, general philosophy, development, implementation, and evaluation of research and
theory-driven community-based education and intervention programs for families. Provides future family life educators with
skills required to design, implement, and evaluate programs focused on addressing critical issues of development and
human relationships across the lifespan. Students will also develop the ability to critically examine ethical questions and
issues as they relate to professional practice. PREREQUISITE: SOCI 2100, 3100, 3210, 3140; senior standing. OFFERED: With
sufficient demand.
SOWK COURSES
2000 Introduction to Social Welfare and Social Work 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Studies the foundations of generalist social work practice. Examines the knowledge, values, and skills base of the social
work profession. Provides introductory content in the areas of human behavior and social environment, social welfare
policy, social research and social work practice. PRE/COREQUISITE: SOCI 2010 or 2020. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2100 Introduction to Field Experience 2 hrs. (1.25, 0)
Participant observer field experience (36 hours) in a social agency providing knowledge and perspective about the network of
social agencies and institutions, administrative structures, policies, programs, and delivery of services. Students develop
human relations skills working with clients. Group discussion each week (1.5 hrs.). PREREQUISITE/COREQUISITE: SOCI 2010
or 2020; SOWK 2000. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2200 Human Behavior and Social Environment 4 hrs. (4, 0)
Exploration of the person in the environment through examining biological, psychological, social and spiritual development
over the lifespan; resources and obstacles in meeting crises at various points in life cycle; systems approach to integration of
individual, group, and societal needs; understanding and acceptance of human diversity; integration of theories of human
behavior from various disciplines; and introductory research methodology. Internship required (20 hours for the semester).
For Social Work Majors and Minors only. PREREQUISITE: SOWK 2000, 2100 (SOWK 2100 waived as a prerequisite for social
work minors); upper-division standing. PREREQUISITE/COREQUISITE: BIOL 2040. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3100 Social Welfare Policy 4 hrs. (4, 0)
Processes by which policies are developed in social welfare delivery systems; establishing priorities; professional roles in
analysis and evaluation in public and private agencies; and political and economic implications of major social welfare
legislation. PREREQUISITE: SOWK 2200, upper-division standing. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3210 Child Welfare 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Historical and current issues related to the practice of child welfare. Examination of contemporary services to children and
parents. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3220 Social Gerontology 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Includes theoretical frameworks, historical development of social policy, and social services related to aging. Provides students
the opportunity to explore the bio-psycho-social dimensions particular to the elderly; assess the socioeconomic, physical, and
psychological needs of the elderly; and to develop intervention skills for obtaining, providing, and improving social services on
behalf of elderly individuals and their families. SAME AS: SOCI 3220. OFFERED:With sufficient demand.
3230 Mental Health 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examination of emotional problems resulting in social dysfunctioning of the individual and family; includes survey of mental
health services. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3240 Developmental Disabilities 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Examination of physical and developmental disabilities. Exploration of barriers and discrimination. Survey of rehabilitation
and social services. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
3300 Family Law and Public Policy 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Comprehensive survey of laws and public policies pertaining to marriage and the family: laws relating to marriage, divorce,
family support, child custody, child protection rights, and family planning and public policy as it affects the family in areas
such as taxes, civil rights, social security, and economic support. SAME AS: SOCI 3300. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (1-4, 0)
Intensive study of a social work area not specifically covered by other courses. CONSENT: Social Work Program Director.
REPEAT: May be repeated; total credit not to exceed 8 hours. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
4350 Program Planning and Grant Writing 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Course rationale is based on the need in the nonprofit sector and social service agencies for highly competent professionals
who possess the requisite skills needed to: (1) assess community needs, especially those impacting children and families; (2)
think strategically and creatively about relevant program interventions; and (3) acquire competitive funding from government
agencies and private and public foundations. Course integrates several knowledge and skill areas including: research
methods, program planning, proposal writing, budget planning, project implementation, and program evaluation to assess
the effectiveness of interventions. PREREQUISITE: Upper-division standing SAME AS: SOCI/PUBH 4350. OFFERED: Sem. I.
4650 Independent Study 1-4 hrs. (1-4, 0)
Intensive study of a social work area not specifically covered by other courses. CONSENT: Social Work Program Director.
REPEAT: May be repeated; total credit not to exceed 8 hours. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.
4710 Social Work Practice 4 hrs. (4, 0)
Teaches basic skills for generalist social work practice that considers the strengths and deficits in the interplay between
people and their environments. Emphasizes theories, methods, and techniques for multi-dimensional assessment, differential
selection of interventions, and evaluation in work with diverse populations. Also builds skills in ethical decision-making,
networking, utilizing resources, and documenting services. Internship required (20 hrs.). Admission to Social Work Program
required. PREREQUISITE: SOWK 2000, 2100, 2200. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4720 Social Work Practice with Families and Groups 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Emphasis on basic skills for generalist social work practice that include understanding and assessing family and small-group
functioning, strategically planning interventions, and effectively terminating and evaluating services with these client groups.
Common family issues are presented in tandem with ideas for interventions. A survey of group types is provided with
techniques for effective facilitation. PREREQUISITE: SOWK 4710. COREQUISITE: SOWK 4730. OFFERED: Sem. I.
4730 Social Work Practice with Communities and Organizations 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Study of macro social work practice skills, interventions, and issues with communities and organizations. Emphasizes
community organization as a viable practice method. The close interrelationship between community and organizations is
explored, as well as concepts such as empowerment, asset-based community development, collective action, and problem
solving. PREREQUISITE: SOWK 4710. COREQUISITE: SOWK 4720. OFFERED: Sem. I.
4850 Social Work Practicum 12 hrs. (arranged)
Block field placement (442 hours) in social service agency under professional supervision. Requires full-time availability for the
entire semester. Applies to liberal arts speaking-Intensive and experiential ways of knowing requirements. PREREQUISITE:
SOWK 4710, 4720, 4730. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4920 Honors Study 4 hrs. (4, 0)
Intensive study of a social work area not specifically covered by other courses. EXPECTATION: Open only to seniors with 3.5
or higher GPAs in SOWK courses counted toward the major. CONSENT: Social Work Program Director. PREREQUISITE:
Senior standing. REPEAT: May be repeated; total credit not to exceed 8 hours. OFFERED: With sufficient demand.

EDUC COURSES
2000 Teaching as a Profession 2 hrs. (2, 1)
Designed for the prospective teacher education candidate to examine and understand one’s values, beliefs, motivations, and
goals; to be aware of and able to evaluate one’s personal learning characteristics; to be knowledgeable about the
developmental stages in becoming a teacher; the history of education in the USA; and to develop a view of education as
related to self, students, teachers, schools, community, the teaching profession, foundations, reform, and the future. Draws
heavily upon class participation, classroom observations, research, and oral and written communication skills. Required of all
education majors. Six hours of field experience required. Grade of C or better required. Prerequisite for all education courses
in professional sequence. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2030 Learning and Teaching Mathematics in the Elementary Classroom 3 hrs. (3, 1)
Develops content and pedagogical knowledge through state and national standards for the development and delivery of a
well-designed, standards-based mathematics curriculum. Presentation of instructional materials, methods, and assessment
related to elementary school mathematics are part of the course activities. Field experience required. Grade of C or better
required. PREREQUISITE: MATH 1100, 1110; EDUC 2000, 2100, 2110; 2.5 GPA overall. EXPECTATION: Grade of C or better in
MATH 1100, 1110. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2100 Child and Adolescent Development 3 hrs. (2, 0)
The primary focus is on characteristics of growth and development of young children through adolescence, including physical,
psychological, social, cognitive, and emotional aspects. Required of all education majors. Grade of C or better required.
OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2110 Educational Psychology: Learning in the Schools 3 hrs. (2, 0)
Introduces the application of psychological principles to the challenges of teaching and learning. Examines the theoretical and
applied aspects of learning, motivation, human development, and measurement and evaluation. Required of all education
majors. A grade of C or better required. SAME AS: PSYC 2110. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2170 Teaching I: Curriculum and Instruction for Early Childhood 4 hrs. (4, 2)
Emphasizes curriculum and planning in the kindergarten and primary grades. Standards-based teaching and planning using
developmentally appropriate strategies are stressed. Prominence is on the uniqueness of teaching young children with an
introduction to classroom organization and management. Grade of C or better required. Twenty hours of field experience
required. PREREQUISITE: EDUC 2000, 2100, 2110; 2.5 GPA overall. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2200 Foundations of Reading Instruction 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Organization, implementation, and evaluation of reading programs. Focuses on the stages of literacy development, the
reading process, planning strategies and classroom management. Field experience required, including classroom observation
and/or teaching assignments. Grade of C or better required. PREREQUISITE: EDUC 2000, 2100, 2110, 2170; SPED 2400; 2.5
GPA overall. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2460 Teaching in a Diverse Society 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Emphasis on the ways candidates will encounter diversity, including cultural and linguistic diversity, in educational settings.
Explores changing demographics of schools, cultural competence, and defining one’s cultural self. Attention to how teacher
candidates can support diverse learners by understanding and implementing culturally relevant pedagogical practices. Introduces
strategies for instruction and engaging in culturally relevant teaching to meet the needs of all students. Grade of C or better
required. Required for all elementary and secondary education majors. PREREQUISITE: EDUC 2000, 2100, 2110; 2.5 GPA overall.
OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2520 Technology in the Classroom 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Increases the teacher candidate’s awareness of technology concepts and tools as a means of providing differential instruction
in a student-centered classroom. The use of current technologies is framed within sound learning theory, proven pedagogical
principles, and current professional standards. Students are provided opportunities to develop skills and perceptivity in
selecting, applying, integrating, and managing instructional technology in the K-12 classroom. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2730 Field Experiences in Reading Processes 1 hr. (0, 2)
Required of all elementary education majors. Grade of C or better required. PREREQUISITE: EDUC 2200. CO-REQUISITE:
EDUC 3300. EXPECTATION: Admission to teacher education program required. OFFERED: Sem. II.
2850 Practicum in Leadership Skills 2 hrs. (1, 2)
Introduction to training assertiveness, communication, helping, and negotiation skills. Students receive direct feedback on
their performance and gain experience in co-leadership and team building. Required for youth leadership-development
majors. CONSENT: Instructor. PREREQUISITE:PSYC 2100.GRADE:CR/NC. SAME AS: PSYC/SOCI 2850. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2860 Practicum in Secondary Education 1 hr. (1, arranged)
Emphasizes curriculum and lesson planning for middle and high school classrooms. Completion of a C or better required to
progress. Fifteen hours of field experience required. PREREQUISITE: 2.5 GPA. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3000 Teaching Literacy Skills in Middle and High School Content Areas 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Candidates will examine research and instructional approaches to help improve the literacy of adolescents and adults. Focused on
current research that looks at the complexities of the reading process and how the process can be improved upon in content area
classrooms. Candidates will design a lesson plan based upon the Department of Teacher Education’s lesson plan format, including
related activities to be implemented in the plan, research-based reading strategies, and focused purposes for reading. The lesson
plan will be submitted electronically. Through reflective writing, candidates will be able to assess their understanding of literacy in
the classroom and their growth in the appropriate use of a variety of reading strategies. Grade of C or better required.
EXPECTATION: Admission to teacher education program required. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3100 The Middle School in the United States 3 hrs. (2, 2)
Introduces teaching strategies for meeting the special needs of the young adolescent student. Physical, emotional, social, and
intellectual changes prompt the teacher to use developmentally appropriate instruction in order to engage the young
adolescent student and to motivate these students to achieve. Teaching methods, such as real-life situations, cooperative
learning, hands-on experiences, and lesson planning are emphasized. Historical patterns and philosophy of the middle-school
movement, with a focus on how to teach this age group, are included. Thirty hours of field experience required. Required of all
secondary education majors. Grade of C or better required. PREREQUISITE: EDUC 2100, 2110, 2460 and 2860.
EXPECTATION: Admission to teacher education program required. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3120 Educational Assessment for the Classroom Teacher 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Prepares elementary and secondary teacher candidates with a strong knowledge base about assessments and their use in
today’s classroom. Teacher candidates will learn what assessment is, when and how to use a variety of assessment strategies,
how to create them, ways to interpret and analyze the data and results, and how to use these interpretations to inform their
teaching practice. Through reflective writing, candidates will evaluate their understanding of assessment in the classroom and
their growth in the appropriate use of a variety of assessment strategies. Applies to liberal arts writing-intensive requirement.
Grade of C or better required. EXPECTATION: Admission to teacher education program required. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
3300 Reading Processes with Assessment and Intervention 3 hrs. (2, 1)
Process assessment and corrective reading instruction at the elementary level. Emphasis on understanding reading difficulties
across the stages of literacy development and addressing instructional needs in strategy and skill development. Field experience
required. Grade of C or better required. PREREQUISITE: EDUC 2200. COREQUISITE: EDUC 2730. EXPECTATION: Admission to
teacher education program required. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3550 Intercultural Education 3 hrs. (3, 1)
Introduces theory and practice of intercultural communication, cross-cultural and international experiences, and teaching
with a global perspective. Emphasizes understanding and respect for cultural, racial, geographical, and religious differences.
4010 Student Teaching 10 hrs. (1, 35)
Observation, participation, and teaching in the school setting for 10-16 weeks on a full-day basis. Student teachers are
expected to participate in all aspects of public school responsibilities as part of the professional semester. A student teaching
fee required. Grade of C or better required. REQUIRED: Admission to professional semester, suicide prevention training, CPR
certification. PREREQUISITE: 3.0 GPA (overall and content area for licensure); completion of 104 hours; senior standing.
REPEAT: May be repeated up to a maximum of 20 hours. CONSENT: Department. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
4120 Organization and Management for the Elementary Classroom 4 hrs. (2, 10)
Culminating experience designed to allow teacher candidates to integrate the skills of teaching with effective classroom
management techniques. Emphasizes classroom management, lesson design, and classroom culture. A practicum experience is
embedded and merged with the coursework to focus on managing the learning environment in order to enhance student
success. Applies to liberal arts speaking and writing-intensive requirements. Required of all senior elementary education majors.
Sixty hours of field experience required. Grade of C or better required. COREQUISITE: EDUC 4320 or MLAN 4700.
EXPECTATION: Admission to teacher education program required. OFFERED: Sem. I.
4310 Integrated Teaching II: Language Arts and Social Studies 4 hrs. (4, 2)
Integrative approach to the teaching of language arts and social studies in the classroom. Using children’s literature as a
framework, candidates develop curriculum, instructional, and assessment strategies that are research-based and framed
within national and state standards. Emphasis on differentiation of learning to meet individual student needs. Portfolio
artifacts required. Twenty hours of field experience required. Grade of C or better required. PREREQUISITE: EDUC 2200
EXPECTATION: Admission to teacher education program required. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4320 Integrated Teaching III: Exploring STEM in the Elementary Classroom 4 hrs. (4, 2)
Prepares elementary teacher candidates for successful teaching of STEM in the classroom, using an integrative, hands-on
approach. Designed to provide teacher candidates with the pedagogical knowledge, skills, and opportunities for application in
clinical settings. Emphasis on promoting inquiry-based learning using national and state standards. Project-based learning is
presented as a framework for the integration of STEM content areas. Candidates focus on planning, teaching, and assessing STEM
lessons in elementary classrooms. Field experience required. Grade of C or better required. PREREQUISITE: EDUC 2030; MATH
1100, 1110. COREQUISITE: EDUC 4120. EXPECTATION: Admission to teacher education program required. OFFERED: Sem. I.
4710 Management, Organization, and Methods in the Secondary Classroom 4 hrs. (2, 10)
Focuses on strategies to meet the special needs of young adolescent and young adult students. Physical, emotional, social,
and intellectual issues are a foundation for developmentally appropriate instruction. Designed as a sequel to the middle
school course, this course emphasizes classroom management, lesson design, and classroom culture. A practicum experience
is embedded and merged with the coursework to focus on managing the learning environment in order to enhance student
success. Work in the university classroom and in a secondary school placement (practicum) is expected. Applies to liberal arts
speaking and writing-intensive requirements. Required of all senior high/middle school education majors. Sixty hours of field
experience required. Grade of C or better required. COREQUISITE: Special methods 4700 or MUED 3130. EXPECTATION:
Admission to teacher education program required. OFFERED: Sem. I.
4800 Internship in Youth Leadership 2 hrs. (1, 2)
Opportunity for youth leadership-development majors to practice training and presentation skills and content learned in prior
courses in an applied setting relevant to the student’s career or personal goals. Required for youth leadership-development
majors. CONSENT: Department. PREREQUISITE: PSYC 4210. GRADE: CR/NC. SAME AS: PSYC/SOCI 4800. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4810 Educational Internship 1-6 hrs. (arranged)
Meets special needs for independent study and internship in professional education. Grade of C or better required.
CONSENT: Department. REPEAT: May be repeated; total credit not to exceed 6 hours. OFFERED: As needed.
4850 Reading Clinic 4 hrs. (arranged)
Intensive, clinical practicum designed to strengthen the candidate’s skills in providing intervention services to students with
significant reading difficulties/disabilities including dyslexia. Candidates will work with one to three students who are
reading significantly below grade level. Instructional time is followed by reflection and discussion in small groups focusing
on student profiles of reading development/disability, instructional strategies, as well as responsiveness to intervention and
necessary modifications. Candidates will also write educational reports and/or hold conferences with parents addressing
the participant’s current level of performance and recommended instructional supports. Field experience required.
4910 Reading Research Seminar 1 hr. (1, 0)
Focuses on professional development strategies for keeping informed of new developments in the field of reading education.
Candidates will use professional resources and digital tools to learn about current research, translate research into practice,
and share this knowledge with colleagues. Grade of C or better required. PREREQUISITE: EDUC 4850. EXPECTATION:
Admission to teacher education program required. OFFERED: Sem. II.
4930 Leadership Seminar in Character Education 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Required of all teacher candidates during their clinical practice experience. Designed as a study in leadership and the
dynamics of character for teachers as classroom and school leaders. Critical issues for educators will be examined, such as the
learning environment, professionalism, school relations, and the dispositions of classroom leadership. Presented in a seminar
format with the candidates engaging in assigned readings, reflection, discussion, candidate-led presentations, research, and
specific facets of performance. Class meets once each week during the late afternoon as a corequisite with the student
teaching experience. Grade of C or better required. CONSENT: Department. COREQUISITE: EDUC 4010. Must be admitted to
Student Teaching. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.

SPED COURSES
2400 Introduction to Mild Disabilities 3 hrs. (3, 1)
Provides an overview of definitions, characteristics, and educational needs of students with mild disabilities. Includes cultural,
language, behavioral, social, and academic factors that interfere with academic achievement for these students. Also
examines current models of educating students with mild disabilities, including response to intervention and the changing
roles of educators within those models. Required of all elementary, secondary, and music education majors, including preservice educators licensing in special education and students majoring in other fields, but who are earning a special education
minor. Grade of C or better required. Six hours of field experience required. OFFERED: Sem. I, II.
2500 Technology for the Diverse Learner 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Assists pre-service educators to develop the skills needed to successfully integrate technology throughout their professional
practice. The ability to customize learning activities for all students, including those with exceptionalities, is the hallmark of
differentiated instruction. Effective assistive technology use allows the special education teacher not only to better discern
what a student needs to learn but also provides a means by which to deliver individually designed instruction. Grade of C or
better required. Required of all pre-service educators licensing in special education, as well as those who are earning a special
education minor. PREREQUISITE: SPED 2400. OFFERED: Sem. I.
2550 Characteristics of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders of Children and Youth 3 hrs. (3, arranged)
Explores the characteristics of children and youth with emotional and behavioral disorders. In addition, the criteria and
process of identifying students who may warrant special education services for emotional and behavioral disorders (EBD)
are rigorously considered. Familiarizes candidates with current theories for understanding EBD as well as perspectives on
best practices for providing an optimal learning context for students identified with EBD. Required of all pre-service
educators licensing in special education, as well as those who are earning a special education minor. Grade of C or better
required. Fifteen hours of field experience required. PREREQUISITE: SPED 2400; Overall 2.5 GPA. OFFERED: Sem. II.
3120 Special Education Assessment for the Classroom Teacher 3 hrs. (3, arranged)
Explores educational assessment practices for students with mild disabilities. Familiarizes candidates with the administration
and interpretation of formal and informal educational assessment instruments used for instructional decision-making and
provision of services to students with special educational needs. Required of all elementary education majors, as well as
candidates earning a special education minor. Field experience required. Grade of C or better required. Applies to liberal arts
writing-intensive requirement. PREREQUISITE: SPED 2400. EXPECTATION: For education majors who are licensing,
admission to teacher preparation program required. Thirty hours of field experience required. OFFERED: Sem. I.
3200 Classroom Instruction for Mild Disabilities 3 hrs. (3, arranged)
Examines techniques for making and implementing data-driven decisions for educating students with mild disabilities. Development
of instructionally sound individualized education programs (IEPs) and implementation in the least restrictive environment for
students will be emphasized. Candidates will learn to develop appropriate instruction and accommodations to provide access to the
general curriculum for students with disabilities. Required of all elementary education majors, as well as candidates earning a special
education minor. Field experience required. Grade of C or better required. Sixty hours of field experience required. PREREQUISITE:
SPED 2400, 3120. EXPECTATION: For education majors who are licensing, admission to teacher preparation program required.
OFFERED: Sem. II.

EDUC COURSES
4200 The Profession of Teaching 3 hrs. (1,0)
Through coursework, candidates will develop insights to the culture and nature of instruction in K-12 classrooms.
Candidates will develop an understanding of how to establish a community of learners through group norms, selfidentification and discussion of the five areas of holistic behaviors for optimal productivity. Candidates will also develop an
understanding of the principles of learning and student development as related to planning curriculum, learning activities,
modes of delivery, and instructional pacing to meet the needs of each learner. Grade of C or better required.
4210 Psychology of Teaching 3 hrs. (3, 0)
Addresses the most significant concepts, principles, theories, methodologies, and issues in the field of educational psychology
and child development. Coursework requires candidates to develop and apply an understanding of pedagogy by analyzing
and integrating the science of learning with the art of teaching. The usage of technological formats to enhance learning will
be addressed. Grade of C or better required.
4215 Exceptional Learners 1 hr. (1, 0)
Provides an overview of the characteristics and educational needs of students with mild disabilities. Historical, legal, and
social perspectives will be considered. Candidates will study language, processing, behavioral, social, and academic issues that
interfere with the academic achievement of students. The goal of the class is to provide knowledge all teachers need to work
with students with mild disabilities in inclusive classrooms and in the community. Field experience required. Grade of C or
better required. PREREQUISITE: EDUC 4200, EDUC 4210.
4220 Differentiated Curriculum and Instruction: Mathematics 1 hr. (1, 0)
Elementary education candidates will articulate clear learning objectives and instructional strategies using a repertoire of
flexible teaching and learning approaches: addressing current curriculum and student standards, using aspects of students’
background knowledge, diverse representations, and social/legal issues relating to special populations, and monitoring
students’ understanding of content through a variety of means. Candidates will study curriculum topics by examining the
organization, materials, and resources of mathematics content and the implications for using them. Grade of C or better
required.
4221 Differentiated Curriculum and Instruction: STEM 1 hr. (1, 0)
Elementary education candidates will study curriculum topics of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
by examining the organization, materials, and resources of each content area and the implications for using them in a
classroom setting. Focus will be on the integration of concepts and the pedagogical implications of interdisciplinary
instruction. Selection of teaching and learning strategies, such as modeling, cooperative learning, guided activities, use of
journals, graphic organizers, and the inquiry method. Grade of C or better required.
4222 Differentiated Curriculum and Instruction: Social Studies 1 hr. (1, 0)
Elementary education candidates will study the scope and sequence and the pedagogical implications of interdisciplinary
instruction using social studies concepts. Organization, resources, and materials for the teaching of social studies will be
addressed. Integration with children’s literature will be a focus, as well as instructional differentiation for individual learning
needs in the classroom. Grade of C or better required.
4231 Developmental Reading 3 hrs. (1, 0)
Elementary education candidates will study linguistic and cognitive bases in the reading process: comprehension, word
identification, vocabulary development, and methodologies will focus on various approaches for teaching reading, research
and theoretical bases for various instructional approaches, instructing students with special reading needs, and fostering
enjoyment and appreciation of reading. Grade of C or better required.
4232 Diagnostic and Corrective Reading 3 hrs. (1, 0)
Elementary education candidates will demonstrate knowledge and understanding of reading difficulties, use a variety of
instructional strategies, assess and document student progress, and plan/implement instruction based on knowledge of
students, learning theory, subject matter, and curriculum needs. Varied forms of assessments include standardized tests,
basal reading assessments, readability indexes, informal reading inventories, miscue analysis, doze procedures, individual
conferences, portfolios, and journals. Field experience required. Grade of C or better required.
4240 Multidimensional Assessment for Student Learning 2 hrs. (1, 0)
Designed to prepare elementary and secondary teacher candidates with a strong knowledge base of assessments and their
use in the classroom. Candidates will learn what assessment is, when and how to use a variety of assessment strategies,
understand how to create them, ways to interpret and analyze the data and results, and know how to use these
interpretations to inform their teaching practice. Grade of C or better required.
4250 Reading in the Content Areas (Secondary Level) 2 hrs. (2, 0)
Candidates examine research and instructional approaches to help improve the literacy of adolescents and adults. Focuses
on current research that looks at the complexities of the reading process and how the process can be improved upon in the
content areas at the secondary level. Candidates will design a lesson plan based upon the Department of Teacher
Education’s lesson plan format, including related activities to be implemented in the plan, research-based reading
strategies, and focused purposes for reading. Grade of C or better required.
4251 Development of Middle/High School Instruction 1 hr. (1, 0)
Focuses on meeting the specific needs of the early adolescent student. Physical, emotional, and intellectual changes
prompt the teacher to use developmentally appropriate instruction in order to motivate the learner to achieve. Teaching
methods such as real-life situations, cooperative learning, and hands-on experiences are emphasized. Field experience
required. Grade of C or better required.
4260 Creating an Environment for Student Learning 2 hrs. (1, 5)
Candidates will analyze and reflect on the essential elements and plans to create an environment that promotes student
learning. Candidates will learn how to create a classroom climate that attends to interpersonal relations, motivational
strategies, questioning techniques, school expectations, rules, routines, and procedures. A focus will be on developing
responses to individual and cultural diversity, nonverbal communication skills, establishing and maintaining consistent
standards of classroom behavior, and making the classroom environment as safe and conducive to learning as possible.
Course includes a 60-hour practicum in a school setting. Grade of C or better required.
4280 Student Teaching (Clinical Practice) 4 hrs. (1, 35)
Observation, participation, and teaching in the school setting for 10-16 weeks on a full-day basis is required. Candidates are
expected to participate in all aspects of the school day and responsibilities of the classroom teacher demonstrating
professional dispositions. Candidates will complete a teacher work sample (TWS) during the student teaching assignment.
Candidates are expected to attend the Student Teaching Seminar during the sessions where the Teacher Work Sample will
be discussed. Grade of C or better required. PREREQUISITE: Admission to professional semester, suicide prevention
training completed, and have current CPR certificates. All course work assignments must be successfully completed and a
GPA of 3.0 must be earned.
