MATH 0013 
Basic Mathematics 
Class 3, Cr. 0 
Designed to review and improve arithmetic computational skills. Also covers the basic concepts of 
beginning algebra. 
MATH 0102 
Strategies for Algebra 
Class 2, Cr. 0 
The co-requisite math strategies provides learning support and supplemental instruction for students 
co-enrolled in MATH 1513 College Algebra. Eligibility is determined by student’s college readiness 
placement exam scores. The course does not count toward graduation or any degree program. Co- 
requisite: MATH 1513. 
MATH 0113 
Introductory Algebra 
Class 3, Cr. 0 
A study of elementary algebra concepts: Operations on signed numbers, operations on polynomials, 
factoring polynomials, linear equations, and linear inequalities. This course does not assume prior 
knowledge of algebra. 
MATH 0115 
Fundamentals of Algebra 
Class 5, Cr. 0 
This course includes a study of elementary algebra concepts, such as operations on signed numbers, 
linear equations and linear inequalities, determining slopes of lines and graphing them, 
operations on polynomials and factoring polynomials. This course prepares students for college 
algebra or equivalent college-level math courses, but does not satisfy the math or logic requirements 
for a college-level math course. Prerequisite: none 
ENGL 0123 
Basic Composition 
Class 3, Cr. 0 
Pre-Collegiate English course placing emphasis on reading and writing at the high school level. 
Designed to prepare students for entry into a college level English course and to meet mandatory 
high school English requirements. Any student with a developmental deficiency may be required to 
enroll in the course prior to enrollment in any college-level English class. 
MATH 0123 
Intermediate Algebra 
Class 3, Cr. 0 
A study of basic concepts of algebra: polynomials, rational expressions, exponents and radicals, 
linear equations and inequalities, quadratic equations, and systems of simultaneous equations. 
Designed to prepare students for entry into College Algebra. Prerequisite: one unit of high school 
algebra or Introductory Algebra 0113, or CPT score greater than 52 in Elementary Algebra. 
MATH 0125 
Intermediate Algebra with Review 
Class 5, Cr. 0 
A study of elementary algebra concepts: Operations on signed numbers, operations on polynomials, 
factoring polynomials, linear equations, and linear inequalities. As well as a peeper study into 
polynomials, rational expressions, exponents and radicals, linear equations and inequalities, 
quadratic equations, and systems of simultaneous equations. This course assumes a basic 
understanding of fundamental algebraic concepts. Designed to prepare students for entry into 
College Algebra. Prerequisite: CPT placement score of 44. 
CIED 0133 
Improved Reading Skills 
Lab 3, Cr. 0 
The course teaches reading skills and attempts to individualize the practical application of these 
skills, while focusing on improving comprehension skills, building a strong vocabulary and learning 
various techniques to enhance students’ skills. Students may be placed in this course based on ACT, 
CPT or other assessment testing. 
MATH 0142 
General College Math Co-Requisite 
Class 3, Cr. 0 
This course is an extension of MATH 0115 for students who need to review the algebra background 
or satisfy a mathematics deficiency. Topics include review of real numbers, first-degree equations, 
polynomials, rational expressions, linear equations in two variables, quadratic equations. This 
proficiency course is designed to prepare students for college level mathematics. MATH 0142 
semester hours do not count toward required credit hours for an Associate degree or a certificate. 
Co-Requisite: MATH 1493. 

              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ACCOUNTING 
ACCT 1103 
Financial Accounting Procedures I 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
This course is designed as an introductory financial accounting course. The course will cover the basic 
concepts and principles of financial accounting. All steps of the accounting cycle will be thoroughly 
covered. Preparation, interpretation, and analysis of the balance sheet and income statement will be 
covered. In addition, this course will cover accounting for cash and current liabilities. This course, in 
combination with ACCT 1203, will serve as a substitute for ACCT 2103. Prerequisite: None. 
ACCT 1203 
Financial Accounting Procedures II 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
This course is designed to follow Financial Accounting Procedures I and together with that course 
will substitute for ACCT 2103, Financial Accounting. This course will introduce principles of 
accounting as applied to inventories, receivables, plant assets, long-term liabilities, 
and 
corporations. Preparation, interpretation, and analysis of the statement of owner’s equity and the 
cash flow statement will be covered. Prerequisite: ACCT 1103. No credit will be given for students 
with credit in ACCT 2103. 
ACCT 2103 
Financial Accounting 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
An introduction to financial accounting concepts, principles, and the development of financial 
accounting information. The material is developed primarily from the perspective of a user. 
Discussion will center on how users analyze and interpret financial information in the decision making 
process. This course is designed for the business/accounting transfer student and the non- 
accounting major. No credit will be given for students with credit in ACCT 1203. 
ACCT 2203 
Managerial Accounting 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Introduction to managerial accounting. Analysis of cost behavior and the use of this knowledge for both 
short and long-term decisions. An introduction to budgeting and the accumulation of product costs 
for planning and performance evaluation. Prerequisites: ACCT 1203 or ACCT 2103. 
ACCT 2523 
Computerized Accounting 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Designed to acquaint the student with the microcomputer and how accounting is processed on a 
computer. Enables the student to process an entire accounting cycle. Prerequisite: ACCT 2103 or 
ACCT 1103. 
 
AGRICULTURE 
AG 1000 
Agriculture — Special Problems 
Cr. 1-4 
Designed primarily for adult education with credit varying from one to four hours. May be taken more 
than once. Maximum credit is four hours. 
AG 1111, 1211, 2111, 2211 Rodeo Activities 
Lab. 3, Cr. 1 
Deals with conduct and participation of rodeo practice session. 
AG 2440 
Agricultural Internship 
Lab. 3-18, Cr. 1-6 
The internship course in the Department of Agriculture is designed to provide students 
appropriate college credit for career oriented learning experiences that complement and enhance 
their formal classroom training. Course credit is awarded upon successful completion of a structured 
internship program with a business or organization involved in the production, processing, 
distribution, regulation, or oversight of agricultural and food products, services, or related resources. 
AG 2281  
Agricultural Capstone Class 1 
 
           Cr. 1 
The objective of this course is to assess the preparedness of graduating Agriculture students for entry into 
the workforce or continue in the pursuit of furthering their education. General agricultural knowledge, 
communication skills and career awareness will be assessed. 
 
 
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
 
AGRICULTURE COMMUNICATIONS 
AGCM 2103 
Communications in Agriculture 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Fundamentals of agricultural news writing and other communication methods. Careers in and the role 
of the media in agriculture and other related fields. Prerequisite: concurrent enrollment or completion 
of ENGL 1113 or consent of instructor. 
 
AGRICULTURE ECONOMICS 
AGEC 1113 
Introduction to Agriculture Economics 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
General course in principles of economics as applied to agriculture. The acquisition of significant 
economic facts. The development of a critical attitude toward economic problems. The general 
application of the principles of economics to agriculture. 
 
AGEC 2203 
Principles of Economics Applied to Agriculture 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
The functioning and relationship of variables at the aggregate economic level, including national 
income, prices, employment, monetary and fiscal policy, especially as they influence the agricultural 
sector. Production theory is presented as a basis for discussion of resource allocation, the structure of 
farming, national welfare and government intervention in agricultural markets. 
 
AGRICULTURE LEADERSHIP 
AGLE 1511 Intro to Leadership in Ag Sciences & Natural Resources 
Class 1, Cr. 1 
This course introduces students to the concept of leadership as a field of study. Emphasis is placed 
on the application of acquired knowledge to practical problems. 
AGLE 2303 Personal Leadership Development in Agriculture 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Sciences and Natural Resources 
This course focuses on how leaders identify key attributes of leadership and link them to their own 
unique vision, values, and personal strength. 
 
AMERICAN SIGN LANGUAGE 
ASL 1113 
American Sign Language 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
This is an introductory course in American Sign Language (ASL). The course will emphasize building 
sign vocabulary, fingerspelling, grammar and syntax rules, facial expressions, use of personal space, 
mime and the development of sensitivity and awareness of the Deaf Community in America. Students 
are expected to acquire basic signing skills and sign vocabulary. 
ASL 1213 
American Sign Language II 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
This course is a continuation of ASL 1113. The course will focus on syntax, grammar structure, 
emotional expressions and use of body language. Students will continue to develop their receptive 
skills and finger spellings skills. Prerequisite: ASL 1113. 
ANIMAL SCIENCE 
ANSI 1101, 1121, 2111 Livestock Selection 
Lab. 2, Cr.1 
Practice in comparative judging; oral and written discussions on beef cattle, dairy cattle, swine, 
sheep, and horses. 
ANSI 1124 
Introduction to Animal Science 
Class 3, Lab. 2, Cr. 4 
A study of market types, classes and grades of farm animals with emphasis on food production and 
evaluation. 
ANSI 2112 
Live Animal Evaluation 
Lab. 4, Cr. 2 
Using tools of evaluation including performance records, pedigree information, and visual appraisal 
in the evaluation of cattle, swine, sheep, and horses. 
ANSI 2123 
Livestock Feeding 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
Nutrition and their functions, nutrient requirements of the various classes of livestock, composition 
and classification of feed stuffs and ration formulations. 
 
ANSI 2253 
Meat Animal & Carcass Evaluation 
Class 2, Lab. 2, Cr. 3 
Evaluation of carcasses and wholesale cuts of beef, pork and lamb factors influencing grades, yields 
and values in cattle, swine, and sheep. 
ART 
ART 1001-1004 
Art: Special Problems 
Cr. 1-4 
Advanced study in a mixture of mediums and a continuation in self- exploration through the student’s 
artwork. Students will work independently and one-on-one with the instructor. Prerequisite: consent 
of the instructor. 
ART 1103 
Studio Art I: Drawing 
Lab. 6, Cr. 3 
Development of basic drawing skills through the exploration of shape, line, value, and perspective 
with emphasis on compositional unity. Variety of media and techniques. 
ART 1203 
Basic Color and Design 
Class 3, Lab. 3, Cr. 3 
A foundations course dealing with theories, problems, and applications of color. Also incorporates 
principles of two-dimensional design in solving studio problems. 
 
ART 1643 
Introduction to Art History I 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
A survey of the painting, sculpture, architecture and minor arts from pre-historic time through the 
Gothic Period. Required of Art majors. 
ART 1743 
Introduction to Art History II 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
A survey of the painting, sculpture, architecture and minor arts from the Renaissance through the 20th 
Century. Required of Art majors. 
ART 1803 
Introduction to Art 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
A survey of artistic expression, motivation, and point of view. Designed to promote greater 
awareness and understanding of the visual arts through slide lectures, readings, and research. 
ART 1933 
Studio Art IV: Ceramics 
Lab. 6, Cr. 3 
An introduction to the skills needed to use a potter’s wheel to create basic pottery forms. The entire 
ceramic process will be introduced, including clay preparation, application of glazes, and firing. 
Methods of hand-building with clay will also be introduced. 
 
ART 1943 
Studio Art II: Painting 
Lab. 6, Cr. 3 
Basic painting fundamentals including techniques and procedures. Development of painting skills 
stressing form and content, visual perception, and individual expression. 
ART 2113 
Life Drawing 
Class 1, Lab. 5, Cr. 3 
In a traditional studio setting, this course explores, the process of drawing a life model. Students will 
be encouraged to experiment with various drawing techniques and materials, and will work toward being 
able to draw the figure with accurate proportions and good artistic expression. Illustrated 
presentations demonstrations, class critiques, and studio exercise and assignment will help students 
develop their understanding of the visual elements and the basic skills fundamental to all the visual 
arts as well as to drawing the figure. Class sessions will begin with expressive gesture drawings and 
projects will be based on the application of key concepts. 
ART 2163 
Graphic Design 
Class 1, Lab. 4, Cr. 3 
Emphasis on the recognition, function, and aesthetic use of typography and pictorial images as a 
visual language for a variety of projects. Includes layout, integration of word and image, technical 
tools and presentational skills. 
ART 2443 
Studio Art III: Sculpture 
Lab. 6, Cr. 3 
An introduction to the formal and conceptual issues found in creating sculpture. Traditional sculpture 
materials, equipment, and construction techniques will be explored. Course will consist 
of demonstrations, studio projects, discussion, and oral and written critiques. 
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
ART 2263 
Graphic Design II 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Emphasis on design and preparation of two- and three- dimensional projects for printing and web. Use 
of computer to enhance production skills and the solution of various design projects. Includes the 
development of a student portfolio. 
 
BANKING & FINANCE 
BAFN 1303 
Principles of Banking 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Topics covered are banks and the monetary system, negotiable instruments, the relationship of the 
commercial bank to depositors, types of bank accounts, the deposit function, the payment function, 
bank loans and investments, and other banking services (trust international and safe deposit), bank 
accounting and marketing, external and internal controls, and the public service obligations of banks. 
BAFN 1323 
Teller Training 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Develop the skills that tellers need in today’s banking industry. The program is divided into seven 
content modules, each devoted to a specific area of teller training. No prerequisite. 
 
BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES 
BIOL 1001-03 
Special Problems in Science 
Up to 3 Cr. Hrs. 
Designed primarily for adult education with credit varying from one to three hours. Maximum credit 
three hours. 
BIOL 1013 
Research Methods 
Class, Cr. 3 
This introductory course provides an overview of the major tools necessary to design and carry out 
research across a broad spectrum of disciplines. Students will learn to identify a research problem, 
write a literature review, match appropriate research designs to problems, and make necessary 
modifications to better fit the design to the situation. Students will engage in several different 
examples of data acquisition and will be able to draw conclusions from the data. Several small papers 
will be generated during the course with the goal that the student will leave with one or more possible 
research topics to pursue in the following semester 
BIOL 1111 
General Biology Lab 
Lab. 2, Cr. 1 
This is a one hour lab that accompanies BIOL 1113 for non-major students who need a biology 
course with a lab component. Prerequisite or co-requisite: BIOL 1113. 
BIOL 1113 
General Biology 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
This is an introduction to the life sciences. The topics include scientific method, cell structure and 
organization, biological molecular and metabolism, the levels of biological organization and 
systematics, plant and animal systems, mendelian genetics, heredity, evolution and ecology. The 
course is a general education course designed for non-majors which does not require a lab. Students 
may enroll in a one credit hour laboratory course to meet a lab requirement. 
BIOL 1114 
Introductory Biology: Populations, Ecosystems 
Class 3, Lab 2, Cr. 4 
Biological principles and philosophies and their application to structures, functions and relationships 
among plants and animals, and their relation to the everyday life of man. Life is interpreted as an 
integrative process which results in a dynamic whole. Concepts examined include unity and 
diversity in living things, interdependence of structure and function, dependence and interdependence 
of the organism with its environment, genetic continuity and change, biological basis of behavior and 
evolution. The course is a general education course designed for non-majors. 
BIOL 1124 
Principles of Biology I 
Class 4, Lab 2, Cr. 4 
First in a two-course introductory sequence for biology majors. The unifying principles of living 
organisms including scientific method, biological molecules, cell structure, function and metabolism, 
genetics, evolution, and a survey of Prokaryotes, Protistans, and Fungi. Fulfills general education 
requirements for life science. Three lectures, one lab per week 
BIOL 1134 
Principles of Biology II 
Class 4, Lab 2, Cr. 4 A 
continuation of BIOL 1124 to include the evolution, diversity, structure, function and ecology of plants 
and animals. Three lectures, one lab per week. 
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
BIOL 1404 
Plant Biology (Botany) 
Class 3, Lab. 3, Cr. 4 
An introduction to plants, their structure, growth, life processes, and response to the forces of nature, 
with emphasis upon the structure of the various parts of the higher plants. 
BIOL 1604 
Animal Biology (Zoology) 
Class 3, Lab. 2, Cr. 4 
Fundamental concepts of animal life. Roles of carbohydrates, lipids, proteins and nucleic acids in 
cells and organisms. Structure and function of cells and the mechanisms of cell division. 
Chromosomes, genes and heredity. Introduction to cellular respiration and its function. An 
introduction to taxonomy and characteristics and examples of the major animal phyla. Methods of 
reproduction in animals with emphasis on mammalian reproduction. Recommended for students 
majoring in the pre-health professions and all majors in the biological sciences. Prerequisites: None; 
High School or college chemistry recommended. 
BIOL 2101 
Animal Biology (Zoology) 
Lab Lab. 3, Cr. 1 
A supplement to Animal Biology (Zoology) 1604. 
BIOL 2114 
Anatomy and Physiology 
Class 3, Lab. 2, Cr. 4 
Introduction to the basic principles of the structure and function of the human body. Emphasis is placed 
on terminology, the gross anatomy of the human body and the relationship of its system to the normal 
functioning of the integrated whole. Dissection of non-human mammals will be used to make 
comparisons with models and charts of the human anatomy. Prerequisite: One lab science or by 
permission of instructor. 
BIOL 2121 
Anatomy & Physiology Lab 
Lab. 2, Cr. 1 
A supplemental lab to Anatomy and Physiology BIOL 2114. 
BIOL 2534 
Advanced Physiology 
Class 3, Lab. 2, Cr. 4 
A thorough coverage of the physiology and interactions of most body systems. Physiology and 
cellular mechanisms of selected pathologies within each system. Genes, inheritance patterns, 
mutations and genetic disorders and their expression at the cellular level. Immunology and 
autoimmune diseases. Prerequisite: BIOL 2114 or equivalent 
 
BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION 
BADM 1001-1004 Business Special Problems 
Cr. 1-4 
Designed primarily for adult education with credit varying from one to four hours. Maximum credit is 
four hours. 
BADM 2103 
Principle Styled Leadership 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
This course is designed to prepare the students for leadership in a business environment. Various 
leadership principles such as Seven Habits, LEAN, and Six Sigma will be covered in the course. 
Upon completion of the course, students should be able to implement these standards in their daily 
lives in order to develop quality leadership principles. 
BADM 2113 
Business Communications I 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Principles and psychological foundations of effective business correspondence, letters of inquiry and 
request; replies to inquiries and requests; order letters and order acknowledgments; claim and 
adjustment letters, short report preparation; letters of application; and business promotion. 
Prerequisite: ENGL 1113. 
 
BADM 2123 
World of Business 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
An introduction to business through a study of the organization and management of business and its 
position in the American economic environment. Emphasis is placed upon the nature of business 
firms, resources and operation of personnel, capital, production and marketing, and the legal and 
social environment of business. 
BADM 2133 
Business Ethics 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
This course explores ethics in business. It seeks to define ethics and to help the student understand 
the role of ethics in our society. Actual cases will be used extensively to enable the student to see 
the value of business ethics in today’s world. 
BADM 2153 
Consumer Mathematics 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
Review of basic arithmetic principles, application of arithmetic principles to analyze and solve problems 
in percentage, mark-up, mark-down, discounts, interest, payrolls, pro-rating, taxation, insurance, 
annuities, and consumer credit. 
BADM 2223 
Business Law 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Principles of law involved in ordinary business transactions, special emphasis being placed upon the 
study of court systems, general contracts, negotiable instruments, and bailments. 
BADM 2301-2306 Business Internship 
Lab 2-12, Cr. 1-6 
A work experience internship to permit students to gain practical experience in the business world 
and to become proficient in business procedures involved in preparing for the world of work. One to six 
credit hours can be earned. 
 
CHEMISTRY 
CHEM 1144 
Chemistry for Health Sciences 
Class 3, Lab. 2, Cr. 4 
A survey of inorganic, organic and biochemistry, from atoms to molecules important to living 
organisms. Overview of atomic structure, formation of molecules, nomenclature of inorganic and 
organic compounds, concentrations of solutions, pH, chemical reactions. Structures and functions of 
proteins, carbohydrates, lipids and nucleic acids. Structure and function of cells, cell membranes, 
function of cell division, types of tissues. This course is intended as a prerequisite for Anatomy and 
Physiology and for Microbiology, especially for students with limited chemistry background. It is also 
recommended to provide background for general and organic chemistry. Prerequisite: MATH 0113, 
or MATH CPT 52 or higher, or MATH ACT score 17 or higher. 
CHEM 1215 
Principles of Chemistry I 
Class 3, Lab. 4, Cr. 5 
The first semester of a two-semester course designed for (1) students whose major requires only one 
semester of a non-survey inorganic chemistry or (2) students whose major requires two semesters 
of inorganic chemistry at a basic level. The course places emphasis on atomic theory, bonding 
concepts, molecular structure and geometry, inorganic nomenclature, chemical quantities, chemical 
reactions and stoichiometry. Prerequisite: MATH 0123 or above. See page 22 for placement 
guidelines. 
CHEM 1225 
Principles of Chemistry II 
Class 3, Lab. 4, Cr. 5 
A continuation of Principles of Chemistry I. Topics covered include states of matter, stoichiometry, 
solutions, acid-base theory, equilibrium, redox, reactions, nuclear chemistry, organic chemistry and 
biochemistry. This course completes requirements for those students needing ten hours of basic 
chemistry. Prerequisite: CHEM 1215 or demonstration of competency; MATH 0123 or above. 
CHEM 1315 
General Chemistry I 
Class 3, Lab. 4, Cr. 5 
The first semester of a year’s course in inorganic chemistry. The course is designed for students 
majoring in the sciences, mathematics, engineering, and certain allied health areas. Both theoretical 
and descriptive chemistry are utilized. Topics covered include stoichiometry, thermochemistry, 
atomic theory, bonding theories (atomic and molecular), molecular geometry, and gases. 
Prerequisite: MATH 1513 or equivalent (may be taken concurrently). See page 23 for placement 
guidelines. 
CHEM 1515 
General Chemistry II 
Class 3, Lab. 4, Cr. 5 
A continuation of General Chemistry 1314. Topics covered include intermolecular forces, modern 
materials, properties of solutions, chemical kinetics, chemical equilibrium, chemical thermodynamics, 
electrochemistry, nuclear chemistry, coordination chemistry and descriptive chemistry of selected 
elements. Prerequisite: CHEM 1315 and MATH 1513 or above. 
 
CHEM 2344 
Introduction to Organic & Biological Chemistry 
Class 3, Lab. 2, Cr. 4 
The goal of the course is to provide both a sound theoretical background in chemistry and an 
understanding of the relationship of chemistry to society in general and the health-related professions 
in particular. Material included in the course reviews atomic and molecular structure, surveys organic 
nomenclature and functional group reactions, carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, nucleic acids, 
metabolism, enzymes, an introduction to molecular genetics and nutrition. Laboratory emphasis is 
toward techniques such as crystallization, distillation, and chromatographic methods. Instrumental 
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
methods to be included are GC, FTIR, MS and pNMR. Prerequisites: Chemistry 1215 or Chemistry 
1315, Math 1513 (or concurrent enrollment). 
CHEM 2345 
(Introductory) Organic Chemistry 
Class 3, Lab. 4, Cr. 5 
A course designed for students whose major requires one course in organic chemistry (e.g., 
pre-veterinary medicine) or students wishing to gain a good fundamental understanding of organic 
chemistry before taking the normal two-semester sequence required by core areas (e.g., chemistry, 
pharmacy, pre-medicine, chemical engineering). A thorough study of the chemistry of carbon 
compounds. The functional group approach is applied from a mechanistic standpoint. Gas 
chromatography, mass spectroscopy, infrared spectroscopy, and nuclear magnetic resonance are 
utilized and emphasized. Prerequisite: CHEM 1225 or CHEM 1515; MATH 1513 (concurrent 
enrollment accepted) or equivalent. 
 
COLLEGE LIFE AND SUCCESS 
CLS 1011 
Skills for Success 
Class 1, Cr. 1 
This course is designed to improve skills necessary to be successful in college, including note taking, 
test taking, reading skills, reading improvement, time management, self-discipline, self-confidence, 
accountability, motivation, and goal setting. This course is required for all students on academic notice. 
CLS 1023 
Strategies for Academic Success 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
This course is designed to help students identify personal and academic issues associated with being 
placed on probation. The course will cultivate self-awareness to overcome weaknesses and barriers 
to success. This course is required for all students on academic probation. 
COMPUTER SCIENCE 
CS 1001-1003 
Computer Science Special Problems 
Cr. 1-3 
Provides an opportunity for a student to conduct an investigation into a subject related to the 
computer science field of study. The student will work under the advisement of a Computer Science 
Department faculty member who will detail the scope of the investigation and evaluate the results. 
For computer science majors only. 
CS 1103 
Computers in Society 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
This course provides students with fundamental computer skills needed during and after college. 
Hardware, software, Windows Operating System, file management, Internet, email, MS Word, Excel, 
PowerPoint, and Access are covered in this course. Students will be introduced to satisfy the 
computer literacy requirement. 
CS 1243 
Introduction to Network Security 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Students explore the principles of information assurance, with an emphasis on current threats 
and vulnerabilities. Topics include infrastructure and operational security; cryptography; legal and 
ethical issues; and security policies, practices and procedures. Prerequisite: CS 1373. 
 
CS 1373 
Network Operating Systems 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
The course includes a study of computer operating systems. Components and characteristics of 
operating systems are explored. Emphasis will be placed on the three basic functions of an operating 
system: managing disk storage, control of peripheral devices, and control of program execution. The 
student will gain knowledge of client/server operating systems related to resource sharing and 
security. 
CS 2023 
Advanced Programming 
Class 2, Lab. 2, Cr. 3 
A continuation of programming with the emphasis on the methodology of implementation and 
documentation of computer systems. Includes coverage of event driven object level programming, 
sequential and random access files, file processing techniques and development of programs and 
systems of programs. Prerequisite: CS 2134 or MATH 2145. 
CS 2043 
Database Programming II 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Prepares the student for designing and programming relational databases. The student 
will be 
introduced to methods for designing sound and efficient databases. Topics will include normalizing 
and defining tables, referential and data integrity, and defining indexes. Custom application 
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
development will include design and programming using SQL queries, menus, panels, reports, and 
procedures. Database utilities will also be included. Prerequisites: CS 2303. 
CS 2054 
Web Database Systems 
Class 3, Lab. 2, Cr. 4 
A study of the Web as a database platform. This course prepares students for developing database 
interfaces for a multi-tier client-server system. Topics will include Internet fundamentals, Web page 
basics, scripting languages, and development tools for dynamically generated Web pages. 
Prerequisites: CS 2023 and CS 2303 
CS 2103 
Computer Concepts 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Provides an orientation into computer components, the operating system (Windows environment), 
and software applications. Computer hardware components will be discussed in their relationship to 
the total system. Students will use three basic software applications including word processing, 
spreadsheet, and database. Networking and database communications is covered with student use 
of the Internet. 
CS 2134 
Introduction to Programming 
Class 3, Lab. 2, Cr. 4 
An introductory study of programming. Concepts include data types, data input/output, operators, 
control structures, arrays, modular design and elementary file processing. The student will design, 
write, and debug programs. Prerequisite: none 
CS 2173 
JAVA Programming 
Class 2, Lab. 2, Cr. 3 
Includes a study of the JAVA Programming language. Discussion will include data storage, 
computations, decision making, looping, arrays, functions, classes, inheritance, packages, handling 
events, and error handling. The student will gain an understanding of the JAVA programming 
environment and application of the language. Prerequisite: CS 2134 
CS 2303 
Database Programming I 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Introduces the student to computer information processing concepts using SQL Database. The 
student will learn methods of creating databases and processing information through adding, deleting, 
updating, and querying data. Menu driven applications will be programmed using input, output, 
computation, and decision making procedures. The use of OS/2 Presentation Manager will provide 
experience with a windowed operating system. This course of study is designed to fulfill university 
requirements for an introductory course in computer concepts. 
CS 2413 
Information Assurance Management 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Students learn the basic principles and the managerial aspects of securing enterprise 
information systems. Topics include risk management, security policy and plan development, 
security architectures, incident handling, disaster recovery planning, system administration, access 
control, and change management. Prerequisite: CS 1373. 
CS 2424 
Systems Design and Development 
Class 4, Cr. 4 
Acquaints the student with authentic, business world data processing applications. Covers a five- 
phased approach to conducting a project: inflation and preliminary investigation, detailed 
investigation, design, development, implementation, and evaluation. Provides understanding of how 
machines and systems are combined and the advantages to be realized by a company through data 
processing. Prerequisite: CS 1373. 
CS 2433 
Advanced Networking 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
A study of client/server networks including network planning, installation, and management. Topics 
will include a review of computer hardware, network topologies, and communication media. The 
student will gain experience in network management through resource sharing and security. User 
access profiles will be developed, user groups will be defined, and resources (file, device, serial) will 
be shared using a popular networking application. Prerequisite: CS 1373. 
 
CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT 
CNST 1001 
Special Problems in Construction 
Class 1, Cr. 1 
This course is designed for sophomore level students. The student will write a research paper on 
either safety compliance in construction or building new projects that need to meet the American with 
Disabilities Act compliance. 
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
CNST 1013 
Construction Safety Technology 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
This course is designed to provide an in-depth coverage of safety associated in the construction 
industry. This course reviews the organization of accident prevention programs, job hazards, 
analysis, accident cost control, inspections, reports, records, and safety standards as established by 
the federal and state governments. Thirty-hour OSHA voluntary compliance cards are available for 
students who qualify. This course uses NCCER training and certification on each modular 
component. Students that meet NCCER criteria have the opportunity to gain the NCCER certification, 
which is nationally recognized. 
CNST 1023 
Introduction to Construction 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
This course explores the various types of construction and careers in the industry. This course 
introduces construction math, hand tools, power tools, drawings, communication skills, critical 
thinking and problem solving, materials and handling, and sources of information. 
CNST 1113 
Construction Drawing & Computer Aided Drafting  Class 1, Lab. 4, Cr. 3 
This basic course is computer graphics uses AutoCAD software. Course content covers the software 
usage as well as how it benefits the construction industry. Basic symbols and techniques are used in 
this hands-on application. 
CNST 1123 
Introduction to Carpentry 
Class 2, Lab. 2, Cr. 3 
This course is designed to provide an introduction in carpentry fundamentals using a hands-on 
approach. Course reviews carpentry history, career opportunities for carpentry, tools, plans, floor 
systems, wall and ceiling framing, roof framing, windows, doors, and basic stair layout. This is an 
overall basic course for carpentry skills which lays the foundation for advanced skills. This course 
uses National Center for Construction Education Research (NCCER) training and certification on 
each modular component. Students which meet NCCER criteria have the opportunity to gain the 
NCCER certification which is nationally recognized. 
CNST 1133 
Introduction to Carpentry II 
Class 2, Lab. 2, Cr. 3 
This course provides advanced instruction into carpentry using a hands-on approach. Course 
reviews drawings and applies them to the various phases of construction. This is an advanced course 
for carpentry skills. This course uses National Center for Construction Education and Research (NCCER) 
training and certification on each modular component. Students which meet NCCER criteria have the 
opportunity to gain the NCCER certification, which is nationally recognized. 
CNST 1153 
Blueprint Reading 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Aimed to provide fundamental training in blueprint reading with the necessary emphasis upon the 
visualization of views of objects. Working blueprints are provided throughout the course to give the 
student supervised training by doing. The language of the engineer is incorporated in the course, 
and engineering sketching is utilized when possible. 
CNST 1233 
Methods of Construction 
Class 2, Lab. 2, Cr. 3 
This is a course on light frame and finishes in the construction industry. Course explains the materials, 
methods and applications used in the construction industry, including specifications, labor costs, 
productivity and units. 
CNST 2113 
Field Safety 
Class 2, Lab. 2, Cr. 3 
This course is designed to provide an in-depth coverage of safety associated in the construction 
industry. This course reviews information for safety compliance in the construction field. Course takes 
an extensive look: at safety standards as established by the federal and state governments. Ten-
hour OSHA voluntary compliance cards are available for students who qualify. This course uses 
NCCER training and certification on each modular component. Students which meet NCCER criteria 
have the opportunity to gain the NCCER certification which is nationally recognized. 
CNST 1213 
Introduction to Electrical Construction 
Class 2, Lab. 2, Cr. 3 
This course provides basic instruction into the electrical trade using a hands-on approach. Course 
reviews careers, electrical safety, electrical circuits, theory, The National Electrical Code, Device 
Boxes, conduit bending, fitting, types of applications, blueprints, residential electrical services, 
and electrical testing equipment. This course uses National Center for Construction Education 
and Research (NCCER) training and certification on each modular component. Students which meet 
NCCER criteria have the opportunity to gain the NCCER certification, which is nationally recognized. 
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
CNST 1223 
Introduction to Masonry 
Class 2, Lab. 2, Cr. 3 
This course provides basic instruction into masonry using a hands-on approach. Course reviews 
tools, equipment, measurements, drawings, specifications, materials, and installation techniques. 
This course uses NCCER training and certification on each modular component. 
Students which meet NCCER criteria have the opportunity to gain the NCCER certification which is 
nationally recognized. 
CNST 1323 
Estimating I 
Class 2, Lab. 2, Cr. 3 
This course is designed to provide estimating techniques and methods of construction. 
Comprehensive material take-off is taught using a hands-on method. Other material includes unit 
pricing, bid process and bid procedures. 
CNST 2123 
Construction Management and Leadership   Class 2, Lab. 2, Cr. 3 
This course covers construction management fundamentals: safety, communication, issues 
and resolutions, documents, planning, estimating and cost control, scheduling, productivity, quality 
control, and critical problem solving. This course uses the National Center for Construction Education 
and Research (NCCER) training and certification for each modular component. Students which meet 
NCCER criteria have the opportunity to gain the NCCER certification which is nationally recognized. 
CNST 2233 
Internship 
Cr. 3 
This course is a capstone course designed to integrate academic and technical lectures and labs 
with business and industry work experience. Students work with area businesses to gain real- life work 
experience. Students will be supervised by professionals in the industry. 
CNST 2333 
Construction Documents 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Students will learn about documents and contracts associated with the construction industry. 
Documents such as change orders, request for information (RFI), addendums, insurance regulations 
and contracts will be covered throughout the semester. 
CNST 2433 
Decorative Concrete 
Class 2, Lab. 2, Cr. 3 
This is a course on decorative concrete and how concrete has moved away from just “flat work” in 
the construction industry. Course explains the materials, methods, and applications of stained, 
stamped, pressed and poured in place decorative concrete. 
CRIMINAL JUSTICE 
CRJU 1082 
Self Defense 
Class 2, Cr. 2 
This course presents an overview of self-defense techniques applicable in today’s society. Lectures 
and demonstrations focus on defensive tactics and the practicality in the use of strikes, kicks, and 
joint locks. The student should be prepared to take part in a “hands-on” instruction, demonstration, 
and practice of various self-defense techniques. 
CRJU 1113 
Introduction to Criminal Justice 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Survey of thecriminal justicesystem in theUnited Statesincluding historical and developmental aspects; 
the function of the police, courts, and correctional agencies in a democratic society. 
Co-requisite: CIED 0133 if reading deficiency. 
CRJU 1153 
Introduction to Corrections 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Provides the student with a broad view of the historical development of the field of Corrections. Special 
emphasis will be devoted to: Probation and Parole, Community Programs, and Juvenile Justice. Co- 
requisite: CIED 0133 if reading deficiency. 
CRJU 2113 
Report Writing 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
The course introduces the student to various report writing styles essential to the Criminal Justice 
field. Basic reports, supplemental reports, and other written forms of communication will be presented 
in a hands-on practical manner. Prerequisite: ENGL 1113; No reading deficiency. 
CRJU 2123 
Police Management 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Study of the police in administration of criminal justice. Principles of police organization and 
administration; administration of staff and auxiliary units including personnel administration and 
training, planning and research, communications, inspection, internal investigations, policy 
formulation and executive responsibilities. Prerequisite: CRJU 1113; No reading deficiency. 
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
CRJU 2133 
Criminal Investigation 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Principles used in crime investigation, crime scene protection; interviewing complainants, suspects, 
and victims; crime scene search; collection and preservation of physical evidence. Post mortem 
changes; cutting and stabbing wounds; firearm wounds; investigation of specific types of deaths. Pre- 
requisite: No reading deficiency. 
CRJU 2223 
Criminal Legal Procedures 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Criminal procedure and courtroom practices most commonly confronting law enforcement officers in 
the administration of criminal law; inquests, indictments, warrants, arrest, preliminary examination, 
bail, pleadings, trials appeals; search and seizure; use of force; evidence. Prerequisite: No reading 
deficiency. 
CRJU 2233 
Elementary Criminal Law 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Introduction to the study of crimes; attempt and conspiracy; classification and nature of crimes; intent 
in crimes; criminal responsibility; defenses to crimes including insanity, mistake of law or fact, double 
jeopardy, entrapment, and the statute of limitations. Prerequisite: No Reading Deficiency. 
CRJU 2243 
Criminal Justice Research 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Individual research and study of various aspects of criminal justice as approved and directed by the 
student’s advisor. Examination of selected problems affecting various criminal justice agencies. 
Prerequisite: No reading deficiency. 
CRJU 2253 
Juvenile Delinquency 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Problems of juvenile delinquency with particular attention focused on: theories of causation; 
prevention, and criminal justice approaches to delinquency. Prerequisite: CRJU 1113 or permission of 
instructor; no reading deficiency. 
CRJU 2273 
Law Enforcement Internship 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Gives the student some actual experience working with police officers and other members of the 
criminal justice system. Prerequisites: Permission of the instructor and 12 hours in Criminal Justice; 
no reading deficiency. 
CURRICULUM AND INSTRUCTION EDUCATION 
CIED 0133 
Improved Reading 
Skills Lab 3, Cr. 0 
The course teaches reading skills and attempts to individualize the practical application of these 
skills, while focusing on improving comprehension skills, building a strong vocabulary and learning 
various techniques to enhance students’ skills. Students may be placed in this course based on ACT, 
CPT or other assessment testing. 
 
DRAFTING 
DRFT 1125 
Architectural Drawing 
Class 3, Lab. 4, Cr. 5 
Presents the basic subject matter, order of development, and drafting techniques of architectural 
drawing. The intention of the course is to develop drafting, not design ability; however, material on 
simple planning procedures is included to make the over-all development of a simple set of drawings 
clear. The material is limited to residential construction. Prerequisite: DRFT 1223. 
DRFT 1152 
Blueprint Reading 
Class 2, Cr. 2 
Aimed to provide fundamental training in blueprint reading with the necessary emphasis upon the 
visualization of views of objects. Working blueprints are provided throughout the course to give the 
student supervised training by doing. The language of the engineer is incorporated in the course, 
and engineering sketching is utilized when possible. 
DRFT 1223 
Computer Aided Drafting and Design I 
Class 2, Lab. 2, Cr. 3 
This is a basic course in computer graphics that uses AUTOCAD software as the main program 
for execution of orthographic projected drawing problems. Approximately 10% of the class is general 
information about (C.A.D.) Computer Aided Drafting and 90% on using AUTOCAD. 
DRFT 1843 
Descriptive Geometry 
Class 2, Lab. 2, Cr. 3 
Science of graphic representation and solution of space problems, with theory of space problems, 
with theory of orthographic projection as applied to the drawing board. The representation and solution 
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
of engineering problems more advanced than those usually encountered in an elementary course in 
engineering drawing is included. DRFT 1223, or permission of Department Chair. 
DRFT 2223 
Computer Aided Drafting and Design II 
Class 2, Lab. 2, Cr. 3 
Advanced Computer Graphics (CAD) course dealing with orthographic, isometric, and 3D problems 
using the latest version of AutoCAD software. Assumes the student has a background in the use of 
a CAD system. Drawing enhancements, dimensioning, attributes, AutoCAD customization, and 3D 
modeling are covered using AutoCAD software. Silverscreen, 3D modeling software, and rapid 
prototyping JP5 slicing software, will be used to generate some 3D models. Prerequisites: CAD 
course or permission of Department Chair. 
DRFT 2233 
Structural Drafting 
Class 2, Lab. 2, Cr. 3 
Structural drawing consists of the preparation of design and working drawings of structures 
composed of steel, concrete, wood and clay products. The main purpose of the course is to teach the 
basics of structural detailing. DRFT 1223, or permission of instructor. 
EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 
(See Family Relations and Child Development) 
ECONOMICS 
ECON 1113 
Economics of Social and Contemporary Issues 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Basic economic principles introduced and developed through study of important social and 
contemporary issues: for example, inflation, unemployment, poverty, crime, education, healthcare, 
taxes, social security, debt and deficits, the environment, and government policies and laws. This 
course is not equivalent to Macroeconomics ECON 2013 or Microeconomics ECON 2023. No general 
education credit for students taking ECON 2023 or AGEC 1114. 
ECON 2013 
Introduction to Macroeconomics 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
The primary objective of the macroeconomics course is to increase the student’s awareness of what 
is meant by economics, to discuss current economic problems facing the nation, to investigate the 
forces of supply and demand on a national scale, and to present possible solutions, through fiscal and 
monetary policy, in coping with economic problems. Students should not concurrently enroll in this 
course and ECON 2023. 
ECON 2023 
Introduction to Microeconomics 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
The primary objective of the microeconomic course is to increase the student’s awareness of 
economic issues concerning markets, the price system, the allocation of resources, income 
distribution, the role of government, the profit motive, and capitalism. Among other topics, the theory 
of perfect competition, monopoly, and oligopoly will be investigated. The logic of consumer choice, 
government regulation and antitrust policy, labor unions and collective bargaining, and the problem of 
poverty will also be included in the course. Students should not concurrently enroll in this course and 
ECON 2013. 
 
ENGINEERING 
ENGR 2113 
Statics 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Resultants of force systems, static equilibrium of rigid bodies and statics of structure. Shear and 
moment diagrams, centroids and moments of inertia. Prerequisite: PHYS 2015. 
ENGR 2123 
Elementary Dynamics 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Particle kinematics and dynamics. Rigid body kinematics and dynamics. Force-massacceleration, 
work-energy, and impulse-momentum methods. Vibrations. Prerequisite: ENGR 2113. 
 
ENGLISH 
ENGL 0123 
Basic Composition 
Class 3, Lab. 2, Cr. 0 
Pre-Collegiate English course placing emphasis on reading and writing at the high school level. 
Designed to prepare students for entry into a college level English course and to meet mandatory 
high school English requirements. Any student who has not completed four (4) years of English in 
high school is required to enroll in the course prior to enrollment in any college-level English class. 
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
Any student with a developmental deficiency may be required to enroll in the course prior to enrollment 
in any college-level English class. 
 
ENGL 1001 -1004 Communications — Special Problems 
Cr. 1-4 
Designed primarily for adult education with credit varying from one to four hours. May be taken more 
than once. Maximum credit four hours. 
HONR 1001-1003 Special Issues 
Cr. 1-3 
Course is designed for students participating in educational travel, either domestic or abroad, or other 
activities related to honors. Credit varies according to length of travel, related study, written 
assignments, or other factors. 
ENGL 1113 
Freshman Composition I 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Freshman Composition I is designed to instruct students in effective writing, in the application of 
grammatical usage, in the use of available resources, and in the concepts of documentation. 
Prerequisite: Must satisfy any deficiency in English and Reading prior to enrollment in this course. The 
course is required for all freshmen except certain terminal course students. 
ENGL 1115 
Freshman Composition I with Review 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Freshman Composition I is designed to instruct students in effective writing, in the application of 
grammatical usage, in the use of available resources, and in the concepts of documentation. 
Prerequisite: Must satisfy any deficiency in English and Reading prior to enrollment in this course. The 
course is required for all freshmen except certain terminal course students. In addition to the core 
course, students in ENGL1115 will also have two-supplemental instruction sections per week to 
receive additional assistance in meeting the course learning outcomes. Only three (3) credit hours 
may apply to the student’s degree or certificate requirements. Prerequisite: ENGL 0123 or required 
ACT or CPT score. 
ENGL 1213 
Freshman Composition II 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
In Freshman Composition II, students continue to develop the skills learned in Freshman 
Composition I with an emphasis on research techniques. Prerequisite: ENGL 1113; must satisfy any 
deficiency in English and Reading prior to enrollment in this course. 
ENGL 2013 
American Indian Writers 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
A study of American Indian literature, literature by Indians, as opposed to literature about Indians. 
Three kinds of literature will be included: traditional (composed in an Indian language for an Indian 
audience at a time when tribal cultures were intact and contact with whites was minimal), transitional 
(represented by translations of great Indian orators of the 19th Century and memoirs of the Indian 
translations of the Indian experience in relation to white dominance), and modern (including novels, 
short stories, and poetry written in English by Indian people, many of whom speak no other language). 
ENGL 2113 
Advanced Composition 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Discusses and applied theories of style and the processes and methods of composing original 
composition. Prerequisite: ENGL 1113 and ENGL 1213 (or permission); must satisfy any deficiency 
in English and Reading prior to enrollment in this course. 
ENGL 2333 
Introduction to Technical Writing 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Study of various rhetorical issues in technical writing. Emphasis on writing situations in the student’s 
area of specialization with a focus on form and content. Does not meet any part of the six-hour 
composition requirement for the associate in arts and associate in science degrees. Prerequisite: 
ENGL 1113; must satisfy any deficiency in English and Reading prior to enrollment in this course. 
ENGL 2413 
Introduction to Literature 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Gives a critical introduction to major types of imaginative literature, including fiction, poetry, and 
drama. Prerequisite: Must satisfy any deficiency in English and Reading prior to enrollment in this 
course. 
ENGL 2433 
World Literature I 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Covers the literature of the Ancient World, and the Renaissance (exclusive of the British and American 
literatures). Prerequisite: Must satisfy any deficiency in English and Reading prior to enrollment in 
this course. 
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
ENGL 2443 
World Literature II 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Covers literature from the Enlightenment to present (exclusive of British and American literatures). 
Prerequisite: Must satisfy any deficiency in English and Reading prior to enrollment in this course. 
ENGL 2533 
Creative Writing 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
This entry level course emphasizes the basic elements of fiction writing for publication. The student 
is given a series of handouts with course background and suggested exercises for each class. The 
approach is “adult enrichment.” The class atmosphere comes from a workshop setting wherein the 
students read and critique their work. The goal of the work is to provide a standard understanding of 
approaches to writing from the craft side as well as the creative process. The learning is based on 
experiential as well as subject matter learning. Prerequisite: Must satisfy any deficiency in English 
and Reading prior to enrollment in this course. 
ENGL 2543 
Survey of British Literature I 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Covers the Anglo-Saxon, Middle English, Renaissance and Restoration periods with emphasis toward 
the political, social, and ideological dynamics as a background for comprehensive literary, cultural, 
and philosophical expression. Prerequisite: Must satisfy any deficiency in English and Reading prior 
to enrollment in this course. 
ENGL 2653 
Survey of British Literature II 1700 to 1900 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Covers the Neo-Classic, Romantic and Victorian periods as related to major movements and 
philosophies of the times and provides a background for comprehensive literary, cultural, and 
philosophical expression. Prerequisite: Must satisfy any deficiency in English and Reading prior to 
enrollment in this course. 
ENGL 2773 
Survey of American Literature I 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Covers the period from the beginning of American literature to Whitman. Selections are chosen 
to illustrate a comprehensive cultural, philosophical, and literary approach. Prerequisite: Must satisfy 
any deficiency in English and Reading prior to enrollment in this course. 
ENGL 2853 
History of Film 
Class 3, Cr. 3 A 
general survey of film in our society. Emphasis on analysis of technical and aesthetic shape and 
growth of film. The progress of the art will be supported through the viewing of film from inception to 
its present form. 
ENGL 2883 
Survey of American Literature II 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Covers the period from Whitman to, and including, contemporary writers. Selections are chosen 
to illustrate prose and poetic form. The course includes analysis of literary types, and study of specific 
selections provides a comprehensive cultural, philosophical, and literary approach. Prerequisite: 
Must satisfy any deficiency in English and Reading prior to enrollment in this course. 
 
ENTOMOLOGY 
ENTO 2993 
General Entomology 
Class 2, Lab. 2, Cr. 3 
Biology & control of insects, principles of control by use of pesticides or other means demonstrated 
by studying selected crop and animal pests. 
 
ENTREPRENEURSHIP 
ENTR 2713 
Entrepreneurship Capstone Course 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
This course is designed for the final semester of study in the entrepreneurship program. Students will 
prepare and present a comprehensive business plan. Prerequisites: Students must have completed 
or be enrolled in a combined total of 15 credit hours of Business courses, including ACCT 2203. 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 
ENVR 1114 
Introduction to Environmental Science 
Class 3, Lab. 2, Cr. 4 
The scientific study of an interaction among organisms, including humans with each other and the 
physical environment, including sustainable resource management and impacts of human populations 
and activity. Lab required. 
 
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
EQUINE 
(See Farm and Ranch Management also) 
EQNE 1101 
Equine Selection 
Lab. 2, Cr. 1 
Provides the student the opportunity to apply the basic techniques of equine selection as it pertains 
to actual judging experience. This includes evaluation of conformation and performance and 
expressing oral reasons. 
EQNE 1103 
Introduction to Equine 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
An introduction to the equine that includes a basic overview of history, breeds, anatomy, physiology, 
reproduction, nutrition, selection and all segments of the horse industry. 
EQNE 1112 
Basic Horseshoeing 
Class 1, Lab. 2, Cr. 2 
A lecture-lab course; topics covered include, trimming feet, fitting shoes, nailing and finishing, forge 
work (calks, clips, brazing, welding), anatomy of the equine leg, physiology of motion, corrective 
shoeing. 
EQNE 1121 
Equine Selection 
Lab. 2, Cr. 1 
Provides the student the opportunity to apply the basic techniques of equine selection as it pertains 
to actual judging experience. This includes evaluation of conformation, performance, and expressing 
oral reasons. 
EQNE 2012 
Basic Horsemanship 
Class 1, Lab. 2, Cr. 2 
The course covers all aspects of horsemanship utilizing techniques to improve riding skills and 
communications between horse and rider. A hands-on class designed to improve basic 
horsemanship and enhance communication between horse and rider focusing on feet, seat, legs, 
hands, and body position. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. 
 
EQNE 2022 
Advanced Horsemanship 
Class 2, Cr. 2 
The course covers all aspects of horsemanship utilizing techniques to improve riding skills and 
communications between horse and rider. A hands-on class designed to advance horsemanship 
skills and enhance communication between horse and rider focusing on feet, seat, legs, hands and 
body position. Prerequisite: EQNE 2012 and consent of instructor. 
EQNE 2112 
Advanced Horseshoeing 
Class 1, Lab. 2, Cr. 2 
Provides a basic understanding of horseshoeing and disease of the foot with practical experience in 
the lab actually in shoeing horses under supervision. 
EQNE 2123 
Equine Health Disease 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
A practical study of equine health management. Includes an in-depth focus on common diseases 
and prevention, first aid procedures, equine medicine, and feeds and nutrition. Includes hands on 
applications of health management and field trips to various veterinary facilities. 
EQNE 2124 
Equine Training Management I 
Lab. 8, Cr. 4 
Students will be introduced to training methods/principles essential for training young horses. Includes 
introduction to proper techniques for routine handling, safety, and behavior modification. Each student 
will be assigned a young horse to care for and train. 
EQNE 2133 
Equine Reproduction 
Class 2, Lab. 2, Cr. 3 
A study and application of equine reproduction including mare and stallion anatomy and physiology, 
endocrinology, and the estrous cycle. Also includes practical application of reproductive techniques 
including estrus detection, semen collection and evaluation, artificial insemination, and pregnancy 
detection. 
EQNE 2234 
Equine Training Management II 
Lab. 8, Cr. 4 
A course for students to advance their young horse’s level of training. Opportunities to begin 
specialization in a specific discipline. Each student will be assigned a young horse to care for and 
train. Prerequisites: EQNE2124 or permission of instructor. 
EQNE 2212 
Equine Selection 
Class 1, Lab. 4, Cr. 2 Provides 
the student the opportunity to apply the basic techniques of equine selection as it pertains to actual 
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
judging experience. This includes evaluation of conformation, performance, and expressing oral 
reasons. 
 
 
FAMILY RELATIONS AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT 
FRCD 1113 
Foundations in Early Childhood 
Class 2, Lab. 2, Cr. 3 
Students will explore theories related to the foundation of education including, but not limited 
to Montesorri, Waldorf, Reggio Emilia, and John Dewey. Students will explore learning center, space 
planning, classroom, environments, basic classroom management skills and an introduction to 
special needs. Students in this class will complete a minimum of 20 hours of field system related to 
their area of study. Students will be responsible for completing a background check through the 
public schools and paying for this expense. 
FRCD 1313 
Nutrition for Children 
Class 2, Lab. 2, Cr. 3 
Basic nutrition for children and food habits in relation to children. Practical application is made of the 
science of nutrition in planning, preparing and serving food for children. 
FRCD 2003 
Dynamics of Family Relationships 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Gives the student a basic understanding of the dynamics of family interaction and the effects upon the child. 
FRCD 2013 
Literature for Children 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Acquaint the student with children’s literature. Emphasis will be placed on selection and presentation 
of literature appropriate to various age levels. 
FRCD 2103 
Child Development 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
An introductory study of the child from conception through adolescence and his development within 
the family. Behavioral patterns and the principles of growth are emphasized. Directed observation of 
children included. 
 
FRCD 2203 
Infant/Toddler Curriculum Planning 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Infant/Toddler Curriculum Planning will focus on creating developmentally appropriate learning 
activities for children ages birth-two years of age. Emphasis will be placed on the integration of literacy, 
language, music, movement, and social skills. OK Early Learning Guidelines for infants and toddlers 
will be used to determine skills and objectives for children in this age range. Students will be expected 
to plan, implement, and reflect on lessons with children ages birth-age two during this class. 
FRCD 2243 
Health and Safety of the Preschool Child 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Care of the young child in the home and in the school during periods of common childhood illness 
and for prevention of accidents and illness. 
 
FRCD 2303 
Activity Planning 
Class 2, Lab. 2, Cr. 3 
Curriculum planning of specific activities for young children in nursery school and preschool programs 
in dramatic play, creative arts, music and physical education. Students will work with young children 
in the Child Development Laboratory. 
FRCD 2503 
Creative Expressions in Early Childhood 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Creative Expressions in Early Childhood explores the role of creative expression including visual arts, 
music and movement, and creative drama in development of young children. Course addresses 
design, implementation, and evaluation of arts experiences developmentally appropriate for children 
in infancy through 3rd grade. Emphasis will be placed on integrated teaching practices in early 
childhood classrooms. Observation and active participation with children in this age range will be 
included in this course. 
FARM AND RANCH MANAGEMENT 
(See Equine also) 
FRMT 1003 Equine and Ranch Business Management 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Course that helps students to develop a basic understanding and comprehension of livestock and 
equine records, laws, taxes, insurance, and accounting records related to the equine and livestock 
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
industry. Emphasis will be placed on how to achieve a profitable and functional operation. 
FRMT 1011 
Beef Cattle Fitting I 
Class 1, Cr. 1 
Provides students with hands-on experience in beef cattle fitting, including halter breaking, nutrition, 
hair care, fitting, and showmanship. 
FRMT 1013 
Pasture and Range Management 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Principals of plant growth and reproduction, economic features and field identification of range plants, 
ecology of range plants and animals, management of rangeland for all its uses including setting and 
adjusting stocking rates, distribution of grazing, grazing methods and supporting practices, 
preparation of ranch management plan. 
FRMT 1113 
Farm Animal Health — Cattle Diseases 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
A basic course for persons with livestock that will explain the causes of, spread of, and the means of 
controlling common cattle diseases. A very practical course for cattle owners. 
FRMT 1213 
Beef Production 
Class 2, Lab. 2, Cr. 3 
Provides the student with an overview of beef production including history, breeds, anatomy, 
physiology, general health, reproduction, nutrition, selection, marketing and all segments of the beef 
industry. 
FRMT 1222 
Equine Livestock Sales Management & Marketing  Class 1, Lab. 2, Cr. 2 
Provides the student with an overview of beef production including history, breeds, anatomy, physiology, 
general health, reproduction, nutrition, selection, marketing and all segments of the beef industry. 
FRMT 2111 
Artificial Insemination 
Class 1, Cr. 1 
Class is for anyone interested in learning the practice of artificial insemination in beef cattle. 
FRMT 2123 
Breeding Management of Farm Animals 
Class 2, Lab. 2, Cr. 3 
Provides the student with a basic understanding of the reproductive anatomy and cycles of farm 
animals. Current reproductive techniques will also be introduced to the students. 
FRMT 2203 
Feedlot Management 
Class 2, Lab. 2, Cr. 3 
Provides the student with an overview of the responsibilities of a feedlot manager. Topics range from 
nutrition, health, and handling of cattle to legal and environmental responsibilities. 
 
FRMT 2221 
FRMT Capstone 
Class 1, Cr. 1 
This course is designed to assess the preparedness of graduating Farm 
and 
Ranch 
Management/Equine and Ranch Management students for entry into the workforce or continue in 
the pursuit of furthering their education. General agricultural knowledge, communication skills, and 
career awareness will be assessed. 
FRMT 2222 
Ranch Jobs 
Class 1, Lab. 2, Cr. 2 
Planning and construction of fences, corrals, and buildings to facilitate handling of livestock, handling 
and management of livestock; methods of livestock identification, dehorning, castration, controlling 
internal and external parasites; term project to layout handling facilities. 
FRMT 2223 
Livestock Production 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
This course will study the production of sheep, goat, swine, poultry, and exotic animals through 
classroom lecture and hands on experience. 
FRMT 2401-2406  Work Experience 
Cr. 1-6 
Includes work on farms, ranches or agricultural business to permit students to gain experience in 
agriculture, to become proficient in business procedures and managerial decision making and to 
prepare for the world of work. 
 
FINANCE 
FIN 2123 
Personal Finance 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
A first course in the management of the individual’s financial affairs such as budgeting, use of credit, 
mortgage financing, investment and estate planning. 
 
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
FORESTRY 
(See also Natural Resource and Ecology Management) 
FOR 2013 
Resource Wildland Fire Certification 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
An introduction to the latest tools and technology in natural resource and fire management. Each 
offering will include a National Wildfire Coordinating Group (NWCG) certification course. 
FOR 2023 
Resource Wildland Fire Certification 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
A continuation of FOR 2013, this course reinforces understanding of the latest tools and technology 
in natural resource and fire management. Each offering will include a National Wildfire Coordinating 
Group (NWCG) certification course. 
FOR 2223 
Wildland Firefighter Qualification 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Wild and prescribed Fire Techniques and Automated Land Management. Prerequisite: FOR 1114 or 
permission of instructor. 
 
FRESHMAN YEAR EXPERIENCE 
FYE 1011 
Freshman Year Experience 
Class 1, Cr. 1 
Orients students to college life while supporting the student’s transition to become successful and 
engaged in all segments of the college’s programs and college mission. Introduces proper use of 
and development of study habits, note taking skills, time management and technology. 
FYE 1012 
Freshman Year Experience and Academic Success  Class 2, Cr. 2 
Orients students to college life while supporting the student’s transition to become successful and 
engaged in all segments of the college’s programs and college mission. Introduces proper use of 
and development of study habits, note taking skills, time management, and technology. This course 
promotes an understanding of the impact of goal development, time management technique 
implementation on becoming a successful student. 
GEOGRAPHY 
GEOG 1013 
World/Regional Geography 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
This course is an introduction to basic geographic concepts and an emphasis on the interrelations of 
people with their physical and cultural environments. 
GEOLOGY 
GEOL 1114 
Physical Geology 
Class 3, Lab. 2, Cr. 4 
Nature and properties of material composing the earth, the distribution of this material, the processes 
by which it is formed, altered, transported and distorted, also, the nature and development of 
landscape. 
GEOL 1224 
Historical Geology 
Class 3, Lab. 2, Cr. 4 
Designed to introduce the physical and pre-historic history of the earth, including its origin and 
development, through the study of rocks and fossils. Prerequisite: GEOL 1114. 
 
GLOBAL STUDIES 
GLST 1113 
Introduction to Global Studies 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
The course is design to enable students to develop a basic understanding of international and 
intercultural global studies. It will help prepare them for their role in an increasingly complex, 
interconnected and interdependent world. 
HEALTH AND PHYSICAL EDUCATION 
HHP 1123 
Leadership and Teambuilding 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Students will receive information and participate in exercises for the development of leadership in 
groups, the dynamics of a team, conflict resolution in a group setting, evaluating effectiveness of 
leadership and teamwork, role of leadership and teams in our society (particularly as related to 
recreation and sports activities), and the forms of leadership that can be used in motivation and goal-
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
setting of teams. Team sports will often serve as a model to study leadership styles and teamwork 
interaction. 
HHP 1363 
Theory of Coaching I 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Comprehensive introduction to the art and science of coaching. The course introduces a positive 
coaching philosophy, the principles of coaching as digested from the fields of sport psychology, sport 
pedagogy, sport physiology, sport medicine, and sport management. 
HHP 1713 
Introduction to Athletic Training 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
An introduction to the profession of athletic training. The principles of injury prevention and care 
relative to athletic injuries and development of essential skills and competencies needed to perform 
selected athletic training procedures. Theory-based course with required laboratory experience. 
HHP 1753 
Introduction to Physical Education 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
The nature, scope, and significance of physical education. Historical and philosophical foundations, 
major sub-disciplines and their interrelationships, and career opportunities. 
HHP 1822 
Pedagogy of Rhythm and Movement 
Class 2, Cr. 2 
Introduction of basic fundamentals and methods of movement skills for rhythms including social, 
creative, developmental, and multicultural dance and activities. Analysis of skills, concepts, terms, 
safety issues, teaching strategies and developmental appropriateness. Prerequisite: HPER majors 
only. 
HHP 2052 
Sports Officiating 
Class 2, Cr. 2 
Designed to teach rules, interpretation and mechanics of officiating to students who are interested in 
becoming certified officials. The class will meet all qualifications and guidelines of the State and 
National Committee on certification of officials in these athletic events: Football, Basketball, Baseball, 
Softball, Wrestling and Soccer. Requirement for state certification of officials in Oklahoma. 
HHP 2213 
Principles in Health Education and Health Promotion Class 3, Cr. 3 
Introduction to the field of health education and health promotion focusing on health principles, 
theories, career opportunities and a field experience. The general objectives in coaching will be 
offered. 
 
HHP 2363 
Theory of Coaching II 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Introduces the coach to their preferred coaching discipline (i.e. sport). Theory II will involve the 
continuation from Theory I into a specific sports discipline. In Theory II, each student will develop, as 
a continuation from Theory I, their personal philosophy in their preferred sport. The development of 
a coaching journal and notebook will be a primary project. Within the journal each coach will develop 
their coaching directives regarding their specific sport. Each coach will participate in a week long 
shadowing of a coach in their sport. The sport of choice and multiple styles of coaching theory and 
philosophy will be studied and broken down to develop each coach’s personal approach in all areas 
of developing a program and players. 
HHP 2602 
Community First Aid 
Class 2, Cr. 2 
Standard first aid course as outlined by the American Red Cross consisting of emergency assistance 
and treatment in cases of accident, injury, or illness pending regular surgical or medical treatment. 
Specific areas covered in course are bandaging, splinting, resuscitation methods, emergency rescue 
and short distance transfer. Course will include Child, Infant, and Adult CPR. This course will be used 
for all general education students and for programs other than Physical Education, Wellness, and 
Pre-Athletic Training. 
HHP 2603 
Total Wellness 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Individual, interpersonal, and socio-cultural issues that have an impact on health. Behavioral 
decision-making, social relations, cultural diversity and environmental sensitivity. 
HHP 2663 
Care and Prevention of Athletic Injuries 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Designed to provide knowledge related to prevention, care and rehabilitations of athletic injuries. 
Prevention of athletic injuries and methods of massage, taping, and bandaging. A requirement 
for all HPER majors. Requirement for certification for all Oklahoma high school coaches. 
HHP 2692 
Water Safety Instruction 
Class 1, Lab. 2, Cr. 2 
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
Consists of 2 parts; review of swimming and safety skills, theoretical and practical knowledge as well 
as methods of teaching swimming and water safety courses. Receives the American Red Cross 
teaching certification. Counts as a 2-hour solid credit rather than an activity credit. Required for most 
physical education teachers and coaches. Prerequisite: Swimmer level skills and current emergency 
water safety and/or lifeguard training. A requirement for all HPER majors. 
HHP 2733 
Procedures in Athletic Training 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Introduction to the psychomotor skills required in the profession of athletic training. Procedures 
relative to athletic injuries and development of essential skills and competencies needed to 
perform selected athletic training procedures. Theory-based course with required lab experience. 
Prerequisite: HHP 1713. 
HHP 2992 
Lifeguarding 
Class 1, Lab. 2, Cr. 2 
Provide knowledge, skills, and the American Cross certification to be a lifeguard. Economically 
beneficial to college students. Includes First Aid and CPR for the Professional Rescuer. 
HISTORY 
HIST 1063 
History of the American Indian 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
An overview of American Indian History from prehistory (through American Indian oral traditions) 
through the colonial and national periods of historical America. This course will focus on the similarity 
and diversity of the many Sates and the impact on both the American Indian and European cultures 
from contact with white civilization. Pre-requisite: must satisfy any deficiency in Reading prior to 
enrollment in this course. 
HIST 1483 
American History to 1865 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
This course will explore the social, cultural, economic, and political history of the United States of 
America from the European arrival in 1492 to the conclusion of the Civil War in 1865. 
HIST 1493 
American History Since 1865 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
This course will explore the social, cultural, economic, and political history of the United States of America 
from the conclusion of the Civil War in 1865 to the present day. 
HIST 1613 
Western Civilization to 1500 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
A survey of Western Civilization from ancient times to the Reformation. Pre-requisite: must satisfy any 
deficiency in Reading prior to enrollment in this course. 
HIST 1623 
Western Civilization after 1500 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
A survey of Western Civilization from the Reformation to the present. Pre-requisite: must satisfy any 
deficiency in Reading prior to enrollment in this course. 
HIST 1913 
World History to 1500 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
This course examines the history of the world from earliest known human settlement to 1500. Special 
attention will be paid the development of human societies in Africa, Asia, and South America, and 
connecting of social, economic, and political movements of the past to the current global situation. 
Pre-requisite: must satisfy any deficiency in Reading prior to enrollment in this course. 
HIST 1923 
World History since 1500 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
This course examines the history of the world since 1500. Special attention will be paid the 
development of human societies in Africa, Asia, and South America, and connecting the social, 
economic, and political movements of the past to the current global situation. Pre-requisite: must 
satisfy any deficiency in Reading prior to enrollment in this course. 
 
HORTICULTURE 
HORT 1013 
Principles of Horticulture Science 
Class 2, Lab. 2, Cr. 3 
Basic physical and physiological processes responsible for plant dormancy, growth, flowering, 
fruiting, and senescence with respect to the science and the art of production, cultivation, utilization, 
and/or storage of horticultural plants; management and control of horticulture pests. 
 
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
HUMANITIES 
(Also see other humanities selections, p. 58) 
HUM 2103 
Humanities I 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Students will hear, see, and read some of the most important works of art, architecture, music, and 
literature from the time of the ancient Egyptians to the end of the Middle Ages in Europe. This course 
has no prerequisites. It is recommended that students complete any necessary remedial courses in 
reading before taking this course. 
HUM 2203 
Humanities II 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Students will hear, see, and read some of the most important works of art, architecture, music, and 
literature from the time of the Renaissance to the present. This course has no prerequisites. It is 
recommended that students complete any necessary remedial courses in reading before taking this 
course. The two Masterworks courses are completely independent; it is not necessary to take one 
before taking the other or to take them in order. 
LEISURE 
LEIS 1352 
Weight Training 
Class 1, Lab. 2, Cr. 2 
Fundamental methods and techniques of weight training, for men and women. 
 
MANAGEMENT 
MGMT 1123 
Salesmanship 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
This is an in-depth course in salesmanship. The theory is supplemented by actual sales 
demonstrations using the learned techniques. Prospecting, approach, knowledge of product, 
planning presentations, territory control and sales management are studied. This is an excellent 
course for all students regardless of their major area since it reinforces areas of personal attributes and 
emphasizes the use of selling techniques in life situations. 
MGMT 1133 
Human Relations 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
A course designed to improve a person’s self-image, attitude, self-confidence, goal setting ability, 
and relationships with other people. 
MGMT 1223 
Small Business Management 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Designed to acquaint the student of management with the environment of the small business 
enterprise. Opportunities of initiating the business, financial and administrative control, marketing 
programs and policies, management of business operations, and legal and 
governmental 
relationships are studied (through the creation and application of the business plan). 
MGMT 2023 
Human Resources Management 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Provides the student with a basic understanding of core human resources processes that should 
be present in an organization and explores challenges in the workplace from both employee and 
employer perspective. 
MGMT 2213 
Principles of Management 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
An introductory management course dealing with the fundamental principles of management such as 
planning, organizing, leading, and controlling the basic processes. 
MGMT 2243 
Basic Real Estate 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
A history of organized real estate; real estate terms and definitions; the nature and classification of 
property ownership; the nature and classification of agreements and contracts; financing real estate; 
surveying and land descriptions; problems in point of law and arithmetic. Both nomenclature and 
technique are stressed to provide a practical course to provide the student with the information and 
background to qualify for the state license examination if he so desires. 
MGMT 2303 
Sports Management Internship 
Lab 6, Cr. 3 
A work experience internship to permit students to gain practical experience in the sports world and 
become proficient in procedures involved in managing an athletic event. 
MGMT 2313 
Introduction to Sports & Entertainment Management  Class 3, Cr. 3 
An introductory course exploring the history, development, and governance in sports and 
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
entertainment management. Current issues and trends will be evaluated. 
MGMT 2323 
Sports Communication 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Examination of the fundamental theories, practices, and communication necessary to deliver sport 
products and services to consumers. 
MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS TECHNOLOGY 
MIS 2133 
Web Page Development 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
This course is designed as an introduction to web page development. The course covers current 
techniques in web design, authoring, creation and implementation of web pages using various web 
development tools. Students will design web pages using frames, backgrounds, tables and 
multimedia. 
MIS 2213 
Desktop Publishing 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
This course provides hands-on training in desktop publishing (DTP) necessary to create publications 
such as flyers, brochures, business cards, and other business items for print. Topics include: DTP 
concepts, operation of DTP software, publication page layout, basic graphic design, and practical 
applications. 
MARKETING 
MKTG 2123 
Marketing 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Introduces college students to the basic concepts, practices and analytic methods of marketing. The 
core subjects are: role of marketing in the firm; strategic and tactical planning; marketing 
environment; market analysis; consumer decision making; and market research. Elements of the 
marketing mix — product, communications, pricing and distribution will also be emphasized. 
MATHEMATICS 
MATH 0013 
Basic Mathematics 
Class 3, Cr. 0 
Designed to review and improve arithmetic computational skills. Also covers the basic concepts of 
beginning algebra. 
MATH 0102 
Strategies for Algebra 
Class 2, Cr. 0 
The co-requisite math strategies provides learning support and supplemental instruction for students 
co-enrolled in MATH 1513 College Algebra. Eligibility is determined by student’s college readiness 
placement exam scores. The course does not count toward graduation or any degree program. Co- 
requisite: MATH 1513. 
MATH 0113 
Introductory Algebra 
Class 3, Cr. 0 
A study of elementary algebra concepts: Operations on signed numbers, operations on polynomials, 
factoring polynomials, linear equations, and linear inequalities. This course does not assume prior 
knowledge of algebra. May not satisfy baccalaureate degree requirements. 
MATH 0115 
Fundamentals of Algebra 
Class 5, Cr. 0 
This course includes a study of elementary algebra concepts, such as operations on signed numbers, 
linear equations and linear inequalities, determining slopes of lines and graphing them, operations on 
polynomials and factoring polynomials. This course prepares students for college algebra or 
equivalent college-level math courses, but does not satisfy the math or logic requirements for a 
college-level math course. Prerequisite: none 
MATH 0123 
Intermediate Algebra 
Class 3, Cr. 0 
A study of basic concepts of algebra: polynomials, rational expressions, exponents and radicals, 
linear equations and inequalities, quadratic equations, and systems of simultaneous equations. 
Designed to prepare students for entry into College Algebra. Prerequisite: one unit of high school 
algebra or Introductory MATH 0113 or CPT score greater than 52 in Elementary Algebra. 
MATH 0142 
General College Math Co-Requisite 
Class 3, Cr. 0 
This course is an extension of MATH 0115 for students who need to review the algebra background 
or satisfy a mathematics deficiency. Topics include review of real numbers, first degree equations, 
polynomials, rational expressions, linear equations in two variables, quadratic equations. This 
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
proficiency course is designed to prepare students for college level mathematics. MATH 0142 
semester hours do not count toward required credit hours for an Associate degree or a certificate. 
Co-Requisite: MATH 1493 
MATH 1022 
Engineering Problems 
Class 2, Cr. 2 
Introduction to the scientific graphing calculator and personal computer software used in problem 
solving. 
MATH 1483 
Mathematical Functions and Their Uses 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Analysis of functions from their graphs. Linear, exponential, logarithmic, periodic functions and rates 
of change. Special emphasis on applications to the natural sciences, agriculture, business and the 
social sciences. Prerequisite: MATH 0123 or placement into MATH 1513. 
MATH 1493 
General College Math 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
A terminal course in mathematics designed for the liberal arts major. Topics include, but are not 
limited to: sets and counting, probability, statistics, finance, matrices, linear programming, 
exponential and logarithmic functions, systems of equations. Prerequisite: MATH 0115, MATH 0123 
or placement into MATH 1513. 
MATH 1495 
General College Math with Review 
Class 5, Cr. 5 
A study of rational expressions, equations, and inequalities in one variable; relations and functions; 
systems of equations; matrices; and determinants. This course provides additional support for 
students to meet the learning objectives. Only three (3) credit hours will apply to a degree or 
certificate requirements. Prerequisite: MATH 0115, MATH 0123 or CPT score of 50 or higher. 
 
MATH 1513 
College Algebra 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
A study of rational expressions, equations, and inequalities in one variable; relations and functions; 
systems of equations; matrices; and determinants. Prerequisite: MATH 0123 or high school 
equivalent or placement in MATH 1513. 
MATH 1515 
College Algebra with Review 
Class 5, Cr. 5 
A study of rational expressions, equations, and inequalities in one variable; relations and functions; 
systems of equations; matrices; and determinants. This course provides additional support for 
students to meet the learning objectives. Only three (3) credit hours will apply to a degree or 
certificate requirements. Prerequisite: MATH 0115, MATH 0123 or CPT score of 50 or higher. 
MATH 1613 
Trigonometry 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
The development and use of circular and trigonometric functions; relations between the functions; 
solutions of triangles; complex forms and applications of practical problems. Prerequisite: College 
MATH 1513 or equivalent. May be taken concurrently with MATH 1513. 
 
MATH 1715 
College Algebra and Trigonometry 
Class 5, Cr. 5 
An integrated course in College Algebra 1513 and Trigonometry 1613. This course is especially 
designed for those students needing additional preparation for the study of calculus. Prerequisite: 
MATH 1513 or high school equivalent. 
MATH 2103 
Elementary Calculus 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Designed for students of business, management, economics, or social science. Differentiation and 
integration of polynomial exponential and logarithmic functions with business oriented applications. 
Prerequisite: MATH 1513 or high school equivalent. No credit for mathematics or pre-engineering 
majors. 
MATH 2145 
Calculus I 
Class 5, Cr. 5 
An introduction to analytical geometry and calculus. Includes analytical geometry of the line, circle 
and conics introduction to the limit concept; differentiation and integration of algebraic functions and 
their applications. Prerequisite: MATH 1513 or high school equivalent. 
MATH 2155 
Calculus II 
Class 5, Cr. 5 
A continuation of 2145. Includes trigonometric, exponential, parametric, hyperbolic functions, methods of 
integration and applications. Prerequisite: MATH 2145. 
MATH 2233 
Differential Equations 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
A first course in the study of Ordinary Differential Equations. Theory and classical methods of solutions of 
ordinary differential equations, systems of ordinary differential equations, methods of approximation, 
applications, and the Laplace Transform. Prerequisite: MATH 2273 or consent of instructor. 
MATH 2273 Calculus III (Calculus and Analytical Geometry) 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
A continuation of Calculus 2155. Includes vectors; infinite series; partial derivatives; and multiple 
integration. Prerequisite: MATH 2155. 
MATH 2413 
Math Structures I 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
A basic course in mathematics for elementary education majors. An introduction to the origin and 
history of number systems: number systems of different bases and basic set concepts. Also included 
is an introduction to symbolic logic, mathematical systems and development of the real number 
system. Prerequisite: MATH 0123 or equivalent. 
MATH 2513 
Math Structures II 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
A continuation of MATH 2413. Continues with the development of the basic structure of the real 
number system. Topics from geometry and elementary probability are covered. 
 
MATH 2601 
Special Problems in Math 
Math Cr. 1 
A seminar for the undergraduate study and research of problems, issues, and trends in mathematics 
and math education. Includes methods for teaching mathematics principles. Fulfills requirements 
for continuing education of Oklahoma elementary and secondary teachers. 
Prerequisite: MATH 2413 or equivalent. 
 
MECHANIZED AGRICULTURE 
MCAG 1413 
Introduction to Engineering in Agriculture 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
The use of power, machines, and engineered systems for agriculture production and processing of 
agricultural products. Engineering aspects of land, water resources, development and utilization. 
MEDICAL LABORATORY TECHNICIAN 
MLAT 1113 
Medical Laboratory Operations 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
The study of medical laboratory including professionalism, communication, vocabulary, laboratory 
information systems, safety, regulations, departments, instrumentation, quality control and quality 
assurance. 
MLAT 1304 
Basic Hematology 
Class 3, Lab. 3, Cr. 4 
Introduction to study of the cellular components of human blood. Emphasis on blood cell counting, 
hemoglobin, hematocrit, and reticulocyte determinations. Prerequisite: Admission to the program. 
MLAT 1313 
Phlebotomy, Urinalysis and Body Fluids 
Class 2, Lab. 2, Cr. 3 
The course provides instruction and practice in proper phlebotomy technique during the first four 
weeks of the course. The remainder of the course is a comprehensive study of macroscopic and 
microscopic examination of urine and other body fluids. The phlebotomy instruction does not qualify 
students for national certification as a phlebotomist. Course offered in fall only. Prerequisite: Admission 
to the MLT Program or permission of the MLT Program Director. 
MLAT 1323 
Clinical Practice 1 
Lab. 9, Cr. 3 
Students will be assigned to affiliate clinical laboratories for practical experience in lab procedures 
for 160 clock hours. Prerequisite: Completion of Medical Laboratory Technician courses. 
MLAT 1333 
Clinical Practice 2 
Lab. 9, Cr. 3 
Students will be assigned to affiliate clinical laboratories for practical experience in lab procedures 
for 160 clock hours. Prerequisite: Completion of Medical Laboratory Technician courses. 
MLAT 1414 
Immunology and Serology 
Class 3, Lab. 3, Cr. 4 
Immunology is the study of the human body’s immune response to foreign antigens and disease. 
Serology is the study of constituents in serum that can be used for detection of disease and 
monitoring of therapy through serological laboratory testing. 
MLAT 2344 
Clinical Chemistry 
Class 3, Lab. 3, Cr. 4 
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
This course will cover the basic theories of routine clinical chemistry procedures, including 
instrumentation. Emphasis will be placed on theory, clinical applications, and procedures. A brief 
review of laboratory mathematics will be included. Prerequisite: CHEM 1144, CHEM 1215 or 
1314. Admission to the Medical Laboratory Technician program. 
MLAT 2354 
Pathogenic Microbiology 
Class 3, Lab. 3, Cr. 4 
This course will have primary emphasis on pathogenic microorganisms, their identification and 
related disease processes. Laboratory will stress the identification of these from a clinical viewpoint. 
Prerequisite: MCRO 2124. 
MLAT 2364 
Introduction to Molecular Diagnostics 
Class 3, Lab. 3, Cr. 4 
Overview of nucleic acid structure, gene expression and genetic disease. Principle and performance 
of DNA and RNA isolation, amplification, hybridization, and analysis. Applications in microbiology, 
prenatal diagnosis, cancer management, transplantation, paternity testing, thrombosis risk testing and 
forensic medicine. Prerequisite: CHEM 1144, CHEM 1215, OR CHEM 1314 and Admission to the 
MLT program or permission of the Director, MLTProgram. 
MLAT 2374 
Immunohematology 
Class 3, Lab. 3, Cr. 4 
Immunohematology is the study of antigen/antibody reactions as it relates to the safe transfusion of 
blood and blood products. Immunohematology is also called “blood banking.” Topics covered include 
the major nine blood group systems, blood group genetics, antibody detection and identification, 
component therapy, and adverse reactions to transfusion. This course will focus on basic laboratory 
techniques and the fundamental theories behind them. Prerequisite: MLAT 1314 
MLAT 2373 
Clinical Practice 3 
Lab. 9, Cr. 3 
Students will be assigned to affiliate clinical laboratories for practical experience in lab 
procedures for 160 clock hours. Prerequisite: Completion of Medical Laboratory Technician courses. 
MLAT 2383 
Clinical Practice 4 
Lab. 9, Cr. 3 
Students will be assigned to affiliate clinical laboratories for practical experience in lab for 160 
clock hours. Prerequisite: Completion of MLT courses. 
MICROBIOLOGY 
MCRO 2124 
Introduction to Microbiology 
Class 3, Lab. 2, Cr. 4 
Introduction to the basic structure and physiology of microorganisms with emphasis on bacteria. This 
course will also include a study of specific microorganisms, the interaction between microbe and host, 
microorganisms and human disease, and applied microbiology and the environment. Prerequisite: 
CHEM 1215 or equivalent and BIOL 1604, or BIOL 1414, CHEM 1215 or equivalent, and BIOL 2114. 
MCRO 2301 
Introduction to Microbiology Lab 
Lab. 2, Cr. 1 
A supplement to Microbiology 2124. 
 
MUSIC 
MUSC 1001-1004 Fine Arts — Special Problems 
Cr. 1-4 
Designed primarily for adult education with credit varying from one to four hours. May be taken more 
than once. Maximum credit is four hours. 
MUSC 1011  Applied Piano Lessons 
Class 1, Cr. 1 
A study of scales and learning repertoire. 
MUSC 1012  Applied Piano Lessons 
Class 2, Cr. 2 
A study of scales and learning repertoire. 
MUSC 1151  Applied Organ Lessons 
Class 1, Cr. 1 
A study of registration, technique for control, and repertoire. 
MUSC 1152  Applied Organ Lessons 
Class 2, Cr. 2 
A study of registration, technique for control, and repertoire. 
MUSC 1161 Applied Harp Lessons 
Class 1, Cr. 1 
A study of the uniqueness of the instrument, teaching the body to coordinate for the technique of the 
instrument, and repertoire. 
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
MUSC 1162 Applied Harp Lessons 
Class 2, Cr. 2 
A study of the uniqueness of the instrument, teaching the body to coordinate for the technique of the 
instrument, and repertoire. 
MUSC 1321 Berserkers Basketball Band 
Lab. 3, Cr. 1 
Study and performance of works for the basketball pep band. Enrollment by instructor’s approval. 
This course will be offered during the second eight weeks of fall semester and the first eight weeks 
of the spring semester. 
MUSC 1331 Applied Voice Lessons 
Class 1, Cr. 1 
A study of the technique of singing, teaching or musicianship, and learning of repertoire. 
MUSC 1332  Applied Voice Lessons 
Class 2, Cr. 2 
A study of the technique of singing, teaching or musicianship, and learning of repertoire. 
MUSC 1531 
Sight-Singing and Eartraining I 
Class 2, Cr. 1 
Reading and dictation of simple melodies and basic rhythms. 
MUSC 1533 
Theory of Music I 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
A study of chord structure and progression with simple triads. 
MUSC 1541 
Sight-Singing and Eartraining II 
Class 2, Cr. 1 
Continuation of Music 1531. Work with more advanced melodies and rhythms. Prerequisite: MUSC 
1531. 
MUSC 1543 
Theory of Music II 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Continuation of Elementary Harmony. Study of secondary triads, non-harmonic tones and seventh 
chords. Prerequisite: MUSC 1533. 
MUSC 1601  Band 
Lab. 5, Cr. 1 
A study of tone quality, technique repertoire for marching performance and concert performance. 
MUSC 1641 Chorus-Concert Choir 
Lab. 4, Cr. 1 
A study of tone quality, breadth support, tone placement, and repertoire. 
MUSC 1661 Chamber Singers 
Lab. 3, Cr. 1 
This course presents the fundamentals of performing in a variety of music from different eras. This 
is an auditioned only group that does not focus on teaching the fundamentals of music. 
MUSC 1671 Golden Blues Stage Band 
Lab. 2, Cr. 1 
Study and performance of instrumental literature written in the jazz idiom. Entrance by audition. 
MUSC 1831  Woodwind Lessons 
Class 1, Cr. 1 
A study of fingering technique and learning repertoire. 
MUSC 1832  Woodwind Lessons 
Class 2, Cr. 2 
A study of fingering technique and learning repertoire. 
MUSC 1841  Brass Lessons 
Class 1, Cr. 1 
A study of fingering technique and learning repertoire. 
MUSC 1842  Brass Lessons 
Class 2, Cr. 2 
A study of fingering technique and learning repertoire. 
MUSC 1851  Percussion Lessons 
Class 1, Cr. 1 
A study of fingering technique and learning repertoire. 
MUSC 1852  Percussion Lessons 
Class 2, Cr. 2 
A study of fingering technique and learning repertoire. 
MUSC 1861  Guitar/String Lessons 
Class 1, Cr. 1 
A study of fingering technique and learning repertoire. 
MUSC 1862  Guitar/String Lessons 
Class 2, Cr. 2 
A study of fingering technique and learning repertoire. 
MUSC 2222 
Music Theatre Workshop 
Lab. 4, Cr. 2 
Study and performance in opera/music theater including musical analysis and character projecting 
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
culminating in a public production. 
MUSC 2421 
String Chamber Ensemble 
Lab. 4, Cr. 1 
Study and performance of music compositions written for small string ensembles from antiquity to 
the contemporary. 
MUSC 2553 
Theory of Music III 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Continuation of Intermediate Harmony. Study of modulation and altered chords. Prerequisite: MUSC 
1543. 
MUSC 2561 
Sight-Singing and Eartraining III 
Class 2, Cr. 1 
Melodies of more complex structure; introduction to harmonic dictation. Prerequisite: MUSC 1541 
MUSC 2563 
Theory of Music IV 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Continuation of Advanced Harmony I. Study of chords of the ninth and advanced modulation. 
Prerequisite: MUSC 2553. 
MUSC 2571 
Sight-Singing and Eartraining IV 
Class 2, Cr. 1 
Continuation of Music 2561. Four-part dictation; modulation. Prerequisite: MUSC 2551. 
MUSC 2573 
Introduction to Music Appreciation 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Designed to give an insight into musical masterpieces from all eras of music literature. Emphasis on 
the listening experience with recognition of basic elements and stylistic characteristics. 
MUSC 2501 
Brass Ensemble 
Lab. 2, Cr. 1 
Study and performance of quartets, quintets, and brass choir works from the Masters to the very 
contemporary. Enrollment by instructor’s approval. 
MUSC 2721 
Harp Ensemble 
Lab. 2, Cr. 1 
Designed for the method of the harp, harp technique with hands on participation by the students. Will 
include participation in student performance, ensemble work, and solo work. Method, literature, 
performance, and teaching strategies will be employed in the class. 
 
NATIVE AMERICAN STUDIES 
NAS 1113 
Cherokee Language I 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Pronunciation drill with a native of Oklahoma Cherokee, basic sentences for memorization, drill on 
variations of these sentences, lectures on phonology, morphology, and syntax of contemporary 
Oklahoma Cherokee. 
NAS 1133 
Cherokee Language II 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Cherokee conversation, instruction in the Sequoyah syllabary, readings in Cherokee, lectures in the 
history and culture of Cherokee Indians. Prerequisite: FL 1013. 
NATURAL RESOURCE ECOLOGY MANAGEMENT 
(See Also Forestry) 
NREM 1001-1003 Natural Resources Field Application 
Cr. 1-3 
Field observation of professional management on public and private lands. Prerequisite: none. 
NREM 1012 
Introduction to Natural Resource Ecology & Management Class 2, Cr. 2 
Introduction to the wide variety of natural resources found globally with a focus on Oklahoma 
ecoregions. Overview of the ecology and management of natural resources in the pine-hardwood 
forest, the Cross Timbers, and the tallgrass mixed-grass and shortgrass prairies. Academic and 
career options presented by speakers. 
NREM 1014 
Introduction to Natural History 
Class 3, Lab. 2, Cr. 4 
The study of living organisms especially their origins, adaptations for reproducing and relation to their 
environment. Laboratory emphasis is on observation and investigation of the diversity and adaptation 
of living organisms. 
NREM 1113 
Elements of Forestry 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
A preview of forestry subjects, including forest resources, agencies, industries, and practices. 
NREM 2103 
Natural Resource Measurements 
Class 2, Lab. 2, Cr. 3 
Introduction to natural resource measurement theory and application designed to familiarize students 
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
with methods of quantifying and gathering data on natural ecosystems. 
NREM 2013 
Natural Resource Ecology 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Introductory focus on understanding and applying general ecological principles to agricultural and 
natural ecosystems. Emphasis and relationships between climate, soils, agricultural, and natural 
ecosystems. Topics include nutrient cycles, energy flow, species interactions, biological diversity, 
productivity, sustainability, and landscape and ecosystem management. 
NREM 2113 
Timber Harvesting 
Class 2, Lab. 2, Cr. 3 
The objective of this course is to develop basic understanding of theory and strategies of planning 
and management of timber harvesting, techniques including felling, bucking, skidding, operation, 
cable yarding, harvesting cost analysis, safety aspects of harvesting, and principles of forest road 
building. 
NREM 1214 
Introduction to Wood Properties and Products   Class 3, Lab. 2, Cr. 4 
To develop basic understanding of anatomical, physical, and mechanical properties of solid wood 
and wood products. Principles of lumber manufacturing, veneer wood and preservation techniques. 
Some basic concepts of manufacture of wood composites including particleboard, fiberboard, 
oriented strandboard, and waferboard will also be reviewed. Paper production will also be covered. 
NREM 2134 
Dendrology 
Class 1, Lab. 6, Cr. 4 
Familiarizes the student with the taxonomy and identification of forest and landscape trees. 
Classification and scientific names, identification of conifer and hardwood species. 
NREM 2880 
Natural Resources Ecology & Management Internship Lab. 3-18, Cr. 1-6 
This course is designed to provide students with career oriented learning experiences that 
complement and enhance their formal classroom training. Students will complete a structured intern 
program with a business or organization involved in the production, processing, distribution, 
regulation, or oversight of forestry, wildlife, environmental resource management or related field. 
 
NURSING — ASSOCIATE DEGREE (RN) 
NURS 1101 
Pharmacology 
Class 1, Cr. 1 
This course provides an introduction to the principles of pharmacology including: pharmacokinetics, 
pharmacodynamics, medication interactions and potential adverse medication reactions. Emphasis 
is placed on drug classifications and nursing care related to the safe administration of medication to 
patients across the lifespan. 
NURS 1112 
Health Assessment 
Class 1, Lab 3, Cr. 3 
This course provides the framework for preparing students to perform basic health assessments 
on adult and older adult patients. Emphasis is placed on taking a thorough nursing history, performing 
 
physiological, psychological, sociological, cultural and spiritual assessments, as well as identification 
of stressors and health risks. Laboratory experiences provide an opportunity to prepare students to 
practice assessment skills on adults and older adults in acute and extended care settings. 
NURS 1116 
Introduction to Nursing 
Class 4, Lab 6, Cr. 6 
This course provides an introduction to nursing and roles of the nurse in micro- and macro- systems 
as well as profession related and patient care concepts. Emphasis is placed on the knowledge and 
skills needed to provide safe, quality care. The theoretical foundation for nursing skills is presented, 
and the student is given an opportunity to demonstrate these skills in a clinical and laboratory setting. 
An introduction to the nursing process provides a decision-making framework to assist students in 
developing effective clinical judgment skills. 
NURS 1 
Transition to AND 
              Class 1, Cr. 2  
This course is designed to facilitate the student who enters the Associate Degree Nursing program 
in a non-traditional manner of transfer or articulation. Content includes the philosophy and theoretical 
framework of the Northeastern Oklahoma A&M Nursing Program as well as the roles and 
competencies of the associate degree nurse. Nursing skills will be evaluated at the level that the 
student enters the nursing program. Also included is this nursing school’s format for data collection 
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
and form processing. Prerequisite: Admission to Nursing Program.. 
 
NURS 1202 
Nursing Care of the Childbearing Family 
Class 1, Lab. 3, Cr. 2 
This course provides an integrative, family-centered approach to the care of child-bearing women 
and newborns. Emphasis is placed on normal and high-risk pregnancies, normal and abnormal 
growth and development, family dynamics and the promotion of healthy behaviors in patients. 
Laboratory/clinical experiences provide the student an opportunity to apply theoretical concepts and 
implement safe patient care to mothers and newborns in selected settings. 
NURS 1217 
Medical Surgical Nursing I (5 body systems)  Class 4, Lab. 9, Cr. 7 
This course focuses on the care of adult patients with health alterations that require medical and/or 
surgical intervention. Emphasis is placed on the care of patients with alterations in selected body 
functions. Concepts of patient-centered care, cultural sensitivity, informatics, safe practice, and 
professionalism are integrated throughout the course. Laboratory/clinical experiences provide the 
student an opportunity to apply theoretical concepts and implement safe patient care to adults in a 
variety of settings. 
NURS 2102 
Nursing Care of the Childrearing Family 
Class 1, Lab. 3, Cr. 2 
This course provides an integrative, family-centered approach to the care of children. Emphasis is 
placed on normal growth and development, family dynamics, common pediatric disorders and 
the promotion of healthy behaviors in patients. Laboratory/clinical experiences provide the student 
an opportunity to apply theoretical concepts and implement safe patient care to children in selected 
settings. 
NURS 2137 
Medical Surgical Nursing II (5 body systems)  Class 3, Lab. 12, Cr. 7 
This course focuses on the care of adult patients with medical and/or surgical health alterations. 
Emphasis is placed on the care of patients with alterations in selected body functions. Concepts of 
health promotion, health education, evidence-based practice, and interdisciplinary collaboration will 
be integrated throughout the course. Laboratory/clinical experiences provide the student an 
opportunity to apply theoretical concepts and implement safe care to patients and selected groups in 
a variety of settings. 
NURS 2242 
Mental Behavioral Health Nursing 
Class 1, Lab. 3, Cr. 2 
This course focuses on the care of patients across the lifespan experiencing cognitive, mental 
and behavioral disorders. Emphasis is placed on management of patients facing emotional and 
psychological stressors as well as promoting and maintaining the mental health of individuals and 
families. Concepts of crisis intervention, therapeutic communication, anger management, and coping 
skills are integrated throughout the course. The community as a site for care and support services is
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
addressed. Clinical experiences provide the student an opportunity to apply theoretical concepts and 
implement safe patient care to patients in selected mental health settings. 
NURS 2243 
Transition to Professional Nursing Practice 
Class 1, Lab. 6, Cr. 3 
This course facilitates the transition of the student to the role of a professional nurse in 
the 
microsystem of a work unit. Emphasis is placed on contemporary issues and management concepts 
as well as developing the skills of delegation, conflict management, and leadership. Legal and ethical 
issues are discussed with a focus on personal accountability and responsibility. Standards of practice 
and the significance of functioning according to state regulations and statutes are analyzed. 
Laboratory/clinical experiences provide the student the opportunity to apply theoretical concepts while 
functioning in a leadership role. 
NURS 2244 
Nursing Care of Patients with 
Class 1.5, Lab. 7.5, Cr. 4 
Multisystem Disorders 
This course focuses on advanced concepts of nursing care as they relate to patients across the 
lifespan with complex, multisystem alterations in health. Emphasis is placed on implementing time 
management and organizational skills while managing the care of patients with multiple needs and 
collaborating with the interdisciplinary team. Complex clinical skills, as well as priority setting, clinical 
judgment, and tenets of legal and ethical practice, are integrated throughout the course. 
Laboratory/clinical experiences provide the student an opportunity to apply theoretical concepts and 
implement safe care to patients and selected groups in a variety of settings. 
 
NUTRITION 
NUTR 1113 
Nutrition 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Basic nutrition related to food and health problems in the present socioeconomic and cultural 
environment. Practical applications of the science of nutrition in planning diets for people of various 
ages and occupations. 
 
OFFICE INFORMATION SYSTEMS 
OIS 1113 
Medical Terminology 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Greek and Latin prefixes, suffixes, adjectives, and verbs as they are used in forming the names of 
major diseases, anatomical parts and other terms commonly used in the medical field. 
OIS 1133 
Professional Development 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Study of techniques and attitudes that lead to success in professional life. Covers the job campaign, 
professional attire, communication skills, planning and goal setting. 
OIS 2033 
Excel Spreadsheets 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
The purpose of this course is to provide students hands-on training using Excel for business and 
personal use. The student will create, edit and format spreadsheets and graphs, work with 
formulas and functions, sort, filter and create and edit macros. Students will use more advanced 
Worksheet tasks, What-if Analysis, exchange data with other programs, and incorporate Web 
information with Excel. 
 
OIS 2523 
Microsoft Word 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
The general course objective is to learn how to use the functions of the Microsoft Word program 
and be able to produce a variety of professional-looking documents with speed and accuracy 
utilizing the functions of the Word program. Students should be familiar with the keyboard before taking 
this class. 
 
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
PHILOSOPHY 
PHIL 1113 
Introduction to Philosophy 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
A general introduction to major areas of philosophical studies, including, but not limited to, 
metaphysics, epistemology, and ethics. No prerequisite. 
PHYSICAL SCIENCES/PHYSICS 
(Also see Chemistry, Engineering, Environmental Science, Geology) 
PHYS 1014 
General Physical Science 
Class 3, Lab. 2, Cr. 4 
This course is designed as an introductory survey course designed to meet the needs of the student 
required to specifically take the general physical science course (e.g., elementary education majors). 
Additionally, the course will meet the general education requirements for a physical science for non-
science majors. Areas studied are physics, chemistry, geology, meteorology, and astronomy. 
Prerequisite: MATH 0123 or above. 
PHYS 1024 
Introduction to Physics 
Class 3, Lab. 2, Cr. 4 
A course in introductory physics, covers the basic concepts, principles and history of physics. Course 
topics will include selected topics in: 1) Mechanics (Newton's Laws, Linear Motion, Momentum, 
Energy, Rotational Motion, Gravity, Projectile Motion, Elasticity and Oscillations, Waves and Sound), 
2) Properties of Matter (Physics of Matter and Heat), 3) Electricity (Electrical Forces and Fields, 
Electric Potential, Electrical Current and Circuits) and4) Optics (Reflection and Refraction of Light); 
Prerequisite or Corequisite: MATH 0115 or above 
PHYS 1104 
Introductory Astronomy 
Class 3, Lab. 2, Cr. 4 
An introduction to the concepts, both historical and modern, of astronomy. Topics include the solar 
system, telescopes, star properties, stellar evolution, galaxies, cosmology and 
exobiology. 
Prerequisite: concurrent enrollment in MATH 0123 or above. 
PHYS 1114 
Principles of Physics I 
Class 3, Lab. 2, Cr. 4 
For those students needing a laboratory science. Not for pre-engineers. A study of mechanics, fluid 
mechanics, and wave mechanics. Experiments are designed to supplement class work. Prerequisite: 
MATH 1513. MATH 1613 recommended but not required. 
PHYS 1214 
Principles of Physics II 
Class 3, Lab. 2, Cr. 4 
A study of thermal physics, electricity and magnetism, and optics. Prerequisite: PHYS 1114. 
PHYS 2015 
Engineering Physics I 
Class 4, Lab. 3, Cr. 5 
Physics for math, chemistry, physics and pre-engineering majors. Includes topics from 
mechanics and fluid mechanics. Emphasis will be placed on solving applied problems. Prerequisite: 
MATH 2145 or concurrent enrollment in MATH 2145. 
PHYS 2115 
Engineering Physics II 
Class 4, Lab. 3, Cr. 5 
Continuation of 2015. Includes topics from thermal physics and electricity and magnetism. 
Prerequisite: PHYS 2015, MATH 2145. 
PHYSICAL THERAPIST ASSISTANT 
 
PHTA 1113 
Introduction to Physical Therapy 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Includes history, philosophy, ethics, settings and trends in Physical Therapy. Delineation of roles 
of health care team and Physical Therapy personnel with interpersonal skills needed to function as 
a health care provider and team member. Principles and procedures of basic patient care skills 
and documentation are covered. Introduction to basic anatomical terminology common in Physical 
Therapy. Entry-level descriptions of primary practice areas. 
Prerequisite: Admission to PTA Program. 
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
PHTA 1292 
Physical Therapy Procedures I 
Class 1, Lab. 3, Cr. 2 
Principles, techniques, and laboratory practice of positioning, draping, pain assessment, body 
mechanics, transfers, assistive device measuring with gait training, superficial heat, cryotherapy, 
handwashing, vital signs, and documentation. Initiate techniques for interviewing patients, 
caregivers, and family for medical history.Prerequisite: Admission to PTA program and required 
PHTA courses. 
PHTA 2321 
Clinical Preparation I 
Class 1, Cr. 1 
This course is designed to provide tools for students and practitioners as they confront ethical 
dilemmas, moral controversy, function as a member of the health care team and face the challenges 
that the Physical Therapist Assistant and all health care professionals face in day to day clinical 
practice. This course also focuses on developing communication skills with staff an-d patients as 
well as developing career readiness within the healthcare care profession. Prerequisite: Successful 
completion of Introduction to Physical Therapy (PHTA 1113) and Physical Therapy Procedures I 
(PHTA 1292) 
PHTA 2333 
Clinical Experience I 
Lab. 9, Cr. 3 
Supervised clinical experience including application of physical therapy services primarily in an 
outpatient orthopedic setting. Prerequisite: Required PHTA courses. 
PHTA 2343 
Physical Therapy Procedures II 
Class 2, Lab. 3, Cr. 3 
Theory, physiology, and application of heat, cold, light, water, electricity, mechanical 
compression/distraction in therapeutic treatment, measurement of joint range of motion 
(goniometry)and manual muscle testing. Prerequisite: Required PHTA courses. 
PHTA 2353 
Neurology & Pathology 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
A study of the clinical relevance of neuroanatomy and physiology including the organization and 
function of the human nervous system. Prerequisite: Required PHTA courses. 
PHTA 2363 
Kinesiology for Physical Therapy 
Class 2, Lab. 3, Cr. 3 
A study of anatomical structures and movement as related to physical therapy procedures. Explores 
basic principles of the relationship between joint motion and mechanical action. Clinical focus is 
application of principles with emphasis on the analysis and biomechanics of all human motion. 
Address the study and analysis of joint mobilization techniques. Prerequisite: Required PHTA 
courses. 
PHTA 2388 
Orthopedic Rehabilitation 
Class 6, Lab. 6, Cr. 8 
A study of selected anatomical, physiological and pathological factors which relate to specific clinical 
conditions seen in orthopedic physical therapy. This will include the application of orthopedic 
assessment strategies and exercise interventions. Clinical focus includes designing, implementing, 
and modifying a treatment plan with appropriate time management and documentation. Prerequisite: 
Required PHTA courses. 
PHTA 2414 
Rehabilitation 
Class 2, Lab. 6, Cr. 4 
Examine common neurological conditions encountered in general clinical practices. Also includes 
common pediatric conditions treated by physical therapy and knowledge or normal human 
development and primitive reflexes. Identify assessment and general treatment strategies for 
improving motor control, motor learning, balance, gait and posture. Relates proper use of prosthetics, 
orthotics, and the prescriptive wheelchair. Includes knowledge and application for assessment of the 
environment for accessibility. Prerequisite: Required PHTA courses. 
PHTA 2432 
Pathology for the Physical Therapy Assistant 
Class 2, Cr. 2 
This course is the study of diseases and medical conditions that are common comorbidities in 
individuals receiving physical therapy. Students will learn the pathophysiology of the disease and the 
impact of selected medical or surgical conditions with emphasis on improving the impairments and 
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
functional limitations of patients who receive physical therapy services. Topics will include 
pathologies of the cardiovascular, pulmonary, integumentary, metabolic, endocrine, gastrointestinal, 
genitourinary, and lymphatic systems. Prerequisites: Successful completion of Introduction to 
Physical Therapy (PHTA 1113) and Physical Therapy Procedures I (PHTA 1292) 
PHTA 2434 
Clinical Experience II 
Lab. 12, Cr. 4 
Supervised clinical experience and application of physical therapy services. Group discussion of 
selected clinical topics in a seminar format. Prerequisite: Required PHTA courses. 
PHTA 2473 
Selected Topics in Physical Therapy 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Study and/or analysis of selected topics in physical therapy, including cardiovascular and pulmonary 
diseases and treatments, obstetrics, burns, arthritis, wound care, standard precautions & sterile 
technique, identifying inpatient & ICU equipment, recognizing & reporting critical changes in patient 
symptoms, aquatic physical therapy, development of professional presentation of chosen physical 
therapy project, and development of orthopedic training to nursing students. Prerequisite: Required 
PHTA courses. 
PHTA 2534 
Clinical Experience III 
Lab. 12, Cr. 4 
Supervised clinical experience including application of physical therapy services primarily in an 
Inpatient (acute, inpatient rehab) or Skilled Nursing setting. Other settings such as pediatrics, home 
health, and outpatient neuro settings can be approved by the ACCE if appropriate. 
Prerequisite: Required PHTA courses. 
 
PLANT SCIENCE 
PLNT 1213 
Introduction to Plant and Soil Systems 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
General agriculture plant science course. Consideration is given to world population and food supply, 
factors influencing plant growth and distribution, plant origin and classification, functions of plant 
organs in relations to management, plant nutrition, propagation and improvement, cropping systems, 
hazards, tillage, and harvesting and utilization of economic plants. 
PLNT 2013 
Applied Plant Science 
Class 2, Lab. 2. Cr. 3 
Climate, edaphic, biotic and genetic factors determine crop adaptation and distribution; climates of 
the U.S. and world and adapted species. 
 
POLITICAL SCIENCE 
POLS 1011 
Oklahoma State and Local Government 
Class 1, Cr. 1 
A survey of the organization, operation, and structure of the governments of the State of Oklahoma, 
primarily focuses on its various local government entities and the three branches of the state 
government; achieved through classroom based academic functions, participation in simulation of 
government functions, participation in lectures facilitated by elected officials, military and law 
enforcement personnel, among other dignitaries, and being immersed in a challenging leadership 
development environment. 
POLS 1012 
Oklahoma State and Local Government 
Class 2, Cr. 2 
A survey of the organization, operation, and structure of the governments of the State of Oklahoma, 
primarily focuses on its various local government entities and the three branches of the state 
government; achieved through classroom based academic functions, participation in simulation of 
government functions, participation in lectures facilitated by elected officials, military and law 
enforcement personnel, among other dignitaries, and being immersed in a challenging leadership 
development environment. 
POLS 1013 
Oklahoma State and Local Government 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
A survey of the organization, operation, and structure of the governments of the State of Oklahoma, 
primarily focuses on its various local government entities and the three branches of the state 
government; achieved through classroom based academic study, evaluation and research, 
simulation of government functions, participation in lectures facilitated by elected officials, military and 
law enforcement personnel, among other dignitaries, and being immersed in a challenging leadership 
development environment. 
POLS 1113 
American Government 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
This course is a study of the American constitutional form of government, which will also include 
emphasis on federalism, political parties, interest groups, elections, landmark court cases, and the 
roles and responsibilities of the three branches of the federal government. Prerequisite: No reading 
deficiency 
POLS 2023 
State Government 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
This course is a study on American federalism. The course will primarily focus on the differences 
among state governments on the following subjects: gubernatorial power, legislative power, judicial 
power, home rule, county authority, direct democracy, and the political structure of municipalities. 
Prerequisite: POLS 1113. 
POLS 2033 
Public Administration 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Public Administration is a course that is primarily focused on the implementation of public policy. In 
that regard, this course covers subjects such as bureaucratic politics, intergovernmental relations, 
budgeting, personnel, ethics, management, and organizational theory. 
POLS 2043 
Introduction to International Relations 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
This course is a survey of political science in the fields of political theory, comparative 
government, and international politics which seek to develop an understanding of the value 
system and challenges of communism, fascism, socialism, and capitalism. Prerequisite: POLS 1113. 
POLS 2053 
Introduction to Law 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Introduction to Law is designed to explore the legal interpretations of the United States Constitution 
and the application of those decisions to the American political culture. In addition, the course will 
introduce the concept of legal reasoning as developed in the western legal systems and include 
practical legal research experience in selected issues of public law. 
POLS 2063 
Introduction to Comparative Politics 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
This course is a comparative study of the political processes and institutions of contemporary 
societies. The course will also introduce the terminologies and methodologies of comparative politics. 
 
PROCESS TECHNOLOGY 
PTEC 1003 
Introduction to Process Technology 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Introduction to chemical and refinery plant operations. Topics include process technician duties, 
responsibilities and expectations, plant organization, plant process and utility systems and the 
physical and mental requirements of the process technician. Prerequisites Removal of English 
deficiency, if applicable. 
PTEC 1213 
Instrumentation 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
A study of the instruments and control systems used in the process industry, including 
terminology, primary variables, symbology, control loops and basic trouble shooting. Prerequisite or 
co-requisite: MATH 1513. 
PTEC 1513 
Internship in Process Technology 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
This course is designed to provide students with hands-on experience in a process industry 
setting. To be taken during the last semester of the program or the semester following completion of 
all other PTEC course requirements. To be arranged and approve by the program coordinator. 
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
Prerequisites: PTEC 2013, PTEC 2134, PTEC 2224, MATH 1513, CHEM 1215. May be taken 
concurrently with PTEC 2134 and PTEC 2224. 
PTEC 2013 
Safety, Health and Environment 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
The course is designed as an introductory course, providing a means for emphasizing strong skill 
development and knowledge to alter attitudes and behaviors required for safe work habits. 
Strengthens the focus on safety, health and environment issues that relate to daily job tasks that also 
meet regulatory compliance. The equipment used to maintain a safe, healthy work place. The role of 
the process technician’s knowledge of a plant’s safety and environmental programs and components 
is identified. Prerequisite: PTEC 1003 or permission of program coordinator. 
PTEC 2023 
Process Quality 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
The course is a study of the background and application of quality concepts. Topics include team 
skills, quality tools, statistics, economics and continuous improvement. Prerequisites: PTEC 1003 or 
permission of program coordinator. 
PTEC 2124 
Process Technology I - Equipment 
Class 4, Cr. 4 
The course is a study of process equipment components, the proper terminology for process 
equipment components, basic functions of process equipment while relating scientific principles 
involved with process equipment. Additional training occurs with hands-on use of common process 
equipment through the laboratory. Co-requisite or Prerequisites: PTEC 1003. 
PTEC 2134 
Process Technology II - Systems 
Class 4, Cr. 4 
The course is a study of the various systems involved in the process industry, the equipment and 
instruments associated with those systems, and those variables that need to be controlled to optimize 
process and safety. Basic theory of each type of system is examined with attention to purpose and 
economic consideration. Process flows are followed using PFDs and P&IDs. Prerequisites: PTEC 
1003, PTEC 1213, PTEC 2013, PTEC 2023, and PTEC 2124. 
PTEC 2224 
Process Technology III - Operations 
Class 4, Cr. 4 
A capstone course for the process technology curriculum. This course unifies concepts and 
information gained from the other six process technology courses. The course integrates important 
concepts from these courses to build a more complete picture that involves the technology role and 
value when working with equipment, instrumentation, process quality, health and safety. A more 
complete picture of how the technician’s daily actions keep a process moving in an economically 
viable, ethically sound, and constantly improving direction is gained to help carry the student into 
internship and future work. Prerequisites: PTEC 1003, PTEC 1213, PTEC 2013, PTEC 2023, and 
PTEC 2124. Co-requisite: PTEC 2134. 
PSYCHOLOGY 
PSYC 1113 
General Psychology 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
An introduction course in psychology. Its purpose is to train the student in the solution of social 
problems, to aid the student in understanding his own behavior and the behavior of those people 
with whom he associates. It lends itself to the needs of students as a terminal education course or 
as a prerequisite to further study in the field of psychology. Prerequisite: No Reading Deficiency & no 
composition deficiency. 
PSYC 1123 
Psychology Self Management 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Provides an introduction to general behavior theory and self-management techniques. It includes 
exercises designed to develop skills in self-analysis, goal-setting and self-determination. Orientation 
of the course is behavioristic and empirical. Prerequisite: PSYC 1113 or consent of instructor. 
PSYC 1603 Developmental Psychology 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Survey of the psychological changes across the life span; the changes in cognitive, social, emotional 
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
and psychological development from conception to death. Prerequisite: PSYC 1113. 
PSYC 2743 
Social Psychology 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Introductory course in the study of human social behavior as affected by the real, imagined, or implied 
presence of others. Topics include research methods, social perception, interpersonal relations, 
attitudes, and sexual behavior. Prerequisite: PSYC 1113. 
 
PSYC 2753 
Psychology and Adjustment 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
A study of human personality dynamics and adjustment in terms of psychological and social variables. 
Prerequisite: PSYC 1113. 
 
READING – See Curriculum and Instruction Education 
 
 
SPANISH 
SPAN 1113 
Spanish I 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
This course may be taken for humanities, required elective, or major/minor credit. It is designed for 
students who need to begin and develop their ability to communicate in Spanish. After completion, 
students will be able to comprehend, speak, read, and write basic Spanish, as well as gain 
knowledge of an appreciation for Hispanic geography and culture. 
 
SPAN 1123 
Spanish II 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
A continuation of skill building activities in 1113 that develop the ability to speak, read, write, and 
comprehend everyday Spanish. Prerequisite: SPAN 1113 or 1⁄2 unit of high school Spanish. 
 
SOCIAL SCIENCE 
SOSC 1001-1004 Social Science — Special Problems 
Cr. 1-4 
Designed primarily for adult education with credit varying from one to four hours. May be taken more 
than once. Maximum credit is four hours. 
 
SOCIOLOGY 
SOCI 1111 
Social Work Field Experience 
Lab. 3, Cr. 1 
Designed to give the student some experience working with and for others in a volunteer capacity 
and evaluating their experience. Prerequisite: SOCI 2013 concurrently or consent of the instructor. 
SOCI 1113 
Introduction to Sociology 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
The purpose of this course is to familiarize the student with some of the keys to understanding social 
life. Sociology stresses how society and social groups we belong to affect our lives. Both the social 
structure and the social interaction will be covered in this course. Sociology helps to explain 
contemporary life and each individual’s own place in it. Sociology offers a set of tools for looking at 
the world that can help all of us to better understand both individual behaviors and the broader context 
in which these behaviors occur. This class will prepare the student to take advance study topics in 
the field. 
SOCI 2013 
Introduction to Social Work 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Offers a comprehensive view of the social work profession. It gives a framework for integrating social 
work information concerning special problems, populations, different social work settings, levels of 
practice, professional preparation for practice and the range of the knowledge, values, and skills 
needed for social work experience. 
                                  
              
 
 
 
 
 
SOCI 2023 
Basic Helping Skills 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
This course is designed to enable the student to learn and practice a set of skills basic to the helping 
professions. It will provide a practicum experience on which the student can draw as he/she tries to 
understand concepts and principles basic to the helping role. 
SOCI 2113 
Marriage and the Family 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
The course will provide a framework for understanding marriage and the family system in its multiple 
contexts and cultures. Issues and trends of family mobility, composition, and divorce will be explored. 
A balanced presentation represents various disciplines, with emphasis placed on cultural, structural 
and interpersonal sources and choices. 
SOCI 2123 
Social Problems 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
The purpose of this course is to provide students with a broad overview of major social problems and 
the primary conceptual frameworks currently used to understand their nature, causes, possible 
solutions and impact on society and diverse groups. 
SOCI 2353 
Cultural Anthropology 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
The purpose of this course is to examine humanity from a holistic approach. It looks at common 
denominators as well as differences in life experiences. The course will cover core concepts, 
approaches, and highlight the scientific nature of anthropology. 
 
SOIL SCIENCES 
SOIL 2124 
Fundamentals of Soil Science 
Class 3, Lab. 2, Cr. 4 
The origin, formation, composition and classification of soils and the principal chemical, physical and 
biological properties of soils in relation to plant growth and land use. 
 
SPEECH COMMUNICATIONS 
SPCH 2713 
Introduction to Speech Communication 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
Basic course in oral communication with emphasis on communication theory, listening skills, 
organizational methods, and delivery techniques. Practice is offered through preparation and 
presentation of various types of speeches. 
 
SPORTS MANAGEMENT 
(See Management) 
 
 
STATISTICS 
STAT 2023 
Elementary Statistics for Business and Economics 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
The primary objective of the statistics course is to familiarize students with the terminology, 
techniques, and approaches in statistical analysis. Topics to be covered in the course may include the 
meaning of statistics, scientific decision making, frequency distributions, probability, sampling, 
hypothesis testing, and regression/correlation analysis. Prerequisites: Algebra or Sophomore 
standing. 
 
THEATRE 
TH 2413 
Introduction to Theatre 
Class 3, Cr. 3 
A survey of the theatrical art as it has reflected and contributed to the development of civilization. 
May be used as part of the student’s humanities hours within the general education requirements. 
Theatre is examined from the perspectives of audience, playwright, director, actor, and designer. 
