ACC 2213 — PRINCIPLES OF ACCOUNTING I — This course is a study of the fundamentals and application
of financial accounting principles that relate to business. The topics to be covered include the accounting
cycle and the accounting systems for service and merchandising businesses. Three semester hours credit.
ACC 2223 — PRINCIPLES OF ACCOUNTING II — (Prerequisite: ACC 1213). This course is a continuation of
ACC 2213. The topics to be covered include corporate accounting concepts, managerial accounting concepts
and internal business decision making. Three semester hours credit.
AGR 1112 — SURVEY OF AGRICULTURE — An inroductory course covering the general functions, organization, and operation of the agricultural industry in both national and international settings.
AGR 2314 — BASIC SOILS — This course is a general course in soils designed to give the student a basic
understanding of all-important phases of the subject, including soil genesis, morphology, classification, and
the physical, chemical and biological aspects of soils as applied to soil fertility. Soil management, including
fertilization and liming of soils, is also included. Three hours lecture. Two hours lab. Four semester hours credit.
ART 1113 — ART APPRECIATION — This course is designed to provide an understanding and appreciation of
the visual arts. Three semester hours credit.
ART 1313 — DRAWING I — This course is an introduction to the basic principles and materials of drawing.
Emphasis will be on observational drawing and black and white media. Three semester hours credit.
ART 1323 — DRAWING II — This course is a continuation of skills from Drawing 1 with an introduction to
color and further study of composition. Three semester hours credit.
ART 1433 — DESIGN I — This course is designed to provide students with an understanding of the elements and
principles of design to enable development of an informed, intuitive sense as well as a highly informed skills
base/ methodology involving black and white design problems which apply principles and Introduction to
the fundamentals of two-dimensional design with emphasis in black and white media. Three semester hours credit.
ART 1443 — DESIGN II — This course is designed to provide students with an understanding of color theory
and applications of color so that there begins to be an informed as well as intuitive sense of seeing, mixing,
and applying color and light to design problems. Continuation of Design I with emphasis in color theory. Three semester hours credit.
ART 1453 — THREE DIMENSIONAL DESIGN — This course is designed to provide students with an
understanding of spatial form in three dimensions through the use of applied design elements and principles
to studio problems in mixed media. Three semester hours credit.
EAST CENTRAL COMMUNITY COLLEGE 130
ART 2513 — PAINTING I — This course is an introduction to painting compositions and techniques. Three semester hours credit.
ART 2713 — ART HISTORY I — This course is a survey course of historical background of art forms from
Prehistoric to Renaissance. Emphasis is on painting, architecture, and sculpture as related to history. Three semester hours credit.
ART 2723 — ART HISTORY II — This course is a survey course of historical background of art forms from
Prehistoric to Renaissance. Emphasis is on painting, architecture, and sculpture as related to history. Three semester hours credit.
BIO 1111 — PRINCIPLES OF BIOLOGY I, Laboratory — This course is a laboratory course for non-science
majors that contains experiments and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced in BIO 1113 Principles
of Biology I, Lecture. One semester hour credit.
BIO 1113 — PRINCIPLES OF BIOLOGY I, Lecture — This course is a lecture course for non-science majors
that provides an introduction to the basic principles of modern biology and their relevance to modern life.
Emphasis is placed on the nature and history of scientific thought, basic biological chemistry, cell structure
and processes, genetics. Three semester hours credit.
BIO 1114 — PRINCIPLES OF BIOLOGY I, Lecture and Laboratory — This course is a combined lecture and
laboratory course for non-science majors that introduces the basic principles of modern biology, and their
relevance to modern life. Emphasis is placed on the nature and history of scientific thought, basic biological
chemistry, cell structure and processes, genetics. Labs associated with this course contain experiments and
exercises that reinforce the principles introduced in lecture classes. Four semester hours credit.
BIO 1121 — PRINCIPLES OF BIOLOGY II, Laboratory — This course is a laboratory course for non-science
majors that contains experiments and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced in BIO 1123 Principles
of Biology II, Lecture. One semester hour credit.
BIO 1123 — PRINCIPLES OF BIOLOGY II, Lecture — This course is a lecture course for non-science majors that
emphasizes the survey of the diversity of life, ecology, evolution, and an overview of organ systems. Three semester hours credit.
BIO 1124 — PRINCIPLES OF BIOLOGY II, Lecture and Laboratory — This course is a combined lecture and
laboratory course for non-science majors that emphasizes the survey of the diversity of life, ecology, evolution,
and an overview of organ systems. Labs associated with this course contain experiments and exercises that
reinforce the principles introduced in lecture classes. Four semester hours credit.
BIO 1131 — GENERAL BIOLOGY I LAB —This course is a laboratory course for science majors that contains
experiments and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced in BIO 1133 General Biology I. One semester hour credit.
BIO 1133 — GENERAL BIOLOGY I — This course is a lecture course for science majors that includes study of
the scientific method, chemistry relevant to biological systems, cell structure and physiology, cell processes
including photosynthesis and cellular respiration, cell division, genetics, and molecular genetics. Three semester hours credit.
BIO 1134 — GENERAL BIOLOGY I, Lecture and Laboratory — This course is a combined lecture and laboratory
course for science majors that includes study of the scientific method, chemistry relevant to biological systems,
cell structure and function, cell processes including photosynthesis and cellular respiration, cell division,
genetics, and molecular genetics. Labs associated with this course contain experiments and exercises that
reinforce the principles introduced in lecture classes. Four semester hours credit.
BIO 1141 — GENERAL BIOLOGY II LAB — This course is a laboratory course for science majors that contains
experiments and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced in BIO 1143 General Biology II. One semester hour credit.
BIO 1143 — GENERAL BIOLOGY II — This course is a lecture course for science majors that reinforces concepts
introduced in BIO 1133 General Biology I, while emphasizing the diversity of life. Topics covered include
adaptation by natural selection, classification, ecology, detailed consideration of each group of organisms
and viruses, study of animals and plants including their basic anatomy and physiology. Three semester hours credit.
BIO 1144 — GENERAL BIOLOGY II, Lecture and Laboratory — A combined lecture and laboratory course
for science majors that reinforces concepts introduced in BIO 1134 General Biology I, while emphasizing
the diversity of life. Topics covered include evolution, classification, ecology, detailed consideration of each
group of organisms and viruses, study of animals and plants including their basic anatomy and physiology.
Labs associated with this course contain experiments and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced in
lecture classes. Four semester hours credit.
BIO 1211 — ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE, Laboratory — This course is a laboratory course that contains
experiments and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced in BIO 1213 Environmental Science,
Lecture. One semester hour credit.
BIO 1213 — ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE, Lecture — This course is a lecture course covering the relevance of
ecological principles to environmental problems and the relationship of humans to their environment with
emphasis on preservation of environmental quality. Three semester hours credit.
BIO 1214 — ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE, Lecture and Laboratory — This course is a combined lecture
and laboratory course covering the relevance of ecological principles to environmental problems and the
relationship of humans to their environment with emphasis on preservation of environmental quality. Labs
associated with this course contain experiments and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced in
lecture classes. Four semester hours credit.
BIO 1311 — BOTANY I LAB — This course is a laboratory course that contains experiments and exercises that
reinforce the principles introduced in BIO 1313 Botany I. One semester hour credit.
BIO 1313 — BOTANY I — This course is a lecture course covering the representative groups of the plant
kingdom, their anatomy, physiology, taxonomy, and economic importance. Three semester hours credit.
BIO 1321 — BOTANY II LAB — This course is a laboratory course that contains experiments and exercises that
reinforce the principles introduced in BIO 1323 Botany II. One semester hour credit.
BIO 1323 — BOTANY II — This course is a lecture course that emphasizes classification and identification of
plants. Pre- requisite: BIO 1313/1311. Three semester hours credit.
BIO 1613 — NUTRITION — This course is a lecture course covering the nutrients required for normal growth
and prevention of major chronic disease, and applied to the selection of food for ingestion, the metabolic
process of digestion, assimilation, and absorption and their applications for healthcare providers. Three semester hours credit.
BIO 2311 — DENDROLOGY LAB — This course is a laboratory course that contains experiments and exercises
that reinforce the principles introduced in BIO 2313 Dendrology. One semester hour credit.
BIO 2313 — DENDROLOGY — This course is a lecture course concerning the taxonomy, morphology, ecology,
and identification of woody plants. Three semester hours credit.
BIO 2314 — DENDROLOGY W/LAB — This course is a combined lecture and laboratory course concerning
the taxonomy, morphology, ecology, and identification of woody plants. Labs associated with this course
contain experiments and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced in lecture classes. Four semester hours credit.
BIO 2411 — ZOOLOGY I LAB — This course is a laboratory course that contains experiments and exercises that
reinforce the principles introduced in BIO 2413 Zoology I. One semester hour credit.
BIO 2413 — ZOOLOGY I — This course is a lecture course that includes in-depth studies of phylogeny and
classification systems, protozoa and major invertebrate phyla. Three semester hours credit.
BIO 2421 — ZOOLOGY II LAB —This course is a laboratory course that contains experiments and exercises that
reinforce the principles introduced in BIO 2423 Zoology II. One semester hour credit.
BIO 2423 — ZOOLOGY II — This course is a lecture course that includes in-depth studies of animal phyla with
emphasis on the vertebrates and animal systems. Three semester hours credit.
BIO 2511 — ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY I LAB — This course is a laboratory course that contains
experiments and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced in BIO 2513 Anatomy and Physiology I. One semester hour credit.
BIO 2513 — ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY I — This course is a lecture course that covers the anatomical
and physiological study of the human body as an integrated whole. The course includes detailed studies of:
biological principles; tissues; and the integumentary, skeletal, muscular and nervous systems. Prerequisite:
Grade of C or better in the following courses: General Biology (BIO 1133 & 1131 or BIO 1143 & 1141), Zoology
(BIO 2413 & 2411 or BIO 2423 & 2421) or General Chemistry (CHE 1213 & 1211), Microbiology (BIO 2923 &
2921) or ACT science score of 18, or prior admittance into either the Associated Degree Nursing Program or
Surgical Technology Program at ECCC. Three semester hours credit.
BIO 2514 — ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY I, Lecture and Laboratory — This course is a combined lecture
and laboratory course that covers the anatomical and physiological study of the human body as an integrated
whole. The course includes detailed studies of: biological principles; tissues; and the integumentary, skeletal,
muscular and nervous systems. Labs associated with this course contain experiments and exercises that
reinforce the principles introduced in lecture classes. Prerequisite: Grade of C or better in any of the following
courses: General Biology (BIO 1133 & 1131 or BIO 1143 & 1141), Zoology (BIO 2413 & 2411 or BIO 2423 &
2421) or General Chemistry (CHE 1213 & 1211), Microbiology (BIO 2923 & 2921) or ACT science score of 18,
or prior admittance into either the Associated Degree Nursing Program or Surgical Technology Program at
ECCC. Four semester hours credit.
BIO 2521 — ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY II LAB — This course is a laboratory course that contains
experiments and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced in BIO 2523 Anatomy and Physiology II. One semester hour credit.
BIO 2523 — ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY II — This course is a lecture course that includes detailed studies
of the anatomy and physiology of the human special senses and the endocrine, circulatory, respiratory,
digestive, and urinary systems, as well as reproduction and development. Prerequisite: Grade of C or better
in Anatomy& Physiology I (BIO 2513 & 2511). Four semester hours credit.
BIO 2524 ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY II, Lecture and Laboratory — This course is a combined lecture
and laboratory course that includes detailed studies of the anatomy and physiology of human endocrine,
cardiovascular, lymphatic and immune, respiratory, digestive, and urinary systems, as well as reproduction
and development. Labs associated with this course contain experiments and exercises that reinforce the
principles introduced in lecture classes. Prerequisite: Grade of C or better in Human Anatomy and Physiology
I (BIO 2513 & 2511). Four semester hours credit.
BIO 2921 — MICROBIOLOBY LAB — This course is a laboratory course which provides experiments that
reinforce principles introduced in the lecture to include fundamental laboratory techniques in lab safety,
microscopy, culturing and identification of microbes, and effectiveness of antimicrobial agents. One semester hour credit.
BIO 2923 — MICROBIOLOGY — This course is a lecture course providing a survey of the microbes (microscopic
organisms) with emphasis on those affecting other forms of life, especially man. Prerequisite: Grade of C or
better in any of the following courses: General Biology (BIO 1133 & 1131 or BIO 1143 & 1141), Zoology (BIO
2413 & 2411 or BIO 2423 & 2421) or General Chemistry (CHE 1213 & 1211), Anatomy and Physiology I ( BIO
2513 & BIO 2511) or General Botany (BIO 1313 & BIO 1311) or ACT science score of 18, or prior admittance
into either the Associated Degree Nursing Program or Surgical Technology Program at ECCC. Three semester hours credit.
BIO 2924 — MICROBIOLOGY, Lecture and Laboratory — This course is a lecture course providing a survey
of the microbes (microscopic organisms) with emphasis on those affecting other forms of life, especially
man. Labs in this course provide experiments that reinforce principles introduced in the lecture to include
fundamental laboratory techniques in lab safety, microscopy, culturing and identification of microbes, and
effectiveness of antimicrobial agents. Prerequisite: Grade of C or better in any of the following courses:
General Biology (BIO 1133 & 1131 or BIO 1143 & 1141), Zoology (BIO 2413 & 2411 or BIO 2423 & 2421) or
General Chemistry (CHE 1213 & 1211), Anatomy and Physiology I ( BIO 2513 & BIO 2511) or General Botany
(BIO 1313 & BIO 1311) or ACT science score of 18, or prior admittance into either the Associated Degree
Nursing Program or Surgical Technology Program at ECCC. Four semester hours credit.
BAD 1113 — INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS — This course is designed to introduce students to the basic
concepts of business. Main topics include current business and economic environment, entrepreneurship,
marketing, management, financial management, and business careers. Three semester hours credit.
BAD 1121 — BUSINESS SEMINAR I — This course is designed to coordinate the various business-related
student activities to the local level. It promotes leadership and professionalism in civic and social functions,
which includes student participation and guest speakers. One hour lecture. One semester hour credit.
BAD 2323 — BUSINESS STATISTICS - This course is an Introduction to statistical methods of describing,
summarizing, comparing, and interpreting data to include probability distributions, sampling, estimation,
confidence intervals, and hypothesis testing. Topics include: Describe data sets, calculate measures of central
tendency and variability, apply probability calculations, differentiate between continuous and discrete
distributions, calculate confidence intervals, perform hypothesis testing. (Pre-requisites: MAT 1313 College
Algebra or MAT1343 Pre-Calculus.) Three lecture hours. Three semester hours.
BAD 2413 — THE LEGAL ENVIRONMENT OF BUSINESS I — This course is an introduction to interrelationships
of law and society, jurisprudence and business. Topics include and introduction to law, law of contracts,
agency, and employment. Three semester hours credit.
BAD 2513 — PRINCIPLES OF MANAGEMENT — This course is a study of basic management principles
as applied to the functions of planning, organizing, directing, controlling, and coordinating with effective
communication in business enterprise. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
BAD 2613 — ENTREPRENEURSHIP — This course is an applied business administration course designed
to integrate the key principles of business planning, marketing, staffing, financing, management, and
information systems to the task of starting, operating, and/or expanding a small business. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
BAD 2713 — PRINCIPLES OF REAL ESTATE — This course is an introduction to the nature of the real estate
market, types of ownership of property, contracts, and methods of transferal of title. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
CHE 1211 — GENERAL CHEMISTRY I LAB — This course is a laboratory course that contains experiments
and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced in CHE 1213 General Chemistry I. Co-requisite: CHE
1213 General Chemistry I. One semester hour credit.
CHE 1213 — GENERAL CHEMISTRY I — This course is a lecture course that covers the fundamental principles
of chemistry and their application. Chemical nomenclature, chemical reactions, stoichiometry, atomic
structure, bonding, theories, energy, periodic properties, and gas laws are among the topics discussed in
depth. Co-requisite: CHE 1211 General Chemistry I Lab and MAT 1313 College Algebra or MAT 1343 Precalculus. Three semester hours credit.
CHE 1221 — GENERAL CHEMISTRY II LAB — This course is a laboratory course that contains experiments
and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced in CHE 1223 General Chemistry II. Co-requisite: CHE
1223 General Chemistry II. One semester hour credit.
CHE 1223 — GENERALCHEMISTRY II — This course is a lecture course that covers solutions, kinetics,
equilibria, thermodynamics, acid-base chemistry, and electrochemistry, Prerequisite: Grade of C or better in
General Chemistry I (CHE 1213 & 1211). Co-requisite: CHE 1221 General Chemistry II Lab. Three semester hours credit.
CHE 2421 — ORGANIC CHEMISTRY I LAB —A laboratory course that acquaints students with important
manipulations, and procedures, and the preparation and study of organic compounds being introduced in
CHE 2423 Organic Chemistry I. Co-requisite: CHE 2423 Organic Chemistry I. One semester hour credit.
CHE 2423 — ORGANIC CHEMISTRY I — This course is a lecture course that covers carbon chemistry, bonding
structure, and behavior, aliphatic compounds, stereochemistry reaction mechanisms, and an introduction to
spectroscopic methods. Prerequisite: Grade of C or better in General Chemistry II (CHE 1223 & 1221). Co-
EAST CENTRAL COMMUNITY COLLEGE 134
requisite: CHE 2421 Organic Chemistry I Lab. Three semester hours credit.
CHE 2431 — ORGANIC CHEMISTRY II LAB — A laboratory course that acquaints students with important
manipulations and procedures, as well as the preparation and study of aromatic and complex organic
compounds being introduced in CHE 2433 Organic Chemistry II. Co-requisite: CHE 2433 Organic Chemistry
II. One semester hour credit.
CHE 2433 — ORGANIC CHEMISTRY II — A lecture course that covers spectroscopy, aromatic compounds,
carbonyl compounds and other complex compounds, with emphasis on reactions, and reaction mechanisms..
Prerequisite: Grade of C or better in Organic Chemistry I (CHE 2423 & 2421). Co-requisite: CHE 2431 Organic
Chemistry II Lab. Three semester hours credit.
COM 2463 — WRITING FOR THE ELECTRONIC MEDIA — Introductory course to teach the basic skills of
broadcast writing, reporting, and production.
CSC 1113 — COMPUTER CONCEPTS — This course is an introductory digital competency course which
includes concepts, terminology, operating systems, electronic communications, security risks, digital ethics,
and applications. Concepts are demonstrated and supplemented by hands-on computer use. Three hours
lecture with open lab. Three semester hours credit.
CSC 1123 — COMPUTER APPLICATIONS I — This course is designed to teach computer applications to
include: word processing, electronic spreadsheet, database management, presentation design, and electronic
communications. Three hours lecture with open lab. Three semester hours credit.
CSC 1133 - COMPUTER APPLICATIONS II - This course is a continuation of CSC 1123 with concentration on
advanced computer applications and emerging technology. (Prerequisite: CSC 1123). Three hours lecture
with open lab. Three semester hours credit.
CSC 1213 — VISUAL BASIC COMPUTER PROGRAMMING I — This course is designed to introduce the
writing of event-driven programs using the Visual Basic computer programming language with emphasis on
problem solving, documentation, program statements, algorithms, and common routines. Course has lecture
with integrated lab components. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
CSC 1613 — COMPUTER PROGRAMMING I — This course is an introduction to problem-solving methods
and algorithm development; designing, debugging, branching, looping, scope rules, functions, input/
output manipulation (to include text files), simple arrays, and a variety of applications in an object-oriented
programming language. Course has lecture with integrated lab components. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
CSC 2134 — PROGRAMMING I with C++ — This course is an in introduction to problem solving methods,
algorithm development, designing, debugging, and documentation in C++ language with a variety of
applications including I/O statements, operators, conditional, looping, methods/functions, and array
processing. Prerequisite: previous programming experience. Three-hour lecture and a required lab component. Four semester hours credit.
CSC 2144 — PROGRAMMING II with C++ — This course is designed to be a continuation of program and
algorithm development and analysis, search/sort methods, dynamic memory management, abstract data
types and object-oriented design, designing and debugging larger programs. Prerequisite: CSC 2134. Three
hour lecture and a required lab component. Four semester hours credit.
CRJ 1313 — INTRODUCTION TO CRIMINAL JUSTICE — This course is a study of history, development, and
philosophy of law enforcement in a democratic society, introduction to agencies involved in the administration
of criminal justice; career orientation. Three hours lecture. Three semester hours credit.
CRJ 1323 — POLICE ADMINISTRATION AND ORGANIZATION — This course is a study of principles of
organization and administration in law enforcement as applied to law enforcement agencies; introduction to
concepts of organizational behavior. Three hours lecture. Three semester hours credit.
CRJ 1363 — INTRODUCTION TO CORRECTIONS — This course is an overview of the correctional field; its
origins, historical and philosophical background, development, current status, relationship with other facets
of the criminal justice system. Three hours lecture. Three semester hours.
CRJ 1383 — CRIMINOLOGY — This course is the study of criminal behavior to include theories, statistics, and
trends of criminal behavior. Three hours lecture. Three semester hours.
CRJ 2213 — TRAFFIC LAW — This course is an examination of the role of law enforcement in coping with
traffic problems. Emphasis is placed on the history, development, and enforcement of statutes pertaining to
motor vehicles. Three hours lecture. Three semester hours.
CRJ 2313 — POLICE OPERATIONS — This course is a study of the operation of law enforcement agencies.
Particular emphasis is placed on the functions of the patrol division. Three hours lecture. Three semester hours.
CRJ 2323 — CRIMINAL LAW — This course is a study of the basic elements of substantive criminal law
including defenses to criminal liability. Three hours lecture. Three semester hours.
CRJ 2333 — CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION — This course is a study of principles of investigation; proper
collection, documentation, and preservation of evidence. Three hours lecture. Three semester hours.
CRJ 2393 — SURVEY OF CRIMINALISTICS — This course is the study and application of scientific evidence
collection through various projects. Three hours lecture. Three semester hours.
CRJ 2513 — JUVENILE JUSTICE — This course is the study of the organization, functions, and jurisdiction of
juvenile agencies. Processing, detention, and disposition of cases. Statutes and court procedures applied to
juveniles. Three hours lecture. Three semester hours.
CRJ 2623 — ASSETS PROTECTION — This course is a study of security awareness of management and
employees; vulnerability training; internal/external theft and fraud; disaster control; physical security
planning; investigation; guard protection; and alcohol and drug abuse in work place. Three hours lecture. Three semester hours.
EDU 1613 — FOUNDATIONS IN EDUCATION — Survey of the history and philosophies of American
education with special emphasis on current issues and problems in education. Includes a minimum of 30
hours field experience.
ECO 2113 — PRINCIPLES OF MACROECONOMICS — This course is the study of a nation’s economy to
include the following topics: supply and demand, production possibilities, monetary and fiscal policies,
factors of production, GDP/business cycles and economic growth, circular flow of market economies and
international trade. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
ECO 2123 — PRINCIPLES OF MICROECONOMICS — This course is the study of firms, industries and
consumers to include the following topics; supply and demand, elasticity of demand and supply, consumer
choice theory, production and cost theory and market structures. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
EGR 2413 — ENGINEERING MECHANICS (STATICS) — This course is the study of equilibrium of point
objects and extended objects in two- and three-dimensions using vector algebra. Distributed forces, structures,
friction, and moments of inertia in three dimensions. Prerequisites: MAT 1623 and PHY 2513. Three hours
lecture. Three semester hours credit.
EPY/PSY 2513 — CHILD PSYCHOLOGY — This course is a study of the various aspects of human growth
and development during childhood and emerging adolescence. Topics include biological, psychosocial, and
cognitive development. Three hours lecture. Three semester hours credit.
EPY/PSY 2523 — ADOLESCENT PSYCHOLOGY — This course is a study of various aspects of human growth
and development during adolescence. Topics include biological, psychosocial, and cognitive development.
Three semester hours credit.
EPY/PSY 2533 — HUMAN GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT — This course is a study of various aspects of
human growth and development from conception through death. Topics include biological, psychosocial,
and cognitive development. Three hours lecture. Three semester hours credit.
ENG 0123 — INTERMEDIATE ENGLISH — This course is designed to advance students to college level writing
skills and reading strategies. Three semester hours credit. Required for students with an ACT English score of
13 or lower. This course does not satisfy degree or program requirements for graduation.
ENG 1033—Technical Writing—This course is designed specifically for Career Tech students who are pursuing
the A.A.S. degree. In this course, students will focus on appropriate writing for business and industry and
will produce technical documents, which may include resumes, letters, emails, memos/reports, proposals,
multimedia presentations, and other related documents. This course will be accepted for this degree but is
not university transfer. Three lecture hours. Three hours credit.
ENG 1113 — ENGLISH COMPOSITION I — This course prepares the student to think critically and compose
texts for academic and professional rhetorical situations. Prerequisite: Completion of ENG 0114 and/or ENG
0124 with a grade of “C” or better, or ACT English score of 17. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
ENG 1113 CR — ENGLISH COMPOSITION I WITH THE CO-REQUISITE COMPONENT — This course is
designed for students with an English ACT sub-score of 14, 15, or 16. CR courses meet 3 times per week: two
days in class and one day for individualized instruction. Taking a CR course allows the student to by-pass
Intermediate English and to receive 3 hours credit for English Composition I upon successful completion.
ENG 1123 — ENGLISH COMPOSITION II — This course is a continuation of English Composition I with
emphasis on research, argumentation, and composition. Readings, essays, and a research paper are required.
Prerequisite: ENG 1113 with a grade of “C” or better. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
ENG 2133 — CREATIVE WRITING — This course involves reading and writing poetry, short fiction, and/or
other genres. Three lecture hours.. Three semester hours credit.
ENG 2153 — TRADITIONAL GRAMMAR — This course focuses on the basic elements of English grammar
and mechanics. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
ENG 2223 — AMERICAN LITERATURE I — This course surveys representative prose and poetry of the United
States from its beginnings to the Civil War. Prerequisites: ENG 1113 and ENG 1123 with a grade of C or better.
Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
ENG 2233 — AMERICAN LITERATURE II — This course surveys representative prose and poetry of the
United States from the Civil War to the present. Prerequisites: ENG 1113 and ENG 1123 with a grade of C or
better. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
ENG 2323 — BRITISH LITERATURE I — This course surveys British Literature from the Anglo-Saxon Period
through the Restoration and Eighteenth Century. Prerequisites: ENG 1113 and ENG 1123 with a grade of C or
better. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
ENG 2333 — BRITISH LITERATURE II — This course surveys British literature from the Romantic Period to
the present. Prerequisites: ENG 1113 and ENG 1123 with a grade of C or better. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
ENG 2423 — WORLD LITERATURE I — This course surveys texts representative of global, historical, and
cultural diversity from the ancient world through the early modern world. Prerequisites: ENG 1113 and ENG
1123 with a grade of C or better. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
ENG 2433 — WORLD LITERATURE II — This course surveys texts representative of global, historical, and
cultural diversity from the Enlightenment Period to the present. Prerequisites: ENG 1113 and ENG 1123 with
a grade of C or better. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
ENG 2613 — FILM AS LITERATURE — This course involves the study of current and classic motion pictures
as a form of literary, historic, and cinematic expression. Prerequisites: ENG 1113 with a grade of C or better.
Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
GEO 1113 — WORLD REGIONAL GEOGRAPHY — This course is a regional survey of the basic geographic
features and major new developments of the nations of the world. Three hours lecture. Three semester hours credit.
GEO 1123 — PRINCIPLES OF GEOGRAPHY — This course is the study of the basic content of geography,
planetary relationships of the earth, interpretation and use of maps, elements of weather and climate, regional
distribution of climatic elements and the interrelationship of human physical and cultural landscapes. Three semester hours credit.
GLY 1113 — PHYSICAL GEOLOGY — The course is designed to help students to more thoroughly understand
the physical environment and forces that shape our Earth and affect our lives. It primarily covers the
relationships of Earth processes and the resultant rocks, minerals, physical features, and natural resources on
the Earth’s surface and in its subsurface. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
GRA 1143 — GRAPHIC COMMUNICATION I — This course is the study of instrumental drawing, geometric
construction, orthographic projection, and descriptive geometry. Includes computer aided design (CAD) in
2-dimensional and 3-dimensional construction. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
HEALTH, PHYSICAL EDUCATION, AND RECREATION
HPR 1111 — GENERAL PHYSICAL EDUCATION ACTIVITIES I — This course is designed to give students a
modern concept of physical education and recreation by developing body skills. One semester hour credit.
HPR 1121 — GENERAL PHYSICAL EDUCATION ACTIVITIES II — This course is designed to give students
a modern concept of physical education and recreation by developing body skills. One semester hour credit.
HPR 1131 — VARSITY SPORTS I — This course includes the participation in football, basketball, baseball,
softball, tennis, golf, soccer or cheerleading. One semester hour credit.
HPR 1141 — VARSITY SPORTS II — This course includes the participation in football, basketball, baseball,
softball, tennis, golf, soccer or cheerleading. One semester hour credit.
HPR 1213 — PERSONAL AND COMMUNITY HEALTH I — The course is the application of principles
and practices of healthful living to the individual and community; major health problems and the mutual
responsibilities of home, school, and health agencies. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit. One semester hour credit.
HPR 1313 — INTRODUCTION TO HEALTH, PHYSICAL EDUCATION AND RECREATION — This course
is the introduction to the objectives, literature, and organizations of the profession. Analysis of successful
teaching with discussion of the responsibilities and opportunity of professional personnel. Orientation of
student to opportunities in the field. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
HPR 1551 — FITNESS AND CONDITIONING TRAINING I — This course includes the instruction and
practice of basic principles of fitness and conditioning through a variety of exercise and activities. Two hours
laboratory. One semester hour credit.
HPR 1561 — FITNESS AND CONDITIONING TRAINING II — This course includes the instruction and
practice of basic principles of fitness and conditioning through a variety of exercise and activities. Two hours
laboratory. One semester hour credit.
HPR 2111 — GENERAL PHYSICAL EDUCATION ACTIVITIES III — This course is designed to give students
a modern concept of physical education and recreation by developing body skills. One semester hour credit.
HPR 2121 — GENERAL PHYSICAL EDUCATION ACTIVITIES IV— This course is designed to give students
a modern concept of physical education and recreation by developing body skills. One semester hour credit.
HPR 2131 — VARSITY SPORTS III — This course includes the participation in football, basketball, baseball,
softball, tennis, golf, soccer or cheerleading. One semester hour credit.
HPR 2141 — VARSITY SPORTS IV — This course includes the participation in football, basketball, baseball,
softball, tennis, golf, soccer or cheerleading. One semester hour credit.
HPR 2213 — FIRST AID & CPR — This course includes the instruction and practice in methods prescribed in
the American Red Cross or American Heart Association standard and advanced courses. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
HPR 2323 — RECREATION LEADERSHIP — Planning and leadership techniques for conducting community
recreation centers, playgrounds, parks, and school recreation programs. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
HPR 2423 — FOOBALL THEORY — This course is the theoretical study of football methods from an offensive
and defensive standpoint including the fundamentals of blocking, passing, tackling, charging, punting,
generalship, rules and team play. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
HPR 2433 — BASKETBALL THEORY — This course is the theoretical study of basketball methods from
an offensive and defensive standpoint, including the study of teaching of the fundamentals and team
organization. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
HPR 2453 — BASEBALL THEORY — This course is the theoretical study of baseball methods from a coaching
standpoint; study of fundamentals and team play; methods of teaching fundamentals; team organization.
Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
HPR 2493 — SOFTBALL THEORY — This course is the study of philosophies and methods of coaching,
leadership, teaching techniques, team or organization, softball strategies, preparation for games, and
preparation and care of softball fields. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
HPR 2551 — FITNESS AND CONDITIONING TRAINING III — This course includes the instruction and
practice of basic principles of fitness and conditioning through a variety of exercises and activities. Two hours
laboratory. One semester hour credit.
HPR 2561 — FITNESS AND CONDITIONING TRAINING IV — This course includes the instruction and
practice of basic principles of fitness and conditioning through a variety of exercises and activities. Two hours
laboratory. One semester hour credit.
HPR 2723 — PREVENTION & CARE OF ATHELTIC INJURIES — This course is the study of theory and practice
for the prospective athletic trainer or coach in the prevention and care of athletic injuries. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
HPR 2733 — INTRODUCTION TO ATHLETIC TRAINING — This course includes an introduction to the
profession, including but not limited to procedural aspects of the athletic training room operations, role
delineations, preparation, and competencies with 50 observational/experience hours under a Board of
Certification (BOC) certified athletic trainer. This course is recommended for Athletic Training majors. Three
lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
HIS 1113 — WESTERN CIVILIZATION I — This is a general survey of Western Civilization from ancient times
to mid-seventeenth century. Three semester hours credit.
HIS 1123 — WESTERN CIVILIZATION II — This course is a general survey of Western Civilization since the
seventeenth century. Three semester hours credit.
HIS 1163 — WORLD CIVILIZATIONS I — This course is a general survey of history from ancient times to the
1500s. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
HIS 1173 — WORLD CIVILIZATIONS II — This course is a general survey of history from ancient times to the
1500s to modern times. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
HIS 1613 — AFRICAN AMERICAN HISTORY — This is a survey course of African American History from
Africa origins to modern times. Prerequisites: Any one of the following, with a grade of C or better. HIS
2213,2223, or HIS 1113,1123. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
HIS 2213 — AMERICAN (U.S.) HISTORY I — This course is a survey of American (U.S.) history to 1877. Three
lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
HIS 2223 — AMERICAN (U.S.) HISTORY II — This course is a survey of American (U.S.) history since 1865.
Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
HIS 2813 — FILM AND MUSIC AS HISTORY — This course involves the study of feature films, music, and
television as a form of historical interpretation and expression within American History. Prerequisites: Any
one of the following, with a grade of C or better. HIS 2213,2223, or HIS 1113,1123. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
FCS 1233 — PRINCIPLES OF NUTRITION — This course is a study of nutrients required for growth and
optimal health emphasizing recommended nutrient intake, food selection, digestion, absorption, transport,
metabolism, and function. Three semester hours credit.
FCS 1253 — NUTRITION — This course is a lecture course covering the nutrients for normal growth and
reducing the risks of major chronic diseases, and applied to the selection of food for ingestion, the processes of
digestion, assimilation, absorption, metabolism, and the applications for healthcare providers. Three lecture
hours. Three semester hours credit.
HUM 1113 — HUMANITIES — This course is the study of the achievements of Western man as reflected in the
art, architecture, and customs of selected European countries. This course consists of a tour which culminates
in a supervised project to be completed by the student. With the completion of the tour and the project, a
student shall earn three semester hours of credit in the humanities. Humanities I provides an overview of
history’s most memorable achievements spanning the major world civilizations of Africa, the Americas, Asia,
Europe, and the Middle East from the Prehistoric Era to the Renaissance. A global perspective is presented
through a survey of history, literature, music, philosophy, and the visual arts. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
JOU 1111 (112, 211, 212) — COLLEGE PUBLICATIONS — Laboratory courses designed to give practical
experience in working with college newspaper and yearbook production.
LEA 1811 — LEADERSHIP AND ORGANIZATION SKILLS I — This course is a study of leadership styles and
skills, roles and functions of officers of student organizations. Includes parliamentary procedure, chain of
command, communication, conducting effective meetings, role of constitution/by-laws, principle of ethics,
etiquette, and working with volunteers. One semester hour credit.
LEA 1821 — LEADERSHIP AND ORGANIZATION SKILLS II — This course is a continued study of LEA
1811, ice breakers; non-verbal communication; role of functions in groups; power; time management; stress
management; role of constitution; Personal Style type indicator; planning and goal setting; leadership
mentoring. One semester hour credit.
LEA 2811 — LEADERSHIP AND ORGANIZATIONAL SKILLS III — This course is a continued study of LEA
1811, LEA 1821; participates fully in class; experiential roles chairing committees and events; lead decision
making techniques; consensus; brain storming; observe and give feedback to group on role functions in group;
lead planning and goal setting groups; and presentation of leadership topics. One semester hour credit.
LEA 2821 — LEADERSHIP AND ORGANIZATIONAL SKILLS IV — This course is the continuation of activities
and events of LEA 1811, LEA 1821, and LEA 2811; emphasizing servant leadership. One semester hour credit.
LIS 1121 — BASIC LIBRARY RESEARCH — This course is the study of the skills necessary to navigate
various information resources and evaluate materials found. This includes using state-provided resources
like MAGNOLIA and MELO. The course will focus on the paper writing process by finding and evaluating
sources, discussing plagiarism and copyright, citing information, and annotating bibliographies. One semester hour credit.
LLS 1151 — COLLEGE LIFE — This course is a study of how College Life offers group experiences in study
skills and career exploration. This course is designed to assist the first-time student in achieving academic
success. One hour lecture. One semester hour credit.
LLS 1313 — FIRST YEAR EXPERIENCE — (The Warrior Path to Success) — This course will be required of
all new students beginning fall 2021. ECCC will offer practical and applicable financial-oriented content to
first-time college students, concentrating on options for paying for college through the completion of student
educational pathways, as well as strategies for lifelong economic well-being. Delivered through a freshman
orientation course with credits counting toward graduation, the goal is to prepare students for their college
journey and beyond with real-world knowledge gained in an engaging setting with personalized attention.
Two lecture hours. Two semester hours credit.
LLS 1321 — CAREER EXPLORATION — This course is designed to assist students in determining career goals.
Interest tests, personality inventories, and aptitude tests are given to help students determine career choices. One semester hour credit.
LLS 1411 — IMPROVEMENT OF STUDY — This course is designed to aid the student in study skills, promote
student success in basic reading and note-taking techniques, critical thinking, time management, test-taking
strategies, and listening and memory enhancement. One hour lecture. One semester hour credit.
LLS 1423 — COLLEGE STUDY SKILLS — This course is an advanced course in study skills that fosters insight
and practice of critical reading skills and study techniques needed for efficient and effective mastery of
college level courses, both graduate and undergraduate. Three semester hours credit.
MAT 1233 - INTERMEDIATE ALGEBRA - This course includes linear equations and their graphs; inequalities
and number line graphs; rational expressions; factoring; laws of exponents; radicals; polynomials. Three
lecture hours. Three semester hours credit. This course does not satisfy degree or program requirements for
graduation.
MAT 1313 – COLLEGE ALGEBRA – This course includes the following topics with applications: inequalities;
functions; linear and quadratic equations, and their graphs; rational, radical, and higher-order equations;
polynomial and rational functions; logarithmic and exponential functions; systems of equations. Prerequisites:
Grade of “C” or better in MAT 1233 or ACT Math Score of 19. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
MAT 1323 — TRIGONOMETRY — This course includes trigonometric functions and their graphs; trigonometric
identities; trigonometric equations; radian measurement; solutions of right and oblique triangles; inverse
trigonometric functions; applications. Pre/Co-requisite: Grade of “C” or better in MAT 1313. Three lecture
hours. Three semester hours credit.
MAT 1343 – PRE-CALCULUS – This course is a review of college algebra and trigonometry in preparation for
Calculus I. Topics include algebraic functions, algebraic equations, logarithmic and exponential functions,
trigonometric functions, trigonometric equations, and graphs of functions. Prerequisites: ACT math sub score
of at least 25 and a grade of “C” or better in Algebra I, Algebra II and Trigonometry in high school OR grade
of “C” or better in both MAT 1313 and MAT 1323 OR grade of “C” or better in MAT 1313 with Co-requisite
MAT 1323. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
MAT 1513 – BUSINESS CALCULUS I – This course is a study of functions, limits, continuity, derivatives, and
their applications to business and economics. Prerequisite: Grade of “C” or better in MAT 1313 or MAT 1343.
Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
MAT 1613 – CALCULUS I – This course includes the following topics: limits; continuity; the definition of the
derivative; differentiation; and applications. Prerequisites: Grade of “C” or better in MAT 1313 and MAT 1323
or grade of “C” or better in MAT 1343. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
MAT 1623 – CALCULUS II – This course includes the following topics: antiderivatives, the definite integral,
indefinite integrals, techniques of integration, and applications. Grade of “C” or better in MAT 1613. Three
lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
MAT 1723 – REAL NUMBER SYSTEM – This course is designed for elementary and special education majors.
Topics include set theory, numeration systems, foundations of number theory, and properties and operations
of real numbers. Prerequisite: Grade of “C” or better in MAT 1313 or MAT 1343. Three lecture hours. Three
semester hours credit
MAT 1733 – GEOMETRY, MEASUREMENT, AND PROBABILITY – This course is designed for elementary
and special education majors. Topics include geometric definitions, shapes, and formulas; linear and angular
measurements; unit conversions, statistics, and probability. Prerequisite: Grade of “C” or better in MAT 1313
or MAT 1343. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit
MAT 1743 – PROBLEM SOLVING WITH REAL NUMBERS – This course is designed for elementary and special
education majors. Topics include logic, applications of real numbers, probability, and statistics. Prerequisite:
Grade of “C” or better in MAT 1313 or MAT 1343. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit
MAT - 1753 - Quantitative Reasoning - This course is designed for students who need only three hours of
unspecified mathematics. Includes basic mathematical concepts from logic, algebra, set theory, probability,
descriptive statistics, and finance. Pre Requisite: ACT Math Score of 16 or higher, SREB math score of 80 or
higher, or completion of MAT 1233 with a “C” or better or minimum Accuplacer Score required for MAT 1313.
MAT 2113 – INTRODUCTION TO LINEAR ALGEBRA – This course includes the following topics: systems of
linear equations; matrices; determinants; vector spaces; orthogonality; linear transformations; applications;
eigenvalues and eigenvectors. Prerequisite: Grade of “C” or better in MAT 1623. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
MAT 2323- STASTICS – This course is an introduction to statistical methods of describing, summarizing,
comparing, and interpreting data to include probability distributions, sampling, estimation, confidence
intervals, and hypothesis testing. Pre-requisites: MAT 1313 or MAT 1343. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours.
MAT 2613 – CALCULUS III – This course includes the following topics: analytical geometry; parametric
equations; polar coordinates; improper integrals, infinite sequences and series; Taylor polynomial, vectors
and geometry of space. Prerequisite: Grade of “C” or better in MAT 1623. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
MAT 2623 – CALCULUS IV – This course includes the following topics: partial differentiation; optimization;
multiple integration; vector calculus; quadric surfaces, line integrals, and divergence theorem. Prerequisite:
Grade of “C” or better in MAT 2613. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
MAT 2913 — DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS — This course includes the following topics: solutions of first and
higher order differential equations; existence theorems; Laplace transforms; applications. Pre/Co-requisite:
Grade of “C” or better in MAT 2623. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
MFL 1213 — SPANISH I — This course stresses conversation, pronunciation, listening comprehension, reading,
writing, and functional grammar with emphasis on communication. Prerequisite: None. Three semester hours credit.
MFL 1223 — SPANISH II — This course is a continuation of MFL 1213 with wider vocabulary and more complex
structures and functions. Prerequisite: MFL 1213 or one unit of high school Spanish. Three semester hours credit.
MFL 2213 — SPANISH III — This course is a continuation of MFL 1223 with additional materials of literary
and cultural value. Prerequisite: MFL 1223 or two units of high school Spanish. Three semester hours credit.
MFL 2223 — SPANISH IV — This course is a continuation of MFL 2213 with additional literary and cultural
readings and compositions as well as a review of essential elements of grammar. Prerequisite: MFL 2213. Three semester hours credit.
MFL 2513—Occupational Spanish—This course is designed to teach basic oral communication skills for
interaction in Spanish in an occupational setting. This course specializes in medical terminology. This course
is not a substitute for Spanish I or Spanish II. It is a Humanities elective that transfers to the university. Three
lecture hours. Three hours credit.
MUA 1141 — ELECTIVE BRASS I — This course is the study of brass instruction for non-brass/music education
majors and non-music majors. Designed to teach the fundamental principles of playing, explore moderate
levels of literature and develop the student’s interest in playing. One semester hour credit.
MUA 1151 — ELECTIVE BRASS II — This course is the study of brass instruction for non-brass/music education
majors and non-music majors. Designed to teach the fundamental principles of playing, explore moderate
levels of literature and develop the student’s interest in playing. One semester hour credit.
MUA 1172 — BRASS FOR MUSIC EDUCATION MAJORS I — This course is the study of brass instruction
for music education majors with and advanced non-music majors with an emphasis on brass instrumental
playing. Designed to teach the fundamental principles of playing, explore moderate to advanced levels of
literature, develop the student’s interest in playing and strengthen the student’s playing ability. Two semester hours credit.
MUA 1182 — BRASS FOR MUSIC EDUCATION MAJORS II — This course is the study of brass instruction
for music education majors with and advanced non-music majors with an emphasis on brass instrumental
playing. Designed to teach the fundamental principles of playing, explore moderate to advanced levels of
literature, develop the student’s interest in playing and strengthen the student’s playing ability. Two semester hours credit.
MUA 1241 — ELECTIVE GUITAR I — This course is the study of guitar instruction for non-music majors
and music majors who wish to take guitar as an elective. Introduction to guitar technique, repertoire, and
performance of standard literature. One semester hour credit.
MUA 1251 — ELECTIVE GUITAR II — This course is the study of guitar instruction for non-music majors and
music majors who wish to take guitar as an elective. Introduction to guitar technique, repertoire, and performance of standard literature.
One semester hour credit.
MUA 1272 — GUITAR FOR MUSIC EDUCATION MAJORS I — This course is the study of guitar for music
education majors with guitar as their area of emphasis. Introduction to guitar technique, repertoire, and
performance of standard literature. Two semester hours credit.
MUA 1282 — GUITAR FOR MUSIC EDUCATION MAJORS II — This course is the study of guitar for music
education majors with guitar as their area of emphasis. Introduction to guitar technique, repertoire, and
performance of standard literature. Two semester hours credit.
MUA 1411 — CLASS PERCUSSION I — This course is the study of percussion instruction for music majors
and non-music majors. Designed to teach the fundamental principles of playing, explore varied levels of
literature and develop the student’s interest in playing. One semester hour credit.
MUA 1421 — CLASS PERCUSSION II — This course is the study of percussion instruction for music majors
and non-music majors. Designed to teach the fundamental principles of playing, explore varied levels of
literature and develop the student’s interest in playing. One semester hour credit.
MUA 1441 — ELECTIVE PERCUSSION I — This course is the study of percussion instruction for nonpercussion/ music education majors. Designed to teach the fundamental principles of playing, explore
moderate levels of literature and develop the student’s interest in playing. One semester hour credit.
MUA 1451 — ELECTIVE PERCUSSION II — This course is the study of percussion instruction for music majors
and non-music majors. Designed to teach the fundamental principles of playing, explore varied levels of
literature and develop the student’s interest in playing. One semester hour credit.
MUA 1472 — PERCUSSION FOR MUSIC EDUCATION I — This course is the study of percussion instruction
for music majors and advanced non-music majors with an emphasis on percussion instrumental playing.
Designed to teach the fundamental principles of playing, explore moderate to advanced levels of literature
and develop the student’s interest in playing. Two semester hours credit.
MUA 1482 — PERCUSSION FOR MUSIC EDUCATION II — This course is the study of percussion instruction
for music majors and advanced non-music majors with an emphasis on percussion instrumental playing.
Designed to teach the fundamental principles of playing, explore moderate to advanced levels of literature
and develop the student’s interest in playing. Two semester hours credit.
MUA 1511 — CLASS PIANO FOR MUSIC MAJORS I — This course is class piano instruction for music majors
with no previous piano training. This curriculum is designed to prepare students for their piano proficiency
examination upon transfer to university. One semester hour credit.
MUA 1521 — CLASS PIANO FOR MUSIC MAJORS II — This course is class piano instruction for music majors
with no previous piano training. This curriculum is designed to prepare students for their piano proficiency
examination upon transfer to university. One semester hour credit.
MUA 1541 — PIANO FOR NON-MUSIC MAJORS I — This course is individual piano instruction for nonmusic majors. One semester hour credit.
MUA 1542 — PIANO FOR VOICE MAJORS I — This course is individual piano instruction for voice majors. Two semester hours credit
MUA 1551 — PIANO FOR NON-MUSIC MAJORS II — This course is individual piano instruction for nonmusic majors. One semester hour credit.
MUA 1552 — PIANO FOR VOICE MAJORS II — This course is individual piano instruction for voice majors. Two semester hours credit
MUA 1571 — PIANO FOR NON-KEYBOARD MUSIC MAJORS I — This course is individual piano instruction
for non- keyboard music majors. One semester hour credit.
MUA 1572 — PIANO FOR KEYBOARD MAJORS (MUSIC EDUCATION) I — This course is individual piano
instruction including technique, appropriate repertoire, and memorization. Two semester hours credit.
MUA 1581 — PIANO FOR NON-KEYBOARD MUSIC MAJORS II — This course is individual piano instruction
for non-keyboard music majors. One semester hour credit.
MUA 1582 — PIANO FOR KEYBOARD MAJORS (MUSIC EDUCATION) II — This course is individual piano
instruction including technique, appropriate repertoire, and memorization. Two semester hours credit.
MUA 1641 — STRINGS FOR NON-MAJORS (ELECTIVE STRINGS) I — This course is the study of bowed
string instrument instruction for music majors with strings as a secondary area of emphasis. Introduction to
tuning, tone production, bowings, fingerings, and positions. One semester hour credit.
MUA 1651 — STRINGS FOR NON-MAJORS (ELECTIVE STRINGS) II —This course is the study of bowed
string instrument instruction for music majors with strings as a secondary area of emphasis. Introduction to
tuning, tone production, bowings, fingerings, and positions. One semester hour credit.
MUA 1673 — STRINGS FOR MUSIC MAJORS I — This course is the study of bowed string instrument instruction
for music majors with strings as their area of emphasis. Introduction to string technique, literature, etudes
and performance standard literature. Two semester hours credit.
MUA 1683 — STRINGS FOR MUSIC MAJORS II — This course is the study of bowed string instrument
instruction for music majors with strings as their area of emphasis. Introduction to string technique, literature,
etudes and performance standard literature. Two semester hours credit.
MUA 1711 — CLASS VOICE I — This course a class course that is designed to teach the fundamental principles
of singing, explore elementary to moderate levels of vocal literature and develop and improve the student’s
vocal ability in a group setting. One semester hour credit.
MUA 1721 — CLASS VOICE II — This course is a voice class that is designed to teach the fundamental principles
of singing, explore elementary to moderate levels of vocal literature and develop and improve the student’s
vocal ability in a group setting. One semester hour credit.
MUA 1741 — VOICE FOR NON-VOCAL MAJORS I — This course is voice class for non-vocal majors is
designed to teach the fundamental principles of singing, explore vocal literature and develop and improve
the student’s vocal ability. One semester hour credit.
MUA 1751 — VOICE FOR NON-VOCAL MAJORS II — This course is voice class for non-vocal majors is
designed to teach the fundamental principles of singing, explore vocal literature and develop and improve
the student’s vocal ability. One semester hour credit.
MUA 1772 — VOICE FOR VOCAL MUSIC EDUCATION MAJORS I — This course is voice for vocal music
education majors is designed to teach the fundamental principles of singing, explore varied vocal literature,
and develop and improve the student’s singing ability. Two semester hours credit.
MUA 1782 — VOICE FOR VOCAL MUSIC EDUCATION MAJORS II — This course is voice for vocal music
education majors is designed to teach the fundamental principles of singing, explore varied vocal literature,
and develop and improve the student’s singing ability. Two semester hours credit.
MUA 1841 — ELECTIVE WOODWINDS I — This course is the study of woodwind instruction for music
majors and non-music majors. Designed to teach the fundamental principles of playing, explore varied levels
of literature, and develop the student’s knowledge of woodwind instruction and performance. One semester hour credit.
MUA 1851 — ELECTIVE WOODWINDS II — This course is the study of woodwind instruction for music
majors and non-music majors. Designed to teach the fundamental principles of playing, explore varied levels
of literature, and develop the student’s knowledge of woodwind instruction and performance. One semester hour credit.
MUA 1872 — WOODWINDS FOR MUSIC EDUCATION MAJORS I —This course is the study of woodwind
instruction for music education majors and advanced non- music majors with an emphasis on woodwind
instrumental playing. Designed to teach the fundamental principles of playing, explore moderate to advanced
levels of literature, develop the student’s interest in playing, and strengthen the student’s playing ability. Two semester hours credit.
MUA 1882 — WOODWINDS FOR EDUCATION MAJORS II — This course is the study of woodwind instruction
for music education majors and advanced non- music majors with an emphasis on woodwind instrumental
playing. Designed to teach the fundamental principles of playing, exploring moderate to advanced levels of
literature, developing the student’s interest in playing, and strengthening the student’s playing ability. Two semester hours credit.
MUA 2141 — ELECTIVE BRASS III — This course is the study of brass instruction for non-brass/music
education majors and non-music
 majors. Designed to teach the fundamental principles of playing, exploring moderate levels of literature, and
developing the student’s interest in playing. One semester hour credit.
MUA 2151 — ELECTIVE BRASS IV — This course is the study of brass instruction for non-brass/music
education majors and non-music majors. Designed to teach the fundamental principles of playing, exploring
moderate levels of literature, and developing the student’s interest in playing. One semester hour credit.
MUA 2172 — BRASS FOR MUSIC EDUCATION III — This course is the study of brass instruction for music
education majors with and advanced non-music majors with an emphasis on brass instrumental playing.
Designed to teach the fundamental principles of playing, exploring moderate to advanced levels of literature,
and developing the student’s interest in playing, and strengthening the student’s playing ability. Two semester hours credit.
MUA 2182 — BRASS FOR MUSIC EDUCATION MAJORS IV — This course is the study of brass instruction
for music education majors with and advanced non-music majors with an emphasis on brass instrumental
playing. Designed to teach the fundamental principles of playing, exploring moderate to advanced levels of
literature, developing the student’s interest in playing, and strengthening the student’s playing ability. Two semester hours credit.
MUA 2241 — ELECTIVE GUITAR III — This course is the study of guitar instruction for non-music majors
and music majors who wish to take guitar as an elective. Introduction to guitar technique, repertoire, and
performance of standard literature. One semester hour credit.
MUA 2251 — ELECTIVE GUITAR IV — This course is the study of guitar instruction for non-music majors
and music majors who wish to take guitar as an elective. Introduction to guitar technique, repertoire, and
performance of standard literature. One semester hour credit.
MUA 2272 — GUITAR FOR MUSIC EDUCATION MAJORS III — This course is the study of guitar for music
education majors with guitar as their area of emphasis. Introduction to guitar technique, repertoire, and
performance of standard literature. Two semester hours credit.
MUA 2282 — GUITAR FOR MUSIC EDUCATION MAJORS IV — This course is the study of guitar for music
education majors with guitar as their area of emphasis. Introduction to guitar technique, repertoire, and
performance of standard literature. Two semester hours credit.
MUA 2411 — CLASS PERCUSSION III — This course is percussion instruction for music majors and nonmusic majors. Designed to teach the fundamental principles of playing, explore varied levels of literature and
develop the student’s interest in playing. One semester hour credit.
MUA 2421 — CLASS PERCUSSION IV — This course is percussion instruction for music majors and nonmusic majors. Designed to teach the fundamental principles of playing, explore varied levels of literature and
develop the student’s interest in playing. One semester hour credit.
MUA 2441 — ELECTIVE PERCUSSION III — This course is percussion instruction for music majors and nonmusic majors. Designed to teach the fundamental principles of playing, explore varied levels of literature and
develop the student’s interest in playing. One semester hour credit.
MUA 2451 — ELECTIVE PERCUSSION IV — This course is percussion instruction for music majors and nonmusic majors. Designed to teach the fundamental principles of playing, explore varied levels of literature and
develop the student’s interest in playing. One semester hour credit.
MUA 2472 — PERCUSSION FOR MUSIC EDUCATION III — This course is percussion instruction for music
majors and advanced non-music majors with an emphasis on percussion instrumental playing. Designed to
teach the fundamental principles of playing, explore moderate to advanced levels of literature and develop
the student’s interest in playing. Two semester hours credit.
MUA 2482 — PERCUSSION FOR MUSIC EDUCATION IV — This course is percussion instruction for music
majors and non-music majors with an emphasis on percussion instrumental playing. Designed to teach
the fundamental principles of playing, explore moderate to advanced levels of literature and develop the
student’s interest in playing. Two semester hours credit.
MUA 2511 — CLASS PIANO FOR MUSIC MAJORS III — This course is class piano instruction for music majors
with no previous piano training. This curriculum is designed to prepare students for their piano proficiency
examination upon transfer to university. One semester hour credit.
MUA 2521 — CLASS PIANO FOR MUSIC MAJORS IV — This course is class piano instruction for music
majors with no previous piano training. This curriculum is designed to prepare students for their piano
proficiency examination upon transfer to university. One semester hour credit.
MUA 2541 — PIANO FOR NON-MUSIC MAJORS III —This course is individual piano instruction for nonmusic majors. One semester hour credit.
MUA 2542 — PIANO FOR VOICE MAJORS III — This course is individual piano instruction for voice majors. Two semester hours credit.
MUA 2551 — PIANO FOR NON-MUSIC MAJORS IV — This course is individual piano instruction for nonmusic majors. One semester hour credit.
MUA 2552 — PIANO FOR VOICE MAJORS IV — This course is individual piano instruction for non-music
majors. Two semester hours credit.
MUA 2572 — PIANO FOR KEYBOARD MAJORS (MUSIC EDUCATION) III — This course is individual piano
instruction including technique, appropriate repertoire, and memorization. Two semester hours credit.
MUA 2582 — PIANO FOR KEYBOARD MAJORS (MUSIC EDUCATION) IV — This course is individual piano
instruction including technique, appropriate repertoire, and memorization. Two semester hours credit.
MUA 2641 — STRINGS FOR NON-MAJORS (ELECTIVE STRINGS) III — This course is the study of bowed
string instrument instruction for music majors with strings as a secondary area of emphasis. Introduction to
tuning, tone production, bowings, fingerings, and positions. One semester hour credit.
MUA 2651 — STRINGS FOR NON-MAJORS (ELECTIVE STRINGS IV — This course is the study of bowed
string instrument instruction for music majors with strings as a secondary area of emphasis. Introduction to
tuning, tone production, bowings, fingerings, and positions. One semester hour credit.
MUA 2673 — STRINGS FOR MUSIC MAJORS III — This course is the study of bowed string instrument
instruction for music majors with strings as their area of emphasis. Introduction to string technique, literature,
etudes and performance standard literature. Two semester hours credit.
MUA 2683 — STRINGS FOR MUSIC MAJORS IV — This course is the study of bowed string instrument
instruction for music majors with strings as their area of emphasis. Introduction to string technique, literature,
etudes and performance standard literature. Two semester hours credit.
MUA 2772 — VOICE FOR VOCAL MUSIC EDUCATION MAJORS III — This course is voice for vocal music
education majors is designed to teach the fundamental principles of singing, explore varied vocal literature,
and develop and improve the student’s singing ability. Two semester hours credit.
MUA 2782 — VOICE FOR VOCAL MUSIC EDUCATION MAJORS IV — This course is voice for vocal music
education majors is designed to teach the fundamental principles of singing, explore varied vocal literature,
and develop and improve the student’s singing ability. Two semester hours credit.
MUA 2841 — ELECTIVE WOODWINDS III — This course is woodwind instruction for music majors and nonmusic majors. Designed to teach the fundamental principles of playing, explore varied levels of literature,
and develop the student’s knowledge of woodwind instruction and performance. One semester hour credit.
MUA 2851 — ELECTIVE WOODWINDS IV — This course is woodwind instruction for music majors and nonmusic majors. Designed to teach the fundamental principles of playing, explore varied levels of literature,
and develop the student’s knowledge of woodwind instruction and performance. One semester hour credit.
MUA 2872 — WOODWINDS FOR EDUCATION MAJORS III — This course is woodwind instruction for music
education majors and advanced non- music majors with an emphasis on woodwind instrumental playing.
Designed to teach the fundamental principles of playing, explore moderate to advanced levels of literature,
develop the student’s interest in playing, and strengthen the student’s playing ability. Two semester hours credit.
MUA 2882 — WOODWINDS FOR MUSIC EDUCATION MAJORS IV — This course is woodwind instruction
for music education majors and advanced non- music majors with an emphasis on woodwind instrumental
playing. Designed to teach the fundamental principles of playing, explore moderate to advanced levels of
literature, develop the student’s interest in playing, and strengthen the student’s playing ability. Two semester hours credit.
MUO 1111 — BAND I — This course is designed to teach the principles of playing musical instruments, explore
varied levels of literature and develop the student’s knowledge of performance technique. One semester hour credit.
MUO 1121 — BAND II — This course is designed to teach the principles of playing musical instruments,
explore varied levels of literature and develop the student’s knowledge of performance technique. One semester hour credit.
MUO 1131 — SMALL INSTRUMENT ENSEMBLE I (COLLEGIANS) — This course is designed to explore
varied levels of literature and develop the student’s knowledge of performance technique in small ensembles
and auxiliary groups. One semester hour credit.
MUO 1141 — SMALL INSTRUMENT ENSEMBLE II (COLLEGIANS) — This course is designed to explore
varied levels of literature and develop the student’s knowledge of performance technique in small ensembles
and auxiliary groups. One semester hour credit.
MUO 1171 — LARGE JAZZ ENSEMBLE I — This course is designed to give students the opportunity to perform
jazz and a variety of music styles in a “big band” setting or similar instrumentation. Instructor permission
required. One semester hour credit.
MUO 1181 — LARGE JAZZ ENSEMBLE II — This course is designed to give students the opportunity to
perform jazz and a variety of music styles in a “big band” setting or similar instrumentation. Instructor
permission required. One semester hour credit.
MUO 1211 — CHOIR I — This course is for music majors and non-majors focused on performing choral music
from a variety of style periods. One semester hour credit.
MUO 1221 — CHOIR II — This course is for music majors and non-majors focused on performing choral music
from a variety of style periods. One semester hour credit.
MUO 1241 — SELECT VOICE ENSEMBLE I (VOCE) — This course is for select singers focused on performing
from one or more genres of music. One semester hour credit.
MUO 1251 — SELECT VOICE ENSEMBLE II (VOCE) — This course is for select singers focused on performing
from one or more genres of music. One semester hour credit.
MUO 2111 — BAND III — This course is designed to teach the principles of playing musical instruments,
explore varied levels of literature and develop the student’s knowledge of performance technique. One semester hour credit.
MUO 2121 — BAND IV — This course is designed to teach the principles of playing musical instruments,
explore varied levels of literature and develop the student’s knowledge of performance technique. One semester hour credit.
MUO 2131 — SMALL INSTRUMENT ENSEMBLE III (COLLEGIANS) — This course is designed to explore
varied levels of literature and develop the student’s knowledge of performance technique in small ensembles
and auxiliary groups. One semester hour credit.
MUO 2141 — SMALL INSTRUMENT ENSEMBLE IV (COLLEGIANS) — This course is designed to explore
varied levels of literature and develop the student’s knowledge of performance technique in small ensembles
and auxiliary groups. One semester hour credit.
MUO 2171 — LARGE JAZZ ENSEMBLE III — This course is designed to give students the opportunity to
perform jazz and a variety of music styles in a “big band” setting or similar instrumentation. Instructor
permission required. One semester hour credit.
MUO 2181 — LARGE JAZZ ENSEMBLE IV — This course is designed to give students the opportunity to
perform jazz and a variety of music styles in a “big band” setting or similar instrumentation. Instructor
permission required. One semester hour credit.
MUO 2211 — CHOIR III — This course is designed for music majors and non-majors focused on performing
choral music from a variety of style periods. One semester hour credit.
MUO 2221 — CHOIR IV — This course is designed for music majors and non-majors focused on performing
choral music from a variety of style periods. One semester hour credit.
MUO 2241 — SELECT VOICE ENSEMBLE III (VOCE) — This course is designed for select singers focused on
performing from one or more genres of music. One semester hour credit.
MUO 2251 — SELECT VOICE ENSEMBLE IV (VOCE) — This course is designed for select singers focused on
performing from one or more genres of music. One semester hour credit.
MUS 1113 — MUSIC APPRECIATION — This course is designed to give the student, through listening and
written work, the ability to understand, appreciate, and evaluate music of Western Culture. Three semester hours credit.
MUS 1133 — FUNDAMENTALS OF MUSIC — This course is a study of basic knowledge of music fundamentals
to prepare students for music theory. Concepts include: notation, scales, keys, rhythm, intervals, triads, and
their inversions. Three semester hours credit.
MUS 1214 — MUSIC THEORY I, LECTURE/LAB — This course is a study of functional harmony through
analysis and part- writing. Lab instruction. Development of music sight-singing, ear training and dictation
skills. Three lecture hours and two hours laboratory. Four semester hours credit.
MUS 1224 — MUSIC THEORY II, LECTURE/LAB — This course is a continued study and review of functional
harmony through analysis and part-writing. Lab instruction. Development of music sight-singing, ear
training and dictation skills. Three lecture hours and two hours laboratory. Four semester hours credit.
MUS 1911 — RECITAL CLASS I — This course includes performances of solo and ensemble literature by
students majoring in music. Attendance at a prescribed minimum number of departmentally approved
musical performances per semester also required. One semester hour credit.
MUS 1921 — RECITAL CLASS II — This course includes performances of solo and ensemble literature by
students majoring in music. Attendance at a prescribed minimum number of departmentally approved
musical performances per semester also required. One semester hour credit.
MUS 2123 — MUSIC SURVEY (MAJORS) — This course is advanced listening course, designed to acquaint
the music major with a broad overview of musical style and repertoire from antiquity to the present. Three semester hours credit.
MUS 2214 — MUSIC THEORY III, LECTURE/LAB — This course is a continued study and review of functional
harmony through analysis and part-writing. Lab instruction. Development of music sight-singing, ear
training and dictation skills. Three lecture hours and two hours laboratory. Four semester hours credit.
MUS 2224 — MUSIC THEORY IV, LECTURE/LAB — This course is a continued study and review of functional
harmony through analysis and part-writing. Introduction to twentieth century techniques. Lab instruction.
Development of music sight-singing, ear training and dictation skills. Three lecture hours and two hours
laboratory. Four semester hours credit.
MUS 2911 — RECITAL CLASS III —This course includes performances of solo and ensemble literature by
students majoring in music. Attendance at a prescribed minimum number of departmentally approved
musical performances per semester also required. One semester hour credit.
MUS 2921 — RECITAL CLASS IV — This course includes performances of solo and ensemble literature by
students majoring in music. Attendance at a prescribed minimum number of departmentally approved
musical performances per semester also required. One semester hour credit.
PHI 1113 — OLD TESTAMENT SURVEY — This course is a survey of the Old Testament (Hebrew Bible) with
regard to its worth as a literary work, along with significant dates, themes, concepts and contributions of its
characters to that history and literature. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
PHI 1133 — NEW TESTAMENT SURVEY — This course is a study of the New Testament covering the life of
Jesus of Nazareth and the establishment of the early church as presented in the Gospels, Acts, and other New
Testament books. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
PHI 1153 — JESUS AND THE GOSPELS — This course is a study of the life and ministry of Jesus of Nazareth
as recorded in the four canonical gospels with specific consideration of the geographical, political, and social
conditions of the 1st century and recognition of various early interpretations of the meaning of the life and
person of Jesus. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
PHI 2113 — INTRODUCTION TO PHILOSOPHY I — This course is an introduction to the major themes and
history of the discipline of Philosophy with an emphasis on the development of critical thinking skills. Three semester hours credit.
PHI 2143 — ETHICS — This course is an introduction to moral philosophy with the investigation of selected
moral problems. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
PHI 2613 — WORLD RELIGIONS I — This course is an introduction to the beliefs and development of
Buddhism, Christianity, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, and other religious traditions. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
PHY 1111 — INTRODUCTION TO ASTRONOMY LAB — This course is a laboratory course that contains
experiments and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced in PHY 1113 Introduction to Astronomy,
Lecture. Co- Requisite PHY 1113. One semester hour credit.
PHY 1113 — INTRODUCTION TO ASTRONOMY — This course is a lecture course that includes surveys of the
solar system, our galaxy and the universe. Three semester hours credit.
PHY 2241 — PHYSICAL SCIENCE SURVEY I LAB — This course is a laboratory course that contains experiments
and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced in PHY 2243. One semester hour credit.
PHY 2243 — PHYSICAL SCIENCE SURVEY I — This course is a lecture course that includes studies of
measurements and units, electricity, mechanics, heat, sound, light, and astronomy. Three semester hours credit.
PHY 2244 — PHYSICAL SCIENCE SURVEY I W/LAB — This course is a combined lecture and laboratory
course that includes studies of measurements and units, electricity, mechanics, heat, sound, light, and
astronomy. Labs associated with this course contain experiments and exercises that reinforce the principles
introduced in lecture class. Four semester hours credit.
PHY 2251 — PHYSICAL SCIENCE SURVEY II LAB — This course is a laboratory course that contains
experiments and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced in PHY 2253. One semester hour credit.
PHY 2253 — PHYSICAL SCIENCE SURVEY II — This course is a lecture course that includes studies of
chemistry, geology, and meteorology. Three semester hours credit.
PHY 2254 — PHYSICAL SCIENCE SURVEY II — This course is a combined lecture and laboratory course that
includes studies of chemistry, geology and meteorology. Labs associated with this course contain experiments
and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced in lecture class.
PHY 2411 — GENERAL PHYSICS I LAB — This course is a laboratory course that contains experiments and
exercises that reinforce the principles introduced in PHY 2413. One semester hour credit.
PHY 2413 — GENERAL PHYSICS I — This course is a lecture course covering mechanics and conservation laws.
This is a non-calculus based course primarily for pre-professional majors. Co-requisite: College Trigonometry
(MAT 1323). Three semester hours credit.
PHY 2414 — GENERAL PHYSICS I W/LAB — This course is a combined lecture and laboratory course covering
mechanics, and conservation laws. This is a non-calculus based course primarily for pre-professional majors.
Labs associated with this course contain experiments and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced in
lecture classes. Four semester hours credit.
PHY 2421 — GENERAL PHYSICS II LAB — This course is a laboratory course that contains experiments and
exercises that reinforce the principles introduced in PHY 2423. One semester hour credit.
PHY 2423 — GENERAL PHYSICS II — This course is a lecture course covering electricity, magnetism, and
optics. This is a non-calculus based coursed primarily for pre-professional majors. Prerequisites: General
Physics I (PHY 2413). Three semester hours credit
PHY 2511 — GENERAL PHYSICS I-A LAB — This course is a laboratory course that contains experiments and
exercises that reinforce the principles introduced in PHY 2513. One semester hour credit.
PHY 2513 — GENERAL PHYSICS I-A — This course is a lecture course covering mechanics and conservation
laws. This is a calculus- based course primarily for students of engineering, science, or mathematics.
Prerequisites: MAT 1623. Three semester hours credit.
EAST CENTRAL COMMUNITY COLLEGE 150
PHY 2521 — GENERAL PHYSICS II-A LAB — This course is a laboratory course that contains experiments and
exercises that reinforce the principles introduced in PHY 2523. One semester hour credit.
PHY 2523 — GENERAL PHYSICS II-A — This course is a lecture course covering electricity, magnetism, and
optics. This is a calculus- based course primarily for students of engineering, science, or mathematics. This is
a continuation of PHY 2513. Pre-requisite PHY 2513. Three semester hours credit
POLITICAL SCIENCE
PSC 1113 — AMERICAN NATIONAL GOVERNMENT — This course is a survey of the foundations, institutions,
and political aspects of American national government. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
PSC 1123 — AMERICAN STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT — This course is the study of relationships
among states, national, and local governments. The organization, function, and operation of the three
branches with emphasis on state and local government. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
PSY 1513 — GENERAL PSYCHOLOGY — This course is an introduction to the scientific study of human
behavior and mental processes. This includes history and theories of psychology, research methods, biological
bases of behavior, the principles of learning, personality and abnormal behavior. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
PSY/EPY 2513 — CHILD PSYCHOLOGY — This course is a study of the various aspects of human growth
and development during childhood and emerging adolescence. Topics include biological, psychosocial and
cognitive development. Three hours lecture. Three semester hours credit.
PSY/EPY 2523 — ADOLESCENT PSYCHOLOGY — This course is a study of various aspects of human growth
and development during adolescence. Topics include biological, psychosocial and cognitive development. Three semester hours credit.
PSY/EPY 2533 — HUMAN GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT — This course is a study of various aspects of
human growth and development from conception through death. Topics include biological, psychosocial and
cognitive development. Three hours lecture. Three semester hours credit.
PSY 2553 — PSYCHOLOGY OF PERSONAL ADJUSTMENT — This course aids in developing an understanding
of personal adjustment with emphasis placed on personal issues through life, love and relationships, wellness,
and career exploration. Prerequisite: PSY 1513. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
SOC 2113 – INTRODUCTION TO SOCIOLOGY - This course introduces the scientific study of human society
and social interaction and examines social forces on individuals and groups. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
SOC 2133 – SOCIAL PROBLEMS - This course is a study of the theoretical analysis, nature, scope, and effects
of contemporary social problems and policy measures used to address them. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
SOC 2143 – MARRIAGE AND FAMILY – This course is the study of the development of marriage and family
as social institutions within society. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
SOC/ANR 2213 – INTRODUCTION TO ANTHROPOLOGY – This course is a survey of the four fields and
applied anthropology in the comparative study of humanity. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
SOC/ANR 2243 – CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY – This course examines human culture and cultural
diversity. The student will explore techniques employed by the anthropologist. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
SPT 1113 — PUBLIC SPEAKING I — This course is the study and practice in making speeches for a variety of
public forums. Major emphasis is placed on effective speech preparation and delivery. Three lecture hours. Three hours credit.
SPT 2233 — THEATRE APPRECIATION — This course is an introduction of the cultural, historical and social
aspects of drama. Class content provides an appreciation of theatre and performance art to develop audience
standards through demonstration of the unique characteristics of theatre (a fine arts elective). Three lecture
hours. Three hours credit.
NUR 1003 — EXTERNSHIP FOR AD NURSING — This course is designed to provide the nursing student the
opportunity to practice basic nursing skills and apply cognitive knowledge in the practice of nursing under
the supervision of a preceptor and indirect supervision of a nursing faculty member. The student completes
a total of 320 hours. Prerequisites: NUR 1110, NUR 1219/NUR 1116, ENG 1113, ENG 1123, EPY 2533. Three semester credit hours.
NUR 1110 — FUNDAMENTALS OF NURSING PRACTICE — This course is designed to provide an introduction
to nursing, nursing roles, professionalism, and patient care concepts. Emphasis is on registered nurse scope
of practice, theory, and practice skills. An introduction to the nursing process, pharmacology, and Maslow’s
Hierarchy of Needs provides a decision-making framework to assist students in developing effective clinical
judgment skills, including safe medication administration. Co-requisite: NUR 2120, ENG 1113, EPY 2533.
Seven hours theory, three hours clinical/clinical simulation/lab. Ten semester credit hours.
NUR 1203 — STUDENT NURSE ACADEMY I – This course is designed to allow the student the opportunity
to practice learned nursing skills and apply cognitive knowledge of nursing practice in the clinical area.
The student will use the nursing process in caring for patients of all ages under the direct supervision of an
experienced registered nurse. Prerequisite: NUR 1110, NUR 2120, ENG 1113, EPY 2533. Co-requisite: NUR
1219/ NUR 1116, NUR 2120, ENG 1123. One hundred thirty-five clinical hours. Three semester credit hours.
NUR 1116 — LPN TO ADN TRANSITION —This course is designed to assist the Licensed Practical Nurse
with transition into the Associate Degree Nursing Program. This course focuses on concepts related to the
care of adult and pediatric patients with commonly occurring health alterations in the medical-surgical
practice environment. Emphasis is placed on using the nursing process to develop competence in emerging
therapeutic relationships and providing and coordinating legal and ethical nursing care. Diverse learning
opportunities in the classroom, skills lab, and simulation are used to build intellectual knowledge, promote
critical thinking, and develop clinical judgment for the lifelong learner. Upon successful completion, the
student will matriculate into semester three of the associate degree program. Four theory hours, Two lab
hours. Nineteen semester hours, which includes thirteen semester credit hours by validation and six semester
credit hours awarded upon successful completion of the course.
NUR 1219 — ADULT/CHILD HEALTH NURSING I — This course focuses on concepts related to the care
of adult and pediatric patients with commonly occurring health alterations in the medical-surgical practice
environment. Emphasis is placed on using the nursing process to develop competence in emerging therapeutic
relationships and providing and coordinating legal and ethical nursing care. Diverse learning opportunities
in the classroom, skills lab, simulation, and clinical agencies are used to build intellectual knowledge, promote
critical thinking, and develop clinical judgment for the lifelong learner. Co-requisite: NUR 2120. Six hours
theory, three hours clinical/ clinical simulation/lab. Nine semester credit hours.
NUR 2103- STUDENT NURSE ACADEMY II — This course is designed to allow the student the opportunity
to practice learned nursing skills and apply cognitive knowledge of nursing practice in the clinical area.
The student will use the nursing process in caring for patients of all ages under the direct supervision of an
experienced registered nurse. Prerequisite: NUR 1110, NUR 1219/NUR 1116, NUR 2120, ENG 1113, ENG
1123, EPY 2533. Co-requisite: NUR 2319, NUR 2120, PSY 1513. One hundred thirty-five clinical hours. Three semester credit hours.
NUR 2120 — NURSE SEMINAR — This course is designed to promote active participation in national, state
and local student nurse organizations and involvement in community activities. This course consists of
meetings where group discussions will be held concerning today’s nursing trends. Goals and objectives set
by the student nursing association will be implemented by the group. Co-requisite: NUR 1110, NUR 1219, or
NUR 2319. Zero semester hour credit for three semesters of participation in a four-semester program and zero
semester hour credit for one semester of a three semester program.
NUR 2121 — NURSE SEMINAR — This course is designed to promote active participation in national, state
and local student nurse organizations and involvement in community activities. This course consists of
meetings where group discussions will be held concerning today’s nursing trends. Goals and objectives set
by the student nursing association will be implemented by the group. Co-requisite: NUR 2410, NUR 2941.
One semester hour credit for participation in a four semester program and participation in a two semester
program.
NUR 2202 — STUDENT NURSE ACADEMY III — This course is designed to allow the student the opportunity
to practice learned nursing skills and apply cognitive knowledge of nursing practice in the clinical area.
The student will use the nursing process in caring for patients of all ages under the direct supervision of an
experienced registered nurse. Prerequisite: NUR 1110, NUR 1219/NUR 1116, NUR 2319, NUR 2120, ENG
1113, ENG 1123, EPY 2533, PSY 1513. Co-requisite: NUR 2410, NUR 2121, NUR 2941, *SPT 1113, *Fine Arts/
Humanities Elective. Ninety clinical hours. Two semester credit hours.
NUR 2319 — ADULT/CHILD HEALTH NURSING II — This course is designed to focus on the care of adult
and pediatric patients with complex medical/surgical and mental/psychiatric health problems. Emphasis
is placed on helping patients and their families cope with alterations in body functions. Concepts of
pharmacology, health promotion and education, evidence based practice, and interprofessional collaboration
will be integrated throughout the course. Clinical/clinical simulation experiences provide the student an
opportunity to apply theoretical concepts and implement safe care to patients and selected groups in a
variety of settings. Co-requisite: NUR 2120. Six hours theory. Three hours clinical/clinical simulation/lab. Nine semester credit hours.
NUR 2410 — ADVANCED CONCEPTS OF NURSING PRACTICE — This course is designed to focus on
advanced concepts of nursing care as they relate to patients across the lifespan with complex, multisystem
alterations in health, as well as an integrative, family-centered approach to the care of mothers, newborns, and
children. Focus is also placed on implementing time management and organizational skills while managing
the care of patients with multiple needs, collaborating with the interprofessional team, and the transition
of the student into the role of a professional nurse in the microsystem of a work unit. Emphasis is placed
on patient management, developing the skills of delegation, conflict management, leadership, standards of
practice and the significance of functioning according to state regulations. Additional emphasis is placed on
normal and high-risk pregnancies, normal growth and development, family dynamics, common pediatric
disorders, and the promotion of healthy behaviors in all patients across the lifespan. Complex clinical skills,
as well as priority setting, clinical judgment, and tenets of legal and ethical practice, are integrated throughout
the course. Clinical/clinical simulation experiences provide the student an opportunity to apply theoretical
concepts, and function in a leadership role, while implementing safe care to patients and groups across the
lifespan in a variety of settings. Co-requisite: NUR 2941, NUR 2121. Six hours theory. Four hours clinical/
clinical simulation/lab. Ten semester credit hours.
NUR 2941 — NCLEX REVIEW — This course is designed to provide a comprehensive, simulated review of the
National Council Licensure Examination for Registered Nurses. This is a required course for students in the
last semester of the nursing program. This course is intended to assist and prepare the student to sit for the
NCLEX-RN® exam through use of testing strategies and practice testing. Co-requisite: NUR 2410, NUR 2121. One semester credit hour.
PNV 1116 — PRACTICAL NURSING FOUNDATIONS — This course is designed to explain the structure and
function of the body systems and its interrelationship to one another in the provision of safe, effective nursing
care. In addition, this course will provide the student with the theory and skills of practical nursing through
campus lab demonstration, supervised practice, and clinical experiences needed to care for the individual in
wellness and illness across the lifespan. (16 scheduled: 9 hr lecture (135), 10 hr. Lab (150), 6 hr. clinical (90)).
(Total contact hours: 375)
PNV 1216 — INTERMEDIATE PRACTICAL NURSING — This course is designed to provide the student with
the basic theory, campus lab demonstrations, supervised practice, and clinical experiences needed to provide
safe, effective care to the adult client experiencing acute, chronic, or life-threatening physical health conditions
in all body systems. This course will include the expanded role of IV therapy as outlined by the Mississippi
Board of Nursing Practice Law, Rules, and Regulations, nutritional considerations, and the advanced theory
of pharmacology. (16 scheduled: 11 hr. lecture (165), 2 hr. lab (30), 12 hr. clinical (180)) (Total contact hours 375)
PNV 1412 — ADVANCED PRACTICAL NURSING — This course will provide the student with the basic
knowledge and skills to provide safe, effective care for clients and families during the antepartum,
intrapartum, postpartum, and infancy through adolescent periods. Also, the course provides students with a
basic knowledge and skills to provide safe, effective care for clients and families experiencing mental health
alterations. In addition, it will allow students to gain knowledge to prepare for the role transition from
student to practical nurse. (12 scheduled: 10.3 hr. lecture (155), 0 hr. lab (0), 1.675 hr. clinical (75)). (Total
contact hours: 230).
EMS 1117 — EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN — This course includes responsibilities of the EMT
during each phase of an ambulance run, patient assessment, emergency medical conditions, appropriate
emergency care, and appropriate procedures for transporting patient. (EMS 1117) Four hours lecture, four
hours lab, and 3 hours clinical. Seven semester credit hours.
SUT 1113 — FUNDAMENTALS OF SURGICAL TECHNOLOGY— This is a basic introductory course including
hospital and surgical suite organization and environment, history, legal responsibilities, terminology,
interpersonal relationships, and biomedical sciences. Three hours lecture. Three semester credit hours.
SUT 1217 — PRINCIPLES OF SURGICAL TECHNIQUE — This course is a comprehensive study of aseptic
technique, safe patient care, anesthesia, pharmacology, and surgical techniques. Three hours lecture. Eight
hours lab. Seven semester credit hours.
SUT 1223 — MEDICAL TERMINOLOGY FOR THE SURGICAL TECHNOLOGISTS — This course is a study
of medical terminology as it relates to the practice of surgical technology. Three hours lecture. Three semester credit hours.
SUT 1413 — SURGICAL MICROBIOLOGY — This is an introduction to pathogenic microorganisms related to
surgery and their effect on wound healing and infection. It includes principles of sterilization and disinfection.
Three hours lecture. Three semester credit hours.
SUT 1518 — BASIC AND RELATED SURGICAL PROCEDURES — This course includes instruction in
regional anatomy, pathology, instrumentation, surgical techniques, and safe patient care in general surgery,
gynecology, obstetrics, and genitourinary. It requires clinical experience in area hospital surgical suites and
related departments. Prerequisites: Introduction to Surgical Technology (SUT 1113), Principles of Surgical
Technique (SUT 1216), Surgical Anatomy (SUT 1314), and Surgical Microbiology (SUT 1413). Four hours
lecture. Twelve hours clinical. Eighteen semester credit hours.
SUT 1528 — SPECIALIZED SURGICAL PROCEDURES — This course includes instruction in regional anatomy,
pathology, instrumentation, techniques, and safe patient care in surgical specialty areas of ear, nose, and
throat; eye; oral and maxillofacial surgery; orthopedics; and plastics. This course requires clinical experience in
area hospital surgical suite and related departments. Prerequisites: Introduction to Surgical Technology (SUT
1113), Principles of Surgical Technique (SUT 1216), Surgical Anatomy (SUT 1314), and Surgical Microbiology
(SUT 1413). Four hours lecture. Twelve hours clinical. Eight semester credit hours.
SUT 1539 — ADVANCED SURGICAL PROCEDURES — This course includes instruction in regional anatomy,
pathology, instrumentation, techniques, and safe patient care in surgical specialty areas of neurosurgery,
thoracic, peripheral vascular, cardiovascular surgery, employability skills, and all-hazards preparation. This
course requires clinical experience in area hospital surgical suites and related departments and a comprehensive
final examination. Comprehensive final examination. Prerequisites: Basic and Related Surgical Procedures
(SUT 1518). Four hours lecture. Fifteen hours clinical. Nine semester credit hours.
ABT 1146 — STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS AND DAMAGE REPAIR I — This course will provide skills and
practice in structural analysis and repair procedures that are used in the collision repair industry. This course
also covers the complete inspection and non-structural analysis of damaged vehicles. It is designed to enable
the student to determine the conditions and severity of the damage, the repair or replacement of parts, the
estimated repair time, and correct use of reference manuals. (Three hours lecture, six hours lab. Six semester
hours credit) Co-requisite: ABT 1153 – Structural Analysis and Damage Repair II.
ABT 1153 — STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS AND DAMAGE REPAIR II — This course is a continuation of
Structural Analysis and Damage Repair I. This course provides for instruction and practice in the removal
and re-installation of structural glass, major body panels and upper body structural components. Instruction
will include the use of power equipment, basic anchoring and pulling, non-adjustable panel alignment and
attachment (welded or bonded). Two hour lecture, two hours lab. Three semester hours credit. Prerequisite:
Structural Analysis and Damage Repair I (ABT-1146).
ABT 1223 — NON-STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS AND DAMAGE REPAIR I — This course will provide instruction
in the procedures and practices for metal finishing and body filling. Includes: the repair of the sheet metal
components of the vehicle body, practice in selecting and applying various methods and tools of the trade
used in removing dents and other damage conditions from sheet metal panels. Also included are constructing
and installing simple metal patch panels, and making basic repairs. One hour lecture, four hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
ABT 1236 — NON-STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS AND DAMAGE REPAIR II — This course is a continuation of
Non-Structural Analysis and Damage Repair I. This course provides instruction for preparation principles
and practices. This course provides instruction for outer body panel repair, replacement, and adjustment
principles and practices. Three hours lecture, six hours lab. Six semester hours credit. Prerequisite: NonStructural Analysis and Damage Repair I (ABT-1223). Co-requisite: ABT 2243 — Non-Structural Analysis
and Damage Repair III.
ABT 1313 — REFINISHING I — This course will provide skills and practices in vehicle preparation, cleaning,
sanding, metal treatment, masking, priming and using basic spray applications. Instruction includes
determining imperfections in paint films. Emphasis is placed on personal safety and environmental concerns.
One hour lecture, four hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
ABT 1323 — REFINISHING II — This course is a continuation of Refinishing I. Included are types of paint
defects, paint gun applications, and maintenance procedures. Instruction includes refinish materials and
their specific application procedures, preventing painting problems, and solving problems that do occur. One
hour lecture, four hours lab. Three semester hours credit. Prerequisite: Refinishing I (ABT-1313).
ABT 1443 — MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL COMPONENTS I — This course is designed to provide
theory and practice in the areas of vehicle restraint systems, the fundamentals of electricity, cooling systems,
and air conditioning/heating systems. Included are procedures for general shop safety, servicing active
or passive restraint systems, air bags, and interior components, headliners, seats, and carpets. Three hour
lecture. Three semester hours credit
ABT 1453 — MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL COMPONENTS II — This course is designed to provide
theory and practice in the areas of brakes and electrical systems. Instruction includes basic brake and electrical
system service and repair. Three hour lecture. Three semester hours credit. Prerequisite: Mechanical and
Electrical Components I (ABT-1443).
ABT 2163 — STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS AND DAMAGE REPAIR III — This course is a continuation of
Structural Analysis and Damage Repair II. This course provides instruction and practice in frame and unibody
structural inspection, measurement, and repair. Instruction includes analysis of damaged: frames, structural
members, suspension, and steering, and the set-up of alignment equipment. Two hour lecture, two hours lab.
Three semester hours credit. Prerequisite: Structural Analysis and Damage Repair II (ABT-1153).
ABT 2243 — NON-STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS AND DAMAGE REPAIR III — This course is a ontinuation of
Non-Structural Analysis and Damage Repair II. This course provides instruction for outer body panel repair
replacement, and continues adjustment principles and practices. Provided also is the theory and practice
in the repair of fiberglass, plastic, and sheet molded compounds. One hour lecture, four hours lab. Three semester hours credit. Co-requisite: Non-Structural Analysis and Damage Repair II (ABT-1233.)
ABT 2336 — REFINISHING III — This course is a continuation of Refinishing II with emphasis on advanced
painting techniques including paint mixing, matching, and applying and detailing. Two hours lecture,
eight hours lab. Six semester hours credit. Prerequisite: Refinishing II (ABT-1323). Co-requisite: ABT 2343
Refinishing IV.
ABT 2713 — COLLISION ANALYSIS AND ESTIMATION — This course covers the complete inspection and
analysis of damaged vehicles. It is designed to enable the student to determine the conditions and severity
of the damage, the repair or replacement of parts, the estimated repair time, and correct use of reference
manuals. One hour lecture, four hours lab. Three semester hours credit. Prerequisite: Structural Analysis And
Damage Repair II (ABT 1153) and Non-Structural Analysis and Damage Repair II (ABT-1233) and Mechanical
and Electrical Components II (ABT-1453).
ABT 2923 — SUPERVISED WORK EXPERIENCE IN COLLISION REPAIR TECHNOLOGY — This course is a
cooperative program between industry and education designed to integrate the student’s technical studies
with industrial experience. Variable credit is awarded on the basis of one semester hour per 45 industrial
contact hours. Nine hours externship, 135 contact hours.
ATT 1124 — BASIC ELECTRICAL/ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS — (Prerequisite: ATT 1124 Basic Electrical/
Electronic Systems) This course is designed to provide advanced skills and knowledge related to all
components of the vehicle electrical system including Two hours lecture. Four hours lab. Four semester hours credit.
ATT 1134 — ADVANCED ELECTRICAL/ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS — This course is designed to provide
advanced skills and knowledge related to all components of the vehicle electrical system including gauges,
driver information systems, horn, wiper/wiper systems, and accessories. Two hours lecture. Four hours lab.
Four semester hours credit.
ATT 1214 — BRAKES — This course is designed to provide advanced skills and knowledge related to the
repair and maintenance of brake systems on automobiles. It includes instruction and practice in diagnosis of
braking system problems and the repair of brake systems. Two hours lecture. Four hours lab. Four semester hours credit.
ATT 1313 — MANUAL DRIVE TRAIN/TRANSAXLE — This course is designed to provide advanced skills
and knowledge related to the maintenance and repair of manual transmissions, transaxles and drive train
components. It includes instruction in the diagnosis of drive train problems and the repair and maintenance
of transmissions, transaxles, clutches, CV joints, differentials and other components. Two hours lecture. Three
hours lab. Four semester hours credit.
ATT 1424 — ENGINE PERFORMANCE I — (Corequisite: ATT 1124- BASIC ELECTRICAL/ELECTRON
SYSTEMS) This course is designed to provide advanced skills and knowledge related to the maintenance and
adjustment of gasoline engines for optimum performance. It includes instruction, diagnosis, and correction
of problems associated within these areas. Two hours lecture. Four hours lab. Four semester hours credit.
ATT 1715 — ENGINE REPAIR — This course is designed to provide advanced skills and knowledge related to
the repair and rebuilding of automobile type engines. It includes instruction and practice in the diagnosis and
repair of engine components including valve trains, blocks, pistons and connecting rods, crankshafts and oil
EAST CENTRAL COMMUNITY COLLEGE 156
pumps. Two hours lecture. Six hours lab. Five semester hours credit.
ATT 1811 — INTRODUCTION, SAFETY, AND EMPLOYABILITY SKILLS — This course is designed to provide
knowledge of classroom and lab policies and procedures. Safety practices and procedures associated with the
automotive program and automotive industry. One hour lecture, one semester hour credit
ATT 2324 — AUTOMATIC TRANSMISSIONS/TRANSAXLES — This course is designed to provide technical
skills and knowledge related to the diagnosis and repair of automotive type automatic transmissions and
transaxles. It includes instruction and practice in testing and inspecting these devices and in disassembly,
repair, and reassembly. Two hours lecture. Four hours lab. Four semester hours credit.
ATT 2334 — STEERING AND SUSPENSION SYSTEMS — This course is designed to provide advanced skills
and knowledge related to the inspection and repair of steering and suspension systems on automobiles. It
includes instruction and practice in the diagnosis of steering system problems and the repair/replacement of
steering system components. Two hours lecture. Four hours lab. Four semester hours credit.
ATT 2434 — ENGINE PERFORMANCE II — (Prerequisite: ATT 1424 – Engine Performance I) This course is
designed to provide advanced skills and knowledge related to the ignition system, fuel, air induction, and
exhaust systems. It includes instruction, diagnosis, and correction of problems associated with in these areas.
Two hours lecture. Four hours lab. Four semester hours credit.
ATT 2444 — ENGINE PERFORMANCE III — (Prerequisite: ATT 2434 Engine Performance II) This course is
designed to provide advanced skills and knowledge related to the emissions control systems and engine
related service. It includes instruction, diagnosis, and correction of problems associated within these areas.
Two hours lecture. Four hours lab. Four semester hours credit.
ATT 2614 — HEATING AND AIR CONDITIONING — This course is designed to provide advanced skills
and knowledge associated with the maintenance and repair of automotive heating and air conditioning systems. It includes instruction and practice in the diagnosis and repair of heating and air conditioning system
components, and control systems. Two hours lecture. Four hours lab. Four semester hours credit.
IAT 1113 — INTRODUCTION TO AUTOMATION AND CONTROLS — This course is designed to introduce
students to the fundamental skills associated with safety, basic tools, special tools, and equipment. Two hours
lecture, two hours lab. Three semester credit hours.
IAT 1123 — ELECTRICAL WIRING FOR AUTOMATION AND CONTROLS — This course will cover basic
electrical wiring for automation and controls including safety practices; installation and maintenance of
raceways, conduit, and fittings; and three-phase service entrances, metering devices main panels, raceways
or ducts, subpanels, feeder circuits and branch circuits according to electrical codes. Two hours lecture, two
hours lab. Three semester credit hours.
IAT 1133 — AC AND DC CIRCUITS FOR AUTOMATION AND CONTROL — This course will cover principles
and theories with DC and AC circuits used in the automation trade will be covered. Also includes the study
of electronic circuits, laws and formulas, and the use of test equipment to analyze AC and DC circuits. Two
hours lecture, two hours lab. Three semester credit hours.
IAT 1143 — FLUID POWER FOR AUTOMATION AND CONTROLS — This course provides basic instruction
in hydraulics and pneumatics. This course covers actuators, accumulators, valves, pumps, motors, coolers,
compression of air, control devices, and circuit diagrams. Emphasis is placed on the development of control
circuits and troubleshooting techniques. Two hours lecture, two hours lab. Three semester credit hours.
IAT 1153 — MOTOR CONTROL SYSTEMS FOR AUTOMATION AND CONTROLS — This course includes the
installation of different motor control circuits and devices. Emphasis is placed on developing the student’s
ability to diagram, wire and troubleshoot the different circuits and mechanical control devices. Two hours
lecture, two hours lab. Three semester credit hours.
IAT 1163 — MANUFACTURING SKILLS FOR AUTOMATION AND CONTROLS — This course is designed
to provide the student with the basic skills needed to be successful in a high performance manufacturing
environment. The course covers 5 major areas of knowledge that are considered critical for employment in a
high-performance manufacturing company. The topics covered include: Basic Computer Literacy, Blueprint
Reading, Precision Measurement, and an introduction to manufacturing improvement methods that covers
Lean Manufacturing, Quick Changeover, SS, Teamwork and Problem-solving. Two hours lecture, two hours
lab. Three semester credit hours.
IAT 1173 — CONTROL SYSTEMS I FOR AUTOMATION AND CONTROLS — This course is an introductory
course to provide information on various instrumentation components and processes. Topics include
analyzing pressure processes, temperatures, flow, and level. . Two hours lecture, two hours lab. Three semester credit hours.
IAT 2113 — PROGRAMMABLE LOGIC CONTROLLERS FOR AUTOMATION AND CONTROLS — This
course provides instruction in the use of programmable logic controllers (PLCs) in modern industrial settings.
The operating principles, installation and basic programming of PLCs will be covered. Two hours lecture,
two hours lab. Three semester credit hours.
IAT 2123 — CONTROL SYSTEMS II FOR AUTOMATION AND CONTROLS — This course is a continuation
of Control Systems I with special emphasis on application of applied skills along with new skills to develop
instrument process controls. The student will be given a process to develop the appropriate instruments and
needed diagrams, utilizing various controlling processes and demonstrating loop troubleshooting techniques.
Two hours lecture, two hours lab. Three semester credit hours.
IAT 2133 — SOLID STATE MOTOR CONTROLS FOR AUTOMATION AND CONTROLS — This course
provides knowledge of the principles and operation of solid state motor control, and variable frequency
drives. The design, installation, and maintenance of different solid state devices for motor control will be
introduced. Two hours lecture, two hours lab. Three semester credit hours.
IAT 2413 — SPECIAL PROJECTS IN AUTOMATION AND CONTROLS — This course provides students with
an opportunity to utilize skills and knowledge gained in other Automation and Control Technology courses.
The instructor and student work closely together to select a topic and establish criteria for completion of the
project. Six hours lab. Three semester credit hours.
ELT 1353 — FUNDAMENTALS OF ROBOTICS — This course is designed to introduce the student to industrial
robots. Topics to be covered include robotics history, industrial robot configurations, operation, and basic
programming. Two hours lecture. Two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
ELT 2153 — INDUSTRIAL ROBOTICS — This course teaches the operating systems and advanced programming
methods of industrial robots. Actual industrial grade robots are used to train the student in the areas of
operation, maintenance, troubleshooting, service procedures, and robotics applications. Two hours lecture.
Two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
BOT 1013 — INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING — (Prerequisite: None) This course provides an
introduction to basic word processing commands and essential skill development using the touch system on
the alphabetic keyboard. Course emphasis will be on speed and accuracy when keying documents and timed
writings. Three hours lecture. Three semester hours credit.
BOT 1233 — MICROSOFT® WORD® I — This course focuses on improving keyboarding techniques using the
touch method and on production of documents using Microsoft® Word® functions. Three semester hours credit. Two hours lecture, two hours lab.
BOT 1243 — MICROSOFT® WORD® II — (Prerequisite: BOT 1233 Microsoft® Word® I) This course is a
continuation of Microsoft® Word® I and focuses on production of documents using Microsoft® Word®.
Production with accuracy is stressed and practice is given through a variety of documents for skillbuilding. Three semester hours credit. Two hours lecture, two hours lab.
BOT 1273 — INTRODUCTION TO MICROSOFT® OFFICE® — This course will introduce an operating system
and word processing, spreadsheet, database management, and presentation software applications using the
Microsoft® Office® suite. Two hours lecture, two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
BOT 1313 — APPLIED BUSINESS MATH — (Prerequisite: None) This course is designed to develop competency
in mathematics for business use. Ten-key touch method on electronic desktop calculators is stressed. Three
hours lecture. Three semester hours credit.
BOT 1433 — BUSINESS ACCOUNTING — (Prerequisite: None) This course is designed to develop an understanding
of recording, classifying, and summarizing business transactions and events with insight into interpreting and
reporting the resulting effects upon the business. Three hours lecture. Three semester hours credit.
BOT 1493 — SOCIAL MEDIA MANAGEMENT & MARKETING — (Prerequisite: BOT 1243 Microsoft® Word®
II )This course teaches students how to develop and maintain a social media presence in a personal and
professional capacity. Students will engage in community and internet-based projects with special emphasis
on blogs, wikis, social networking sites, photo-sharing sites, instant messaging, videos-haring sites, podcasts,
widgets, virtual worlds, and more. Two hours lecture, two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
BOT 1613 — MEDICAL TERMINOLOGY I — (Prerequisite: None) This course is a study of medical language
relating to the various body systems including diseases, physical conditions, procedures, clinical specialties,
and abbreviations. Emphasis is placed on correct spelling and pronunciation. Three hours lecture. Three semester hours credit.
BOT 1623 — MEDICAL TERMINOLOGY II — (Prerequisite: BOT 1613 Medical Terminology I) This course
presents medical terminology pertaining to human anatomy in the context of body systems. The emphasis is
directed toward medical terminology as it relates to medical office. Two hours lecture. Two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
BOT 1763 — COMMUNICATION ESSENTIALS — This course focuses on the basic English competencies
and communication skills necessary to be successful and effective in the workplace in addition to effectively
contributing to a team while working with a diverse population. Two hours lecture, two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
BOT 1823 — MICROSOFT® EXCEL® I — This course focuses on application Microsoft® Excel® as an aid to
management decision making. Two hours lecture, two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
BOT 1853 — MICROSOFT® EXCEL® II — (Prerequisite: BOT 1823 Microsoft® Excel® I) This course is a
continuation of Microsoft® Excel® I and focuses on advanced functions and applications of the software.
Two hours lecture, two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
BOT 2133 — DESKTOP PUBLISHING — (Prerequisite: BOT 1233 Microsoft® Word ® I). This course presents
graphic design techniques, principles of page layout and design, and electronic publishing terminology and
applications to create a variety of documents such as flyers, brochures, newsletters, and business cards using
advanced features of word processing. Two hours lecture. Two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
BOT 2183 — CAREER READINESS — This course is designed to prepare students for employment by
teaching the importance of interviewing skills, employer expectations, employability skills, work ethics, and
job retention skills. Two hours lecture, two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
BOT 2333 — MICROSOFT® ACCESS® — This course applies database concepts for designing and manipulating
data files and formatting output as complex documents and reports using Microsoft® Access®. Two hours
lecture, two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
BOT 2433 — QUICKBOOKS® — This course applies basic accounting principles using QuickBooks®. Two
hours lecture, two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
BOT 2523 — MEDICAL MACHINE TRANSCRIPTION I — (Prerequisites: BOT 1113-Document Formatting
& Production and BOT 1613-Medical Terminology I and BOT 1623-Medical Terminology II ). This course
is designed to teach transcription of various medical documents. One hour lecture. Four hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
BOT 2643 — CPT CODING — (Prerequisites: BOT 1613 Medical Terminology I and BOT 1623 Medical
Terminology II) (Corequisite: BOT 2653 ICD Coding) This course is an introduction to the field of procedural
coding and requirements for insurance reimbursement. Two hours lecture. Two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
BOT 2653 — ICD CODING — (Prerequisites: BOT 1613 Medical Terminology I, and BOT 1623 Medical
Terminology II) (Corequisite: BOT 2643 CPT Coding) This course is an introduction to the field of diagnostic
coding. Two hours lecture. Two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
BOT 2673 — MEDICAL INSURANCE BILLING — This course is a culmination of skills and knowledge of
appropriate procedures for generating, processing, and submitting health insurance claims to private and
government health insurance programs. Two hours lecture, two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
BOT 2743 — MEDICAL OFFICE CONCEPTS — (Prerequisites: BOT 1233 Microsoft® Word® I) This course will
provide coverage and integration of medical office skills and issues using knowledge of medical terminology.
Problem solving will be emphasized. Two hours lecture. Two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
BOT 2763 ELECTRONIC HEALTH RECORDS — (Prerequisite: BOT 1613 — Medical Terminology I ) This
course covers electronic health records (EHR) in the healthcare environment as they pertain to various
healthcare settings. Two hours lecture, two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
BOT 2923 BOT EXTERNSHIP AND SEMINAR — This course will provide students an opportunity to serve
as interns with local businesses and will be given meaningful projects, responsibilities, work deadlines, and
expectations similar to what they would expect as a full-time employee. This capstone course can only be
taken in the graduating semester. Two hours lecture, two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
BOT 2463 PAYROLL ACCOUNTING — This course provides an in-depth study of payroll accounting. Two
hours lecture, two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
BOT 2613 ENTREPRENEURIAL PROBLEM SOLVING — (Prerequisite: BOT 1233 Microsoft® Word® I) This
course is designed to develop business students into entrepreneurs capable of operating their own companies
and to reduce the high failure rate of starting, conducting, and expanding a business. Students will gain
experience in problem solving through visits to businesses, analyses of case studies, and projects and surveys
of current business practices. Two hours lecture, two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
BOT 2233 — HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT — This course provides a general overview of the concepts
and applications of the many parts of Human Resources (HR). Students will learn how the interdependence
of the major topics in HR are created and implemented through the use of real world HR issues, community
projects, and case studies. Two hours lecture, two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
CDT 1113 — EARLY CHILDHOOD PROFESSION — This course provides an introduction to the profession of
early childhood, types of early childhood programs, and theories of child development. Students are required
to observe, assess, and record child behavior through laboratory experience. Room arrangements, software,
play, and safety are explored. Two hours lecture. Two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
CDT 1213 — INFANT AND TODDLER DEVELOPMENT — This course provides knowledge concerning the
care and development of infants and toddlers in early childhood programs. Practice of infant and toddler
care giving skills (birth to 36 months) in group settings is given in laboratory classroom or collaborative
centers. Three hours credit, two hours lecture, two hours lab.
CDT 1223 — PRESCHOOL AND PRIMARY DEVELOPMENT — This course provides knowledge concerning
the care, development, and education of the preschool child in group settings and school age children in
afterschool and summer programming. Practice is given in preschool children caregiving in group settings
through classroom laboratory or collaborative centers. (ages 3–8) Three hours credit, two hours lecture, two hours lab.
CDT 1313 — CREATIVE ARTS FOR YOUNG CHILDREN — This course is designed to plan and develop
creative art activities with children birth to age eight. Activities will be implemented during Student Teaching
I and II. Three hours lecture. Three semester hours credit.
CDT 1343 — CHILD, HEALTH, SAFETY AND NUTRITION — This course provides knowledge of general
health, safety, and nutrition practices in the care and education of young children that includes health and
safety issues required by the Mississippi Department of Health (MDH) Regulations Governing Licensure of
Childcare Facilities and referenced in the Infant Toddler Environmental Rating Scale Revised (ITERS-R) and
Early Childhood Environmental Rating Scale Revised (ECERS-R). Three semester hours, three hours lecture.
CDT 1713 — LANGUAGE AND LITERACY DEVELOPMENT FOR YOUNG CHILDREN — This course
includes the study of oral and written language development of young children and the implementation of
a developmentally appropriate language arts curriculum. The Mississippi Early Learning Guidelines, Infant
Toddler Environmental Rating Scale Revised (ITERS-R), and Early Childhood Environmental Rating Scale
Revised (ECERS-R) are utilized. Three hours lecture. Three semester hours credit.
CDT 2233 — GUIDING SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL BEHAVIOR — This course focuses on the identification
of developmental stages and environmental influences on young children’s behavior. Positive guidance
principles are discussed and practiced to ensure a productive learning environment. Resources include the
Mississippi Department of Health Regulations Governing Licensure of Childcare Facilities, Mississippi Early
Learning Guidelines, Infant Toddler Environmental Rating Scale Revised (ITERS-R), and Early Childhood
Environmental Rating Scale Revised (ECERS-R). Lab activities will be implemented during Student Teaching
I and II. Three hours lecture. Three semester hours credit.
CDT 2413 — DEVELOPMENT OF THE EXCEPTIONAL CHILD — This course provides knowledge of
atypically developing children, family, and classroom intervention strategies and available support services.
Legal, ethical, legislative, and family issues will be explored. Resources include Infant Toddler Environmental
Rating Scale Revised (ITERS-R), and Early Childhood Environmental Rating Scale Revised (ECERS-R). Three hours credit, two hours lecture, two hours lab.
CDT 2513 — FAMILY DYNAMICS AND COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT — This course provides knowledge
for establishing successful partnerships with children’s families and communities by creating respectful,
reciprocal relationships that support and empower families while involving families in their children’s
development and learning (ages birth to 8 years). Three hours credit. Three hours lecture.
CDT 2613 — METHODS AND MATERIALS — This course will introduce Mississippi Early Learning Guidelines,
Infant Toddler Environmental Rating Scale Revised (ITERS-R), and Early Childhood Environmental Rating
Scale Revised (ECERS-R) to develop classroom curricula in an indoor and outdoor learning environment.
Lab activities with the children are implemented during Student Teaching I and II. Three hours lecture. Three semester hours credit.
CDT 2713 — SOCIAL STUDIES, MATH, AND SCIENCE FOR YOUNG CHILDREN — This course provides
instructional and hands-on techniques in planning developmentally appropriate activities in social studies,
math and science for young children. Lab activities with the children are implemented during Student
Teaching I and II. Four hour lecture. Four semester hours credit.
CDT 2813 — ADMINISTRATION OF PROGRAMS FOR YOUNG CHILDREN — This course provides an
overview of the development and administration of programs for young children. Emphasis is placed on
evaluation of policies and procedures, organizational structure, management, and the Mississippi Childcare
Quality Steps System (MCCQSS). Three hours lecture. Three semester hours credit.
CDT 2915 — INITIAL PRACTICUM — This course is a supervised practicum which includes a minimum of
120 clock hours of observation and supervised teaching in an approved early childhood setting. The course
provides the application of evidence based best practices of early education principles and theories. Students
work to create an environment that is safe, healthy, and developmentally appropriate to promote an optimum
learning environment for young children. Five hours credit, eight hours lab.
CDT 2944 — ADVANCED PRACTICUM — This course is a supervised practicum which includes a minimum
of 120 clock hours of observation and supervised teaching in an approved infant and toddler setting. The
course provides the application of evidence based best practices of early education principles and theories.
Students work to create an environment that is safe, healthy, and developmentally appropriate to promote an
optimum learning environment for young children. Four hours credit, eight hours lab.
COMPUTER NETWORKING & COMPUTER INFORMATION SYSTEMS TECHNOLOGY
IST 1124 — IT FOUNDATIONS — This course covers the diagnosis, troubleshooting, and maintenance of
computer components and interpersonal communications for IT professionals. Topics include hardware
compatibility, system architecture, memory, input devices, video displays, disk drives, modems, printers,
safety and environmental issues, communication, and professional behavior. Four semester hours: two-hour
lecture, four hour lab.
IST 1134 — FUNDAMENTALS OF DATA COMMUNICATIONS — This course presents basic concepts of
telephony, local area networks, wide area networks, data transmission, and topology methods. Four semester
hours: two hours lecture, four hours lab.
IST 1143 — PRINCIPLES AND INFORMATION SECURITY — This course is an introduction to the various
technical and administrative aspects of information security and assurance. This course provides the
foundation for understanding the key issues associated with protecting information assets, determining the
levels of protection and response to security incidents, and designing a consistent, reasonable information
security system with appropriate intrusion detection and reporting features. Three semester hours: two hour
lecture, two hour lab.
IST 1154 — WEB AND PROGRAMMING CONCEPTS — This course is an introduction to Web site development
and programming logic. Students will gain hands-on experience in the development of computer programs.
Upon completion of this course, students will be able to create a Web site and post it on the Internet. Four
semester hours: two-hour lecture, four hour lab.
IST 1163 — DATABASE & SQL CONCEPTS — This course is an introduction to the design and manipulation
of relational databases. Emphasis is placed on creation, manipulation, extraction, and display of data from
existing databases. QBE and SQL are explored. Three semester hours: two hour lecture, two hour lab.
IST 1213 — CLIENT INSTALLATION AND CONFIGURATION — This course is designed to help the student
install, support, and troubleshoot a current client operating system. Emphasis will be placed on common
user operations as well as the network administrator’s support of the client. Three semester hours: two hour
lecture, two hour lab.
IST 1223 — NETWORK COMPONENTS — This course presents local area network and wide area network
connectivity. It focuses on architectures, topologies, protocols, and transport methods of a network. Three
semester hours: two hour lecture, two hour lab. Prerequisite: IST 1134 Fundamentals of Data Communications
or CNT 1414.
IST 1234 — NETWORK ADMINISTRATION USING NOVELL — This course focuses on the management
of a computer network using the Novell network operating system. Emphasis will be placed on daily
administrative tasks performed by a network administrator. Four semester hours: two-hour lecture, four
hour lab.
IST 1244 — NETWORK ADMINISTRATION USING MICROSOFT WINDOWS SERVER — This course focuses
on the management of a computer network using the Microsoft Windows Server network operating system.
Emphasis will be placed on daily administrative tasks performed by a network administrator. Four semester
hours: two-hour lecture, four hour lab.
IST 1254 — NETWORK ADMINISTRATION USING LINUX — This course focuses on the management of
a computer network using the Linux operating system. Emphasis is placed on installation, configuration,
implementation, and administrative tasks of a functional server. Four semester hours: two-hour lecture, four
hour lab.
IST 1314 — VISUAL BASIC PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE — This course is an introduction to the Visual
BASIC programming language introduces the student to object-oriented programming and a graphical
integrated development environment. Four semester hours: two-hour lecture, four hour lab.
IST 1514 — SQL PROGRAMMING — This course is the first of a two-part series that offers students an extensive
introduction to data server technology, covering the concepts of both relational and object relational databases
and the Structured Query Language (SQL). Students are taught to store, retrieve, and manipulate data. Four
semester hours: two-hour lecture, four hour lab.
IST 1613 — COMPUTER FORENSICS — This course is an introduction to the various technical and administrative
aspects of computer forensics and the laws pertaining to the cybercrime. This course provides the foundation
for understanding the key issues associated with computer forensic investigations, understanding the boot
processes, and disk structure for multiple operating systems, and understanding the processes related to data
acquisition during investigations (3 sch: 2 hr lecture, 2 hr lab).
IST 1624 — NETWORK SECURITY FUNDAMENTALS — This course provides the fundamental understanding
of network security principles, implementations and the technologies and principles involved in creating a
secure computer network environment. Topics include authentication, types of attacks and malicious code
against Web applications, e-mail, and file and print services (4 sch: 2 hr lecture, 2 hr lab). (Prerequisite: IST
1143).
IST 1633 — WIRELESS SECURITY AND PRIVACY — This course provides the fundamental understanding of
EAST CENTRAL COMMUNITY COLLEGE 162
wireless architecture, security principles, and the technologies and principles involved in creating a secure
wireless computer network environment. Topics include wireless hardware, protocols, encryption, and
how to prevent weaknesses in wireless technology (3 sch: 2 hr lecture, 2 hr lab). (Prerequisite: Instructor
Approved).
IST 1643 — NETWORK DEFENSE AND COUNTERMEASURES — This course provides a solid foundation
of network security and the understanding of the process to create a network defense and countermeasure
policy obtained from intrusion detection. Topics include Network Address Translation, packet filtering,
proxy servers, firewalls, and Virtual Private Networks used to design a network defense strategy (3 sch: 2 hr
lecture, 2 hr lab). (Prerequisite: IST 1143).
IST 1723 — PROGRAMMING IN PYTHON — This course is designed to provide an introduction to
programming concepts and data informatics using Python through lecture and a series of practical hands-on
exercises (3 sch: 2 hr lecture, 2 hr lab). (Prerequisite: Instructor Approved).
IST 2213 — NETWORK SECURITY — This course provides an introduction to network and computer security.
Topics such as ethics, security policies, legal issues, vulnerability testing tools, firewalls, and operating
system hardening will be discussed. Students will receive a deeper understanding of network operations and
protocols through traffic capture and protocol analysis . Three semester hours; two hours lecture, two hour
lab. Prerequisites: IST 1143 Security Principles and Policies.
IST 2224 — NETWORK PLANNING AND DESIGN — This course involves applying network concepts in
planning and designing a functioning network. Emphasis is placed on recognizing the need for a network,
conducting an analysis, and designing a solution. Four semester hours: two-hour lecture, four hour lab.
Prerequisites: IST 1223 Network Components or CNT 1523 and IST 1234 Network Administration Using
Novell or CNT 1614 or IST 1244 Network Administration Using Microsoft Windows Server or CNT 1624 or
IST 1254 Network Administration using Linux.
IST 2234 — NETWORK IMPLEMENTATION — This course is the culmination of all concepts learned in
the network curriculum. Topics include planning, installation, evaluation, and maintenance of a network
solution. Four semester hours: two-hour lecture, four hour lab. Co-requisite: IST 2224 Network Planning and
Design or CNT 2534.
IST 2244 — ADVANCE NETWORK ADMIN. USING NOVELL — This course is a continuation of Network
Administration Using Novell. Emphasis is place on installation, configuration, and implementation of a
Novell network. Four semester hours: two-hour lecture, four hour lab. Prerequisite: IST 1234 Network
Administration Using Novell or CNT 1614.
IST 2254 — ADVANCED NETWORK ADMINISTRATION USING MICROSOFT WINDOWS SERVER — This
course is a continuation of Network Administration Using Microsoft Windows Server. Emphasis is placed
on installation, configuration, and implementation of a functional server. Four semester hours: two-hour
lecture, four hour lab. Prerequisites: IST 1244 Network Administration Using Microsoft Windows Server or
CNT 1624.
IST 2264 — ADVANCED NETWORK ADMINISTRATION USING LINUX—This course is a continuation
of Network Administration Using Linux (IST 1254). This is an advanced administration course in network
services for Linux users who wish to increase their skills. Students will learn how to apply security to network
users, and resources, manage and compile the Linux kernel, manage network clients, and troubleshoot
network processes and services. Four semester hours: two-hour lecture, four hour lab. Prerequisites: IST 1254
Network Administration Using Linux.
IST 2324 — SCRIPT PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE — This course is an introduction to the use of integrating
script to add functionality to web pages. Four semester hours: two-hour lecture, four hour lab.
IST 2464 — POWERSHELL PROGRAMMING — This course is designed to introduce the student to the
PowerShell command line language and its use in monitoring and maintaining Microsoft networks. The
student will become familiar with the syntax of the command (4 sch: 3 hr lecture, 2 hr lab). (Prerequisite:
Instructor Approved).
IST 2614 — WINDOWS SECURITY — This course provides the knowledge and fundamental understanding of
Windows security, how to harden current Windows operating systems, and how to defend against attacks.
Topics include designing Active Directory, authentication for Windows, group security and policy, service
security, remote access security, planning a public key infrastructure, securing file resources, Internet Protocol
Security, and additional Windows security toics (3 sch: 2 hr lecture, 2 hr lab). (Prerequisites: Network Admin.
Using Microsoft Windows Server (IST 1244)).
IST 2634 — SECURITY TESTING AND IMPLEMENTATION — This course provides an in-depth exploration
of various methods for gaining unauthorized access and explores network security concepts from the point of
view of hackers and their methodologies. Topics include hackers, crackers, ethical hackers, attacks, intrusion
detection systems, malicious code, computer crimes and industrial espionage (4 sch: 2 hr lecture, 4 hr lab).
(Prerequisite: IST 1643).
CJT/CRJ 1313 — INTRODUCTION TO CRIMINAL JUSTICE — This course contains the history, development,
and philosophy of law enforcement in a democratic society, introduction to agencies involved in the
administration of criminal justice; career orientation. Three Hours Lecture. Three Semester Hours Credit
CJT/CRJ 1323 — POLICE ADMINISTRATION AND ORGANIZATION — This course contains the principles
of organization and administration in law enforcement as applied to law enforcement agencies; introduction
to concepts of organizational behavior. Three Hours Lecture. Three Semester Hours Credit
CJT/CRJ 1343 — POLICE AND COMMUNITY RELATIONS — This course is a study of current issues between
police and community. The role and influence of officers in community relations; tensions and conflict; and
the problem areas of race and juveniles will be covered. Three Hours Lecture. Three Semester Hours Credit
CJT/CRJ 1363 — INTRODUCTION TO CORRECTIONS — This course contains an overview of the correctional
field; its origins, historical and philosophical background development, current status; and relationship with
other facets of the criminal justice system and future prospects. Three Hours Lecture. Three Semester Hours Credit
CJT/CRJ 1383 – CRIMINOLOGY — This course includes the study and practice the nature and significance of
criminal behavior. It also explores the theories, statistics, trends, and programs concerning criminal behavior.
Three Hours Lecture. Three Semester Hours Credit
CJT/CRJ 2213 — TRAFFIC LAW — This course will provide an overview of traffic law and its components.
A major focus of this course will be the history, development, and philosophy of law enforcement in a
democratic society, introduction to the traffic law, and overview of enforcement. Specifically, this course will
cover such topics as examining the role of government in coping with traffic problems. Emphasis is placed
on the history, development, and enforcement of statutes pertaining to motor vehicles. Three Hours Lecture.
Three Semester Hours Credit
CJT/CRJ 2313 — POLICE OPERATIONS AND ETHICS — This course is a study of the operation and
administration of law enforcement agencies. Particular emphasis is placed on the functions of the patrol
division. Three Hours Lecture. Three Semester Hours Credit
CJT/CRJ 2323 — CRIMINAL LAW — This couse presents basic elements of criminal law under the Constitution
of the United States, state Constitutions, and federal and state statutes. Three Hours Lecture. Three Semester Hours Credit
CJT/CRJ 2333 — CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION I — This course includes fundamentals, search and recording,
collection and preservation of evidence, finger printing, photography, sources of information, interviews and
interrogation. Three Hours Lecture. Three Semester Hours Credit
CJT/CRJ 2353 — DRUGS AND SOCIETY — This course is designed to introduce the student to the social
reality of drug use and drug users. We will study the historical significance and social construction of drug
use, users, abuse and addiction. Additionally, the course focuses on drug use and abuse as a social--rather
than as a medical or psychopathological--phenomenon. Three Hours Lecture. Three Semester Hours Credit
CJT/CRJ 2393 — SURVEY OF CRIMINALISTICS — This course provides a study of scientific crime detention
methods, modus operandi, crime scene search, preservation of evidence, research projects and other topics
related to criminalistics. Three Hours Lecture. Three Semester Hours Credit
CJT/CRJ 2513 — JUVENILE JUSTICE — This course identifies the role of police in juvenile delinquency
and control. It covers organization, functions, and jurisdiction of juvenile agencies as well as processing,
detention, and disposition of cases. Statutes and court procedures applied to juveniles will also be covered in
this course. Three Hours Lecture. Three Semester Hours Credit
CJT/CRJ 2613 — COMPUTER SECURITY — This course introduces the student to the student to current
technological advances in the field of forensic science as well as some novel concepts in crime scene
investigation. This class will also cover what the future may hold for forensic science in terms of new ideas,
technology, and instrumentation. Three Hours Lecture. Three Semester Hours Credit
CJT/CRJ 2623 — ASSET PROTECTION — This course entails security awareness of management and
employees; vulnerability training; internal/external theft and fraud; disaster control; physical security
planning; investigation; guard protection; and alcohol and drug abuse in work place. Three Hours Lecture.
Three Semester Hours Credit
CJT/CRJ 2723 — INTELLIGENCE ANALYSIS AND SECURITY MANAGEMENT — This course is designed to
develop an understanding of how intelligence assists in maintaining national security, the laws, guidelines,
executive directives and oversight relating to intelligence as well as the methodologies used in the intelligence
community. Three Hours Lecture. Three Semester Hours Credit
CJT/CRJ 2733 — TRANSPORTATION AND BORDER SECURITY — This course provides a student with an
analysis of issues that concern the protection of the borders of the United States and U. S. policies regarding
the safety of the U. S. Transportation System. Three Hours Lecture. Three Semester Hours Credit
CJT/CRJ 2743 — FOUNDATIONS OF HOMELAND SECURITY AND TERRORISM — This course is a study of
the issues pertaining to the role and mission of the Department of Homeland Security and related agencies,
both domestic and international. Three Hours Lecture. Three Semester Hours Credit
CJT/CRJ 2813 — CRIMINAL PROCEDURES — This course provides an in-depth study of the criminal case
within the state and federal court systems. Three Hours Lecture. Three Semester Hours Credit
CJT/CRJ 2823 — CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION II — This course introduces the student to advanced concepts
specific to crime scene processing. Beyond the identification, documentation, and collection of evidence on
a crime scene lies the true field of crime scene analysis. The ability to give interpretive value to data gained
from a crime scene is what makes a crime scene technician an expert on the witness stand. Three Hours
Lecture. Three Semester Hours Credit
CJT/CRJ 2833 — FINGERPRINT ANALYSIS AND COMPARISON — This course introduces the student
to concepts and technologies associated with fingerprint analysis and comparison. A quality crime scene
investigator should have advanced knowledge in developing fingerprints on a variety of surfaces as well as
how to search fingerprint databases and identify fingerprints to individuals. This is an important skill that
will be used daily in the field of crime scene processing and investigations. By the end of this class the student
will be able to process a variety of items for prints, explain how a fingerprint would be searched against
databases, and understand the concepts behind identifying an individual with fingerprint evidence. Three
Hours Lecture. Three Semester Hours Credit
CJT/CRJ 2843 — DEATH INVESTIGATION — This course introduces the student to intermediate concepts
specific to crime scene processing. Using physical evidence to develop leads in an investigation begins with
crime scene investigation. Much more goes in to crime scene investigation than documenting and collecting
evidence. This class will build on Crime Scene Investigation I by reviewing particular scene types and
techniques for analyzing each specific scene type. Three Hours Lecture. Three Semester Hours Credit
CJT/CRJ 2853 — CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION III — This course introduces the student to advanced concepts
specific to crime scene processing. Beyond the identification, documentation, and collection of evidence on
a crime scene lies the true field of crime scene analysis. The ability to give interpretive value to data gained
from a crime scene is what makes a crime scene technician an expert on the witness stand. Three Hours
Lecture. Three Semester Hours Credit
CUT 1114 — CULINARY PRINCIPLES I — This course focuses on the fundamentals of food preparation and
cookery emphasizing high standards for preparation of meat, poultry, seafood, vegetables, soups, stocks,
sauces, and farinaceous items. Co-requisites: Sanitation and Safety (HRT 1213) or by permission of instructor.
Two hours lecture, four hours lab. Four semester credit hours.
CUT 1123 — CULINARY PRINCIPLES II — This course focuses on the advanced study of Culinary Principles
I to polish and perfect the techniques of food preparation and cookery emphasizing high standards for
preparation of meat, poultry, seafood, vegetables, soups, stocks, sauces, and farinaceous items. Prerequisites:
Culinary Principles I (HRT 1213/CUT 1114). One hour lecture, four hours lab. Three semester credit hours.
CUT 1133 — PRINCIPLES OF BAKING — This course focuses on the fundamentals of baking science,
terminology, ingredients, weights and measures, and formula conversion and storage. Students will prepare
yeast goods, pies, cakes, cookies, and quick breads; and use and care for equipment. Prerequisites: Culinary
Principles I (HRT 1213/CUT 1114). Two hours lecture, two hours lab. Three semester credit hours.
CUT 1513 — GARDE MANGER — This course provides orientation to garnishing, preparation of charcuterie
items, cold foods, and buffet presentation. It also explores the various duties of the modern garde manger.
Prerequisites: Culinary Principles I (HRT 1213/CUT 1114). One hour lecture, four hour lab. Three semeste credit hours.
CUT 2223 — MENU PLANNING AND FACILITIES DESIGN — This course introduces the principles and
concepts of menu planning, menu formats, and layout with regard to a wide variety of eating habits and
taste of the dining public. Emphasis will be on pricing, menu design, merchandising, tools, nutritional
considerations, schedules, and profitability. Effective planning and layout of kitchen and equipment will also
be emphasized. Prerequisites: None . Three hours lecture. Three semester credit hours.
CUT 2243 — DINING ROOM MANAGEMENT — This course introduces the management of a restaurant
dining room including good housekeeping technique, fine food, and efficient service. Covers French,
Russian, American, and English waited table service, limited service, counter, tray service, and catering.
Emphasis will be place on staffing, scheduling controls and skills required to effectively supervise a dining
room operations. Prerequisites: None. Three semester hours, one hour lecture and four hour lab.
CUT 2313 — AMERICAN REGIONAL CUISINE — This course will explore the American Cuisine concept
emphasizing freshness, seasonality, nutrition, indigenous ingredients, and presentation. A thorough study into
the cuisine characteristics and traditions of the various regions of the United States of America. Prerequisites:
CUT 1114 Culinary Principles I, CUT 1124 Culinary Principles II. Three semester hours, one hour lecture, four
hours lab.
CUT 2423 — INTERNATIONAL CUISINE — This course is a study of cuisines of the world. Emphasis is on use
of authentic ingredients, methods, and terminology. Prerequisites: CUT 1114 Culinary Principles I, CUT 1124
Culinary Principles II. Four semester hours, one hour lecture, four hour lab.
CUT 2926 — SUPERVISED WORK EXPERIENCE IN CULINARY ARTS TECHNOLOGY — This course is a
cooperative program between industry and education and is designed to integrate the student’s technical
studies with industrial experience. Prerequisite: Consent of instructor. Six semester hours, 18 hours externship.
DDT 1163 — ENGINEERING GRAPHICS — This course is designed to give the drafting major the background
needed for all other drafting courses. Emphasis is placed upon maintaining correct techniques while
developing speed. Two hours lecture, two hours laboratory. Three semester hours credit.
DDT 1173 — MECHANICAL DESIGN I — (Prerequisite: DDT 1163 Engineering Graphics or GRA 1143 Graphic
Communication I) This course emphasizes methods, techniques and procedure in presenting screws, bolts,
rivets, springs, thread types, symbols for welding, materials, finish and heat treatment rotation, working
order preparation, routing and other drafting room procedures. Two hours lecture, two hours laboratory.
Three semester hours credit.
DDT 1213 — CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS AND MATERIALS — A course designed to familiarize the
student with the physical properties of the materials generally used in the erection of structures, with a brief
description of their manufacturer. Three hours lecture, two hours laboratory. Three semester hours credit.
DDT 1313 — COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN I — This course will use the CAD system to design and draw
various problems in the architectural, mechanical and civil drafting areas. Emphasis will be placed on the
operations of the CAD system to solve these problems. Two hours lecture, two hours laboratory. Three semester hours credit.
DDT 1323 — COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN II — (Prerequisite: DDT 1313 Computer-Aided Design I or GRA
1143 Graphic Communication I). This course is designed as a continuation of Computer-Aided Design I.
Subject areas will include dimensions, sectional views, and symbols. Two hours lecture, two hours laboratory.
Three semester hours credit.
DDT 1413 — ELEMENTARY SURVEYING — This course provides instruction in surveying dealing with
the principles of geometry, theory and use of instruments, mathematical calculations, and the control and
reduction of errors. One hour lecture, four hours laboratory. Three semester hours credit.
DDT 1613 — ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN I — (Prerequisites: DDT 1163 Engineering Graphics I and DDT
1313 Computer-Aided Design I or GRA 1143 Graphic Communication I in lieu of DDT 1313 Computer-Aided
Design I). This course includes principles and practices of modern design, requiring working drawings and
solutions, typical construction details and specifications for residential construction. One hour lecture, four
hours laboratory. Three semester hours credit.
DDT 2153 — CIVIL PLANNING AND DESIGN — (Prerequisite: DDT 1413 Elementary Surveying and
DDT 1323 Computer-Aided Design II) This course deals with the development of civil planning and design
processes. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory. Three semester hours credit.
DDT 2213 — STRUCTURAL DETAILING I — (Prerequisite: DDT 1163 Engineering Graphics I and DDT 1313
Computer-Aided Design I or GRA 1143 Graphic Communication I). This course will introduce the drafting major to structural sections, terms and conventional abbreviations, and symbols used by structural
fabricators and erectors. Knowledge is gained in the use of A.I.S.C. Handbook. Problems are studied that
involve structural designing and drawing of beams, columns, connections, trusses and bracing. One hour
lecture, four hours laboratory. Three semester hours credit.
DDT 2243 — COST ESTIMATING — This course includes preparation of material lists and quantity surveys
from actual working drawings and specifications. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory. Three semester hours credit.
DDT 2373 — 3D MODELING — (Prerequisite: DDT 1323 Computer-Aided Design II). This course is an
advanced course in the use of CAD software with emphasis on the user coordinate system and 3-D modeling.
Two hours lecture, two hours laboratory. Three semester hours credit.
DDT 2423 — MAPPING AND TOPOGRAPHY — (Prerequisite: DDT 1413 Elementary Surveying and DDT
1323 Computer-Aided Design II). This course is a laboratory setting that will allow the drafting major to
apply selected drafting techniques to the problem of making maps, traverses, plot plans, plan and profile
drawings using maps, field survey data, aerial photographs and related references, materials including
symbols, notations, and other applicable standardized materials. Two hours lecture, two hours laboratory.
Three semester hours credit.
DDT 2433 — LEGAL PRINCIPLES OF SURVEYING — This course is a study of the legal aspects of boundary
controls for the survey and resurvey of real property. Two hours lecture, two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
DDT 2443 — BOUNDARY SURVEYING — Practical applications of boundary surveying as per State of
Mississippi regulations. Course includes methods of determining boundary location and legal descriptions,
research record survey/description information, data collection, and boundary stake-out. One hour lecture,
four hours lab.
DDT 2623 — ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN II — (Prerequisite: DDT 1613 Architectural Design I and DDT 1323
Computer-Aided Design II). This course emphasizes standard procedures and working drawings. Details
involving architectural, mechanical, electrical, and structural drawings are covered, along with presentation
of drawings and computer aided design assignments. Two hours lecture, two hours laboratory. Three semester hours credit.
DDT 2633 — PRE-ENGINEERED METAL STEEL BUILDING DRAFTING — (Prerequisite: Architectural Design
I) This course provides a basic understanding of a metal building system design and its incorporation into
architectural engineering documents. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory. Three semester hours credit.
DDT 2123 — FUNDAMENTALS OF GIS (Geographical Information Systems) — This course includes the use
of mapping and databases in multiple applications. Included are incorporation of imagery and data into a
graphical oriented database system. Also included are the fundamentals of geographical information system
techniques, approaches and applications. Two hours lecture, two hours laboratory. Three semester hours credit.
DDT 2813 — INVENTOR 3D MODEL AND ANIMATION — (Prerequisite: DDT 2373 3D Modeling and
DDT 1173 Mechanical Design I) This course will provide instruction on the 3D applications of lnventor. It
emphasizes the development of 3D parametric models and the ability to generate 2D drawings, details and
renderings from the model. This course will also provide the utilization of assembly drawings and animation
of working parts. Two hours lecture, two hours laboratory. Three semester hours credit.
DDT 2913 — SPECIAL PROJECT — This course provides practical application of skills and knowledge gained
in other drafting courses. The instructor works closely with the student to ensure that the selection of a
project will enhance the student’s learning experience. Six hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
DET 1114 — FUNDAMENTALS OF EQUIPMENT MECHANICS — This course is designed to provide review
and update of safety procedures; tools and equipment usage; handling, storing, and disposing of hazardous
materials; and operating principles of diesel engines. Four semester hours. Three hours lecture, two hours
lab.
DET 1223 — ELECTRICAL/ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS I — This course is designed to provide diagnosis, service,
and repair of electrical and electronic systems on diesel engines, includes instruction in general systems
diagnosis, starting and charging systems. Three semester hours. Two hours lecture, two hours lab.
DET 1263 — ELECTRICAL/ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS II — This course is designed to provide diagnosis, service,
and repair of electrical and electronic systems on diesel engines, includes instruction on lighting systems,
gauges and warning devices, and related electrical systems. Three semester hours. One hour lecture, four
hours lab.
DET 1364 — DIESEL SYSTEMS I — This course is designed to provide diagnosis, service, and repair of basic
engine operating principles, with an emphasis on cylinder head and valve train engine block. . Four semester
hours. Two hours lecture, four hours lab.
DET 1373 — DIESEL SYSTEMS II — This course is designed to provide skills and knowledge related to the
diagnosis, service, and repair of lubrication systems, cooling system, and air induction and exhaust systems.
Three semester hours. Two hours lecture, two hours lab.
DET 1513 — HYDRAULICS I — This course is designed to provide knowledge of basic operation and
maintenance of hydraulic systems associated with diesel powered equipment, includes instruction in safety,
system components, operation, and repair. . Three semester hours. One hour lecture, four hours lab.
DET 1614 — PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE AND SERVICE — This course is designed to provide practice
in the preventive maintenance of diesel powered equipment, includes instruction in general preventive
maintenance of vehicles and equipment. Four semester hours. Two hours lecture, four hours lab.
DET 1713 — TRANSPORTATION POWER TRAIN — This course is designed to provide diagnosis, service,
maintenance, and repair of power train units on transportation equipment, includes instruction on clutch,
manual transmissions, drive shafts, and drive axles. Three semester hours. Two hours lecture, two hours lab
DET 1813 — AIR CONDITIONING AND HEATING SYSTEMS — This course is designed to provide skills and
knowledge related to the operation, maintenance, and repair of air conditioning and heating systems used
in commercial equipment, includes instruction in theories and operating principles, A/C system diagnosis
and repair, clutch and compressor repair, evaporator and condenser repair, and heating system repair. Three semester hours. One hour lecture, four hours lab.
DET 2253 — STEERING AND SUSPENSION SYSTEMS — This course is designed to provide advanced skills
and knowledge related to the operation, maintenance, and repair of heavy duty steering and suspension
systems, Includes instruction in steering column and steering gear, power steering unit, steering linkage,
suspension, wheel alignment, and related components diagnosis and repair. Three semester hours. One hour
lecture, four hours lab.
DET 2273 — ELECTRICAL/ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS III — This course is designed to provide advanced skills
and knowledge associated with the diagnosis, service, and repair of electrical and electronic systems on
diesel engines, includes instruction in electronic fuel management systems. Three semester hours. One hour
lecture, four hours lab.
DET 2383 — DIESEL SYSTEMS III — This course is a basic course to provide students with an opportunity to
diagnosis, service, and repair of general engine operations and fuel system operations. Three semester hours.
Two hours lecture, two hours lab.
DET 2523 — HEAVY EQUIPMENT POWER TRAINS — This course will provide students with basic
maintenance and repair of fluid power and hydrostat transmissions used on heavy equipment to include
operation and diagnosis and repair of system components. Three semester hours. One hour lecture, four
hours lab.
DET 2623 — ADVANCED BRAKE SYSTEMS — This course will provide students with instruction and practice
in the basic maintenance and repair of air brake systems commonly used on commercial diesel powered
transportation and heavy equipment, includes instruction in maintenance and repair of the air supply system,
mechanical system, antilock braking system, and traction control system. Three semester hours. Two hours
lecture, two hours lab.
ELT 1123 — COMMERCIAL WIRING — (Prerequisite: ELT 1113 Residential/Light Commercial Wiring and
ELT 1193 Fundamentals of Electricity, or equivalent). This course will provide instruction and practice in the
installation of commercial electrical service including the types and uses of conduits and other raceways.
NEC code requirements, and three phase distribution networks. Two hours lecture. Two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
ELT 1143 — AC AND DC CIRCUITS FOR ELECTRICAL TECHNOLOGY — (Co-requisite: Fundamentals of
Electricity, ELT 1193 or ACT 1713 Electricity for Heating, Ventilation, Air Conditioning and Refrigeration).
This course will provide principles and theories associated with AC and DC circuits used in the electrical
trades. Includes the study of electrical circuits, laws and formulas, and the use of test equipment to analyze
AC and DC circuits Four semester hours. Two hours lecture, two hours lab.
ELT 1183 — INDUSTRIAL WIRING — This course includes instruction and practice in the installation of
industrial electrical services including the types of conduit and other raceways, National Electrical Code ®
requirements, and three-phase distribution networks. Three semester hours credit, two hours lecture, two
hours lab.
ELT 1193 — FUNDAMENTALS OF ELECTRICITY — This course is designed to provide fundamental skills
associated with all electrical courses. It includes safety, basic tools, special tools, equipment, and introduction
to simple AC and DC circuits. Two lecture hours and two lab hours. Two semester hours credit.
ELT 1213 — ELECTRICAL POWER — (Co-requisite: Fundamentals of Electricity, ELT 1193 or ACT 1713
Electricity for Heating, Ventilation, Air Conditioning and Refrigeration) This course will provide skills related
to electrical motors and their installation. Includes instruction and practice in using the different types of
motors, transformers and alternators. Two hours lecture. Two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
ELT 1223 — MOTOR MAINTENANCE AND TROUBLESHOOTING — (Prerequisite: ELT 1193 Fundamentals
of Electricity or ACT 1713 Electricity for Heating, Ventilation, Air Conditioning and Refrigeration). This course
will familiarize the students with the principles and practice of electrical motor repair. Includes instruction
and practice in the disassembly/assembly and preventive maintenance of common electrical motors. Two
hours lecture. Two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
ELT 1253 — BRANCH CIRCUIT AND SERVICE ENTRANCE CALCULATION — (Prerequisite: ELT 1113
Residential/Light Commercial Wiring). This course will teach calculating circuit sizes for all branch circuits
and service entrances in residential installation. Two hours lecture. Two hours lab. Three semester hours credit
ELT 1263 — ELECTRICAL DRAWING AND SCHEMETICS — (Co-requisite: Fundamentals of Electricity,
ELT 1193 or ACT 1713 Electricity for Heating, Ventilation, Air Conditioning and Refrigeration). This course
provides knowledge of architectural symbols and electric symbols needed to read blueprints. All elevations
and various plans associated with electrical wiring will be studied. Blank blueprints will be provided and a
list of all appliances and their amperage will be supplied. The blanks will be filled with receptacles, switches,
and lighting outlets as required by NEC. Circuit layouts for all switching will be demonstrated. All branch
circuits will be plotted on the blueprint. Two hours lecture. Two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
ELT 1273 — SWITCHING CIRCUITS FOR RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL, AND INDUSTRIAL — This course
provides an introduction to various methods by which switches and control devices are installed. It includes
installation and operation of residential.commercial automation systems. Two hours lecture. Two hours lab.
Three semester hours credit.
ELT 1283 — COST ESTIMATION FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS — This course gives students the
knowledge and ability to estimate the cost of an electrical installation using specifications for various
structures. Two hours lecture, two hours lab.
ELT 1413 — MOTOR CONTROL SYSTEMS — (Prerequisite: ELT 1193 Fundamentals of Electricity, or equivalent).
This course will provide instruction in the installation of the different motor control circuits and devices.
Emphasis is placed on developing student’s ability to diagram, wire and troubleshoot the dif­ferent circuits
and mechanical control devices. Two hours lecture. Two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
ELT 2114 — EQUIPMENT MAINTENANCE, TROUBLESHOOTING, AND REPAIR — This course includes
maintenance and troubleshooting techniques, use of technical manuals and test equipment, and inspection/
evaluation/repair of equipment. One hour lecture. Six hours lab. Four semester hours credit.
ELT 2424 — SOLID STATE MOTOR CONTROL — (Prerequisite: ELT 1413 Motor Control Systems and and
Co-Requisite: ELT 2613 Programmable Logic Controllers). This course will introduce the students to the
principles of solid state motor control. Includes instruction and practice in the design and installation of
different solid state devices for motor control. Two hours lecture. Four hours lab. Four semester hours credit.
ELT 2614 — PROGRAMMABLE LOGIC CONTROLLERS — (Prerequisite: ELT 1413 Motor Control Systems).
This course will provide instruction and practice in the use of programmable logic controllers (PLC’s) in
modern industrial settings. Includes instruction in the operating principles of PLC’s and practice in the programming, installation, and maintenance of PLC’s. One hour lecture. Four hours lab. Four semester hours credit.
ELT 2913 — SPECIAL PROJECT I — (Prerequisite: Consent of Instructor). This course will cover practical
application of skills and knowledge gained in other electronics or electronics-related technical courses. The
instructor works closely with the student to insure that the selection of a project will enhance the student’s
learning experience. Six hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
ELT 2933 — SPECIAL PROJECTS II — This course provides practical application of skills and knowledge
gained in other electrical or electrical-related technical courses. The instructor works closely with the student
to ensure that the selection of a project will enhance the student’s learning experience. Six hours lab. Three semester hours credit
MMT 2513 — ENTREPRENEURSHIP — This course provides an overview of activities that are involved in
planning, establishing, and managing a small business enterprise. Topics to be covered include planning,
location, analysis, financing, and development of a business plan. Three lecture hours. Three semester hours credit.
ACT 1003 — INTRODUCTION TO HEATING AND AIR CONDITIONING TECHNOLOGY — This course
is designed to introduce students to the fundamental skills associated with all HVAC courses. Safety, basic
tools, special tools, and equipment, communication skills, employability skills, and materials handling topics
are included. Three semester hours credit, two hours lecture, two hours lab.
ACT 1124 — BASIC COMPRESSION REFRIGERATION — This course is an introduction to the field of
refrigeration and air conditioning. Emphasis is placed on the principles of safety, thermodynamics, and heat
transfer. Two hours lecture. Four hours lab. Four semester hours credit.
ACT 1133 — TOOLS AND PIPING — This course introduces various tools and pipe connection techniques.
Covers tools and test equipment required in heating, ventilation, air conditioning and refrigeration. Two
hours lecture. Two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
ACT 1213 — CONTROLS — This course will introduce fundamentals of gas, fluid, electrical and programmable
controls. Two hours lecture. Two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
ACT 1313 — REFRIGERATION SYSTEM COMPONENTS — This course is an in-depth study of the components
and accessories of a sealed system including metering devices, evaporators, compressors and condensers.
Two hours lecture. Two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
ACT 1713 — ELECTRICITY FOR HEATING, VENTILATION, AIR CONDITIONING AND REFRIGERATION
— This course introduces basic knowledge of electricity power distribution, components, solid state devices
and electrical circuits. Two hours lecture. Two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
ACT 2323 — COMMERCIAL REFRIGERATION — This course is a study of various commercial refrigeration
systems. It includes installation, servicing and maintaining systems. Two hours lecture. Four hours lab. Four semester hours credit.
ACT 2413 — AIR CONDITIONING I — This course introduces various types of residential and commercial air
conditioning, including hydronic, absorption and desiccant systems. Two hours lecture. Four Hours lab. Four semester hours credit.
ACT 2423 — AIR CONDITIONING II — An in-depth course in the installation, start-up, maintenance and air
quality of complete heating and air conditioning systems. Two hours lecture. Four hours lab. Four semester hours credit.
ACT 2433 — REFRIGERANT, RETROFIT AND REGULATIONS — This course details the regulations and
standards for new retrofit and government regulations. Includes OSHA regulations, EPA regulations, local
and state codes. Two hours lecture. Two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
ACT 2513 — HEATING SYSTEMS — This course introduces the various types of residential and commercial
heating systems. Includes gas, oil, electric, compression and hydroponic heating systems. Two hours lecture.
Two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
ACT 2623 — HEAT LOAD AND AIR PROPERTIES — This course is an introduction to heat load calculations
for residential and light commercial heating, ventilation, air conditioning and refrigeration systems. Included
are air distribution, duct sizing selection of grills and register, types of fans, air velocity and fan performance.
An introduction is provided to air testing instruments and computer usage. Two hours lecture. Four hours
lab. Four semester hours credit.
ACT 2913 — SPECIAL PROJECT IN HEATING, VENTILATION, AIR-CONDITIONING, AND REFRIGERATION
TECHNOLOGY — This course is designed to provide the student with practical application of skills and
knowledge gained in technical courses. The instructor works closely with the students to ensure that the
selection of a project will enhance the student’s learning experience. Six hours lab, three hours credit.
ACT 2942 — SPECIAL PROJECT II IN HEATING, VENTILATION, AIR-CONDITIONING, AND REFRIGERATION
TECHNOLOGY — This course includes is designed to provide the student with practical application of skills
and knowledge gained in technical courses. The instructor works closely with the students to ensure that the
selection of a project will enhance the student’s learning experience. Two semester hours credit.
HRT 1123 — INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT — This course is an introduction to
the hospitality and tourism industry. Discussions and industry observations to discover the opportunities,
trends, problems, and organizations in the field. Three hours lecture. Three semester hours credit.
HRT 1213 — SANITATION AND SAFETY — This course will provide basic principles of microbiology,
sanitation, and safety for a food service operation. The course studies the implementation of sanitation
procedures, cost control, risk reduction standards in a hospitality operation. ServSafe Sanitation Certification
from the National Restaurant Association is offered as a part of this course. Two hours lecture. Two hours lab.
Three semester hours credit.
HRT 1224 — RESTAURANT AND CATERING — This course introduces the principles of organizing and
managing a food and beverage operation. Two hours lecture. Four hours lab. Four semester hours credit.
HRT 1413 — ROOMS DIVISION MANAGEMENT — This course introduces an operational approach to rooms
division management in the hospitality industry including front office management and housekeeping
operations. Two hours lecture. Two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
HRT 1511 — HOSPITALITY SEMINAR — This course will introduce leadership and management skills
necessary for success in hospitality and tourism management to the student. One hour lecture. One semester hour credit.
HRT 1813 — TOURISM SPECIALIST — This course covers activities associated with organizing, booking, and
conducting tours. Three hours lecture. Three semester hours credit.
HRT 2233 — HOSPITALITY COST CONTROL — This course focuses on the principles and procedures
involved in an effective food and beverage control system, including standards determination, the operating
budget, cost-volume profit analysis, income and cost control, menu pricing, labor cost control, and computer
applications.. Two hours lecture. Two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
HRT 2423 — HOSPITALITY SECURITY MANAGEMENT AND LAW — This course details the issues
surrounding the need for individualized security programs. Examines a variety of security equipment and
procedures and discusses internal security for food service and lodging operations. This course provides
awareness of the rights and responsibilities that the law grants to or imposes upon a hotelier and consequences
of failure to satisfy legal obligations. Two hours lecture. Two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
HRT 2613 — HOSPITALITY SUPERVISION — This course introduces supervisory skills in leadership styles,
communication skills, motivational techniques, employee training techniques, and evaluation methods. Two
hours lecture. Two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
HRT 2623 — HOSPITALITY HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT — This course introduces the principles
of hospitality human resource management with an emphasis placed on the study of human behavior and
human relations in the hospitality industry. Three hours lecture. Three semester hours credit.
HRT 2853 — CONVENTION AND MEETING PLANNING — This course will focus on planning, promotion,
and management of meetings, conventions, expositions, and events. Three hours lecture. Three semester hours credit.
MST 1115 — POWER MACHINERY I — This course provides instruction of general shop safety as well as the
operation of power machinery which includes instruction and practice in the safe operation of lathes, power
saws, drill presses, and vertical mills. Two hour lecture, six hour lab. Five semester credit hours.
MST 1125 — POWER MACHINERY II — (Prerequisite: Power Machinery I -MST 1115) This course is a
continuation of Power Machinery I with emphasis on more advanced applications of lathes, mills, shapers,
and precision grinders. Two hours lecture. Four hours lab. Five semester hours credit.
MST 1313 — MACHINE TOOL MATHEMATICS — This course is an applied mathematics course designed
for machinists. Includes instruction and practice in algebraic and trigonometric operations. Two hours lecture.
Two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
MST 1413 — BLUEPRINT READING — This course introduces plans and specifications interpretation designed
for machinists. Includes instruction and practice in reading and applying specifications. Two hours lecture.
Two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
MST 1423 — ADVANCED BLUEPRINT READING — (Prerequisite: Blueprint Reading-MST 1413). This course
is a continuation of Blueprint Reading with emphasis on advanced feature of plans & specifications. Includes
instruction on the identification of various projections and views and on different assembly components. Two
hours lecture. Two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
MST 1613 — PRECISION LAYOUT — This course details precision layout for machining operations which
includes instruction and practice in the use of layout instruments. Two hours lecture. Two hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
MST 2134 — POWER MACHINERY III — (Prerequisite: Power Machinery II, MST 1124). This course is a
continuation of the Power Machinery II with emphasis on safety and advanced applications of the engine
lathe, milling machine, and grinding machine. Two hours lecture. Four hours lab. Five semester hours credit.
MST 2144 — POWER MACHINERY IV — (Prerequisites: Power Machinery III, MST 2134). This course is a
continuation of Power Machinery III with emphasis on highly advanced safety operations of the radial arm
drill, milling machine, engine lathe, and precision grinder. Two hour lecture. Four hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
MST 2715 — COMPUTER NUMERICAL CONTROL OPERATIONS I — This course is an introduction of
computer numerical control (CNC) and computer assisted manufacturing (CAM) techniques and practices.
Includes the use of the Cartesian coordinate system, programming codes and commands and tooling
requirements for CNC/CAM machines. Two hours lecture. Six hours lab. Four semester hours credit.
MST 2724 — COMPUTER NUMERICAL CONTROL OPERATIONS II — (Prerequisites: Computer Numerical
Control Operations I, MST 2714). This course is a continuation of Computer Numerical Control Operations
I. Includes instruction in writing and editing CNC programs, machine setup and operation, and use of CAM
equipment to program and operate CNC machines. Two hour lecture. Four hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
MST 2733 — FUNDAMENTALS OF CAD/CAM — This course is designed to provide the students with the
fundamental knowledge and skills of Computer Aided Design Manufacturing using various CAD/CAM
software packages as they relate to Machine Tool Technology. Three hours lecture. Three semester hours credit.
WORK-BASED LEARNING
WBL 191(1-3), 192(1-3), 291(1-3) & 292(1-3) — WORK-BASED LEARNING — This Work-Based Learning
course is designed for students enrolled in career-technical programs and employed in parallel workplace
environments for a minimum of 15 hours per week. Course content is based upon a model course curriculum,
defined workplace requirements, and specific objectives addressing competent workplace performance.
Three semester hours credit is based upon 270 approved contact hours of work experience.
CCT 1116 — FOUNDATIONS — This course introduces the different types of foundations used in residential
construction. Lay-out and setup of a conventional foundation for a residential dwelling. Two hours lecture.
Eight hour lab. Six semester hours.
CCT 1133 — BLUEPRINT READING — (Prerequisites: CCT 1116, CCT 1163 and CCT 1236) This course is the
study of the different plans in a set of house plans and the symbols used in each of them to identify the parts
of a structure. Two hours lecture. Two hours lab. Three semester hours.
CCT 1163 — CONSTRUCTION MATHEMATICS — This course includes the fundamental principles of
practical problems in mathematics that carpenters may encounter in the workforce. Three semester hours
credit. One hour lecture, four hours lab.
CCT 1213 — CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS — This course examines the physical properties of the materials
generally used in the erection of a structure, with a brief description of their manufacture. Three semester
hours, two hours lecture, two hours lab.
CCT 1236 — FLOOR & WALL FRAMING — This course provides theory and practical work experience in
estimating, cutting, and installing floor and wall framing members. Two hours lecture. Eight hour lab. Six semester hours.
CCT 1244 — CEILING & ROOF FRAMING — (Prerequisites: CCT 1116, CCT 1236, and CCT 1163) This course
provides theory and practical work experience in estimating materials for ceiling and roof framing members.
Hands-on experience in measuring, cutting, and the installation of different types of ceiling and roof framing
members. One hour lecture. Eight hours lab. Four semester hours.
CCT 1315 — INTERIOR/EXTERIOR FINISHING & CABINET INSTALLATION — (Prerequisites: CCT 1116,
CCT 1236, and CCT 1163) This course is the study of all areas of interior wall, ceiling and floor finishing and
cabinet making. Two hours lecture. Eight hour lab. Five semester hours.
CCT 291(1-3) — SPECIAL PROBLEMS IN CARPENTRY — A course to provide students with an opportunity
to utilize skills and knowledge gain in other Residential Carpentry Technology courses. The instructor and
student work closely together to select a topic and establish criteria for completion of the project.
COV 1122 — COSMETOLOGY ORIENTATION — This course will cover the history, career opportunities,
life skills, professional image, Mississippi Cosmetology laws, rules and regulations and communicating for success in the cosmetology industry. Included are classroom theory and lab practice as governed
by Mississippi cosmetology laws, rules, and regulations involved in cosmetology practices and safety precautions associated with each. Two hours lecture. Two semester hours credit.
COV 1245 — COSMETOLOGY SCIENCES I — This course consists of the study of bacteriology, sterilization
and sanitation. Included are classroom theory and lab practice as governed by Mississippi cosmetology laws,
rules, and regulations involved in cosmetology practices and safety precautions associated with each. Three
hours lecture. Six hours lab. Five semester hours credit.
COV 1255 — COSMETOLOGY SCIENCES II — This course consists of the study of anatomy and physiology.
Included are classroom theory and lab practice as governed by Mississippi cosmetology laws, rules, and
regulations involved in cosmetology practices and safety precautions associated with each. Three hours
lecture. Four hours lab. Five semester hours credit.
COV 1263 — COSMETOLOGY SCIENCES III — This course consists of the application and demonstration
of chemistry, and electricity. Included are classroom theory and lab practice as governed by Mississippi
cosmetology laws, rules, and regulations involved in cosmetology practices and safety precautions associated
with each. Two hours lecture. Three hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
COV 1426 — HAIR CARE I — This course consists of the study of properties of the hair and scalp; principles of
hair design; shampooing, rinsing, and conditioning; haircutting; hairstyling; braiding and braid extensions;
wigs and hair enhancements; chemical texture services, and hair coloring. Included are classroom theory and
lab practice as governed by Mississippi cosmetology laws, rules, and regulations involved in cosmetology
practices and safety precautions associated with each. Two hours lecture. Twelve hours lab. Six semester hours credit.
COV 1436 — HAIR CARE II — This course consists of the advanced study of properties of the hair and scalp;
principles of hair design; shampooing, rinsing, and conditioning; haircutting; hairstyling; braiding and braid
extensions; wigs and hair enhancements; chemical texture services, and hair coloring. Included are classroom
theory and lab practice as governed by Mississippi cosmetology laws, rules, and regulations involved in
cosmetology practices and safety precautions associated with each. Two hours lecture. Twelve hours lab. Six semester hours credit.
COV 1443 — HAIR CARE III — This course consists of the practical applications of the study of properties of
the hair and scalp; principles of hair design; shampooing, rinsing, and conditioning; haircutting; hairstyling;
braiding and braid extensions; hair enhancements; chemical texture services, and hair coloring. Included
are classroom theory and lab practice as governed by Mississippi cosmetology laws, rules, and regulations
involved in cosmetology practices and safety precautions associated with each. Three semester hours credit.
Nine hours lab.
COV 1522 — NAIL CARE I — This course consists of basic nail care services including nail structure and growth,
manicuring and pedicuring, and advanced nail techniques. Included are classroom theory and lab practice
as governed by Mississippi cosmetology laws, rules, and regulations involved in cosmetology practices and
safety precautions associated with each. One hour lecture. Three hours lab. Two semester hours credit.
COV 1532 — NAIL CARE II — This course consists of basic nail care services including nail structure and
growth, manicuring and pedicuring, and advanced nail techniques. Included are classroom theory and
lab practice as governed by Mississippi cosmetology laws, rules, and regulations involved in cosmetology
practices and safety precautions associated with each. One hour lecture. Three hours lab. Two semester hours credit.
COV 1542 — NAIL CARE III — This course consists of basic nail care services including nail structure and
growth, manicuring and pedicuring, and advanced nail techniques. Included are classroom theory and
lab practice as governed by Mississippi cosmetology laws, rules, and regulations involved in cosmetology
practices and safety precautions associated with each. Six hours lab. Two semester hours credit.
COV 1622 — SKIN CARE I — This course consists of the introduction to basic skin care services including
anatomy of skin, disorders of skin, hair removal, facials, and facial makeup. Included are classroom theory
and lab practice as governed by Mississippi cosmetology laws, rules, and regulations involved in cosmetology
practices and safety precautions associated with each. One hour lecture. Three hours lab. Two semester hours credit.
COV 1632 — SKIN CARE II — This course consists of basic skin care services including anatomy of skin,
disorders of skin, hair removal, facials, and facial makeup. Included are classroom theory and lab practice
as governed by Mississippi cosmetology laws, rules, and regulations involved in cosmetology practices and
safety precautions associated with each. One hour lecture. Three hours lab. Two semester credit hours.
COV 1642 — SKIN CARE III — This course consists of advanced skin care services including anatomy of skin,
disorders of skin, hair removal, facials, and facial makeup. Included are classroom theory and lab practice
as governed by Mississippi cosmetology laws, rules, and regulations involved in cosmetology practices and
safety precautions associated with each. Six hours lab. Two semester hours credit.
COV 1722 — SALON BUSINESS I — This course will cover preparing to operate a successful salon. Included
are classroom theory and lab practice as governed by Mississippi cosmetology laws, rules, and regulations
involved in cosmetology practices and safety precautions associated with each.. One hour lecture. Three
hours lab. Two semester hours credit
COV 1732 — SALON BUSINESS II — This course will cover operating a successful salon and seeking
employment. Included are classroom theory and lab practice as governed by Mississippi cosmetology laws,
rules, and regulations involved in cosmetology practices and safety precautions associated with each. One
hour lecture. Three hours lab. Two semester hours credit.
COV 2816 — COSMETOLOGY TEACHER TRAINING I — (Pre/co requisites: Students must have at least
two years of active practical experience as a licensed cosmetologist and currently hold a valid Mississippi
cosmetology license.) This course provides instruction in developing appropriate communication skills,
effective use of visual aids, identification of various teaching styles, and practical application of cosmetology
instruction. Three hours lecture. Nine hours lab. Six semester hours credit.
COV 2826 — COSMETOLOGY TEACHER TRAINING II — (Pre/co requisites: COV 2816 Cosmetology Teacher
Training I) This course provides instruction in development of instructional methods, development of visual
aids, development of effective evaluation, and practical application of cosmetology instruction. Three hours
lecture. Nine hours lab. Six semester hours credit.
COV 2836 — COSMETOLOGY TEACHER TRAINING III — (Pre/co requisite: Cosmetology Teacher Training
II COV 2826) This course provides professional application and training including: Laws Governing Learning
Processes, Student Motivation, Student Participation, Student Personalities and Individual Differences,
Ninety-nine clock hours. Three lecture hours. Nine hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
COV 2846 — COSMETOLOGY TEACHER TRAINING IV — (Pre/co requisite: COV 2836 Cosmetology Teacher
Training III) This course provides instruction in classroom management techniques; cosmetology laws, rules,
and regulations; and practical application of cosmetology instruction. Three hours lecture. Nine hours lab.
Six semester hours credit.
WLT 1115 — SHIELDED METAL ARC WELDING I — This course is designed to teach students introductory
welding techniques using the SMAW process. One-hour lecture, eight hours lab. Five semester hours credit.
WLT 1125 — (Prerequisite: WLT 1172, WLT 1313) GAS METAL ARC WELDING (GMAW) — This course is
designed to give the student experience in various welding applications with the GMAW process using
various modes of transfer. One hour lecture, eight hours lab. Four semester hours credit.
WLT 1135 — (Prerequisite: WLT 1172, WLT 1313) GAS TUNGSTEN ARC WELDING (GTAW) — This course is
designed to give the student experience in various welding applications using the GTAW process. One hour
lecture, eight hours lab. Six semester hours credit.
WLT 1143 — (Prerequisite: WLT 1172, WLT 1313) FLUX CORED ARC WELDING (FCAW) — This course is
designed to give the student experience using the FCAW process. One hour lecture, four hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
WLT 1172 — INTRODUCTION TO WELDING AND SAFETY — This course is designed to give students an
introduction to the welding profession and experience in safety procedures related to welding. One hour
lecture, two-hour lab. Two semester hour credit.
WLT 1225 — SHIELDED METAL ARC WELDING II — This course is designed to teach students advanced
welding techniques using the SMAW process. One hour lecture, eight hours lab. Five semester hours credit.
WLT 1232 — (Prerequisite: WLT 1172, WLT 1313) BLUE PRINT READING, WELDING SYMBOLS, AND
METALLURGY — This course is designed to give the student experience in blueprint reading, welding
symbols, and metallurgy. One hour lecture, two hours lab. Two semester hours credit.
WLT 1313 — CUTTING PROCESSES — This course is designed to give the student experience in oxyfuel
cutting principles and practices, air carbon cutting and gouging, and plasma arc cutting. One hour lecture.
Four hours lab. Three semester hours credit.
