ACC 2213 Principles of Accounting I
Study of the fundamentals and application of financial accounting principles that relate to business.
The topics to be covered include the accounting cycle and accounting systems for service and merchandising businesses. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
ACC 2223 Principles of Accounting II
A continuation of ACC 2213. The topics to be covered include corporate accounting concepts, managerial accounting concepts and internal business decision making. Three hours lecture per week.
Credit, three semester hours.
AGR 1214 Animal Science
Fundamental principles and practical application of livestock, dairy, and poultry science. Origin,
history, characteristics, market classes, and grades of the major breeds of livestock and poultry. Four hours lecture per week. Credit, four semester hours.
AGR 1313 Plant Science
Scientific principles as the basis for practice in producing, handling, processing, marketing, and utilizing agronomic and horticultural crops. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
AGR 2713 Principles of Agricultural Economics
Economic principles applied to production, value, prices, credit, taxation, land tenure, marketing,
international trade, and related problems affecting agriculture. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
AMR 1112 Foundations of Officership
Introduction to the personal challenges and competencies which are critical for effective leadership
in the Armed Forces. Students will examine the role of leadership, officership, and the Army profession as well as develop life skills such as goal settings, time management, physical fitness, and stress
management. The focus is on developing basic knowledge and comprehension of Army leadership
dimensions. Includes a leadership lab and recommended physical training. One hour lecture and two
hours laboratory per week. Credit, two semester hours.
AMR 1122 Basic Leadership
Fundamental leadership and training techniques with exposure to setting direction, map reading,
problem-solving, presenting briefs and using effective writing skills. Students will explore dimensions of leadership attributes and core leader competencies in the context of practical, hands-on, and
interactive exercises. Considerable attention is also placed on improving physical fitness. Includes
a leadership lab and physical training. One hour lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, two semester hours.
AMR 2113 Individuals Leadership Studies
Develop effective military leadership skills: problem analysis, decision making, planning and organizing, delegation and control, and interpersonal conflict resolution. Includes a leadership lab and
physical training. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
AMR 2123 Leadership and Teamwork
An application of leadership skills with emphasis on: beliefs, values, ethics, counseling techniques,
map reading, land navigation, basic first aid, and group interaction. Includes a leadership lab and
physical training. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
ART 1113 Art Appreciation
A course designed to provide an understanding and appreciation of the visual arts. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
ART 1313 Drawing I
Includes the study of the basic elements and principles of organization in two dimensions and the
selection, manipulation and synthesis of these components to create an organized visual expression.
Students will apply overlapping foreshortening and diminished scale. Black and white media will be
stressed. Required of art majors. Six hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
ART 1323 Drawing II
Continuation of skills from Drawing I with an introduction to color and further study of composition.
Required of art majors. Six hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite:
ART 1313)
ART 1433 Design I
Introduction to the fundamentals of two-dimensional design with emphasis in black and white media.
Required of art majors. Six hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
ART 1443 Design II
Continuation of Design I with emphasis in color theory. Required of art majors. Six hours of laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: ART 1433)
ART 1453 Three-Dimensional Design
To provide students with an understanding of spatial form in three-dimensions through the use of
applied design elements and principles to studio problems in mixed media. Three hours lecture per
week. Credit, three semester hours.
ART 1513 Computer Art
An introduction to the theory and practice of using the computer to create art. A study of methods
and applications utilizing the computer and selected software applications. Three hours lecture/lab
per week. Credit, three semester hours.
ART 1811/1821 Exhibition Class I & II
Attendance at 75% of all college art exhibitions during the semester student is enrolled. The intended
requirement is for art majors to monitor and encourage independent research in career practices and
promotion. Submission of individual art work to at least one local, regional, or national exhibition is
required. Required of all art majors. Credit, one semester hour each.
ART 1913 Art for Elementary Teachers
Development of essential concepts of children’s art education in compliance with the National Standards for Arts Education. Two hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
ART 2513 Painting I
An introduction to painting compositions and techniques. Six hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
ART 2523 Painting II
A further study in the compositions, techniques, and concepts in painting. Six hours laboratory per
week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: ART 2513)
ART 2613 Ceramics I
This course is directed toward an introduction to different aspects and materials of ceramic design.
Instruction covers forming and shaping by hand and by mechanical means, various kiln operations,
understanding the nature of clay and glazes, and an appreciation of functional and non-functional
forms. Six hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
ART 2623 Ceramics II
Continuation of skills introduced in Ceramics I. Emphasis on individual problem solving. Six hours
laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: ART 2613)
ART 2713 Art History I
Survey course of historical background of art forms from Prehistoric to Renaissance. Emphasis is on
painting, architecture, and sculpture as related to history. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
ART 2723 Art History II
Survey courses of historical background of art forms from Renaissance to present with special emphasis on contemporary expression. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
ART 2811 Exhibition Class III
A continuation of ART 1821. One hour lecture per week. Credit, one semester hour.
ART 2821 Exhibition Class IV
A continuation of ART 2811. One hour lecture per week. Credit, one semester hour.
BAD 1113 Introduction to Business
This course is designed to introduce students to the basic concepts of business. Main topics include
current business and economic environment, entrepreneurship, marketing, management, financial
management, and business careers. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
BAD 1121, 1131, 1141 Business Seminar I, II, III
This course is designed to coordinate the various business-related student activities to the local level.
It promotes leadership and professionalism in civic and social functions which includes student participation and guest speakers. Credit, one semester hour.
BAD 2113 Introduction to International Business
This course is an introduction to international business concepts and practices. Emphasis is placed
on understanding cultural differences and foreign exchange markets. Three hours lecture per week.
Credit, three semester hours.
BAD 2323 Business Statistics
Introduction to statistical methods of describing, summarizing, comparing, and interpreting data to
include probability distributions, sampling, estimation, confidence intervals, and hypothesis testing.
Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
BAD 2413 Legal Environment of Business
An introduction to interrelationships of law and society, jurisprudence, and business. Topics include
an introduction to law, law of contracts, agency, and employment. Three hours lecture per week.
Credit, three semester hours.
BAD 2713 Principles of Real Estate
The course is an introduction to the nature of the real estate market, types of ownership of property,
contracts, and methods of transferal of title. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
BAD 2723 Real Estate Law
Designed to give the student a general background in the law of real property and the law of real
estate brokerage. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
BAD 2813 Business Communications
This course develops written and oral communication skills for future professionals among multicultural audiences with emphasis on principles of writing business messages, generating reports
and presentations, and preparing communications for employment. Three hours lecture per week.
Credit, three semester hours.
BAD 2853 Business Ethics
An exploration of the ethical problems faced in business theory and practice through which the student will recognize and analyze ethical dilemmas and implement ethical decisions within the context of today’s business environment. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
BAD 2413 Legal Environment of Business
An introduction to interrelationships of law and society, jurisprudence, and business. Topics include
an introduction to law, law of contracts, agency, and employment. Three hours lecture per week.
Credit, three semester hours.
BAD 2713 Principles of Real Estate
The course is an introduction to the nature of the real estate market, types of ownership of property,
contracts, and methods of transferal of title. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
BAD 2723 Real Estate Law
Designed to give the student a general background in the law of real property and the law of real
estate brokerage. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
BAD 2813 Business Communications
This course develops written and oral communication skills for future professionals among multicultural audiences with emphasis on principles of writing business messages, generating reports
and presentations, and preparing communications for employment. Three hours lecture per week.
Credit, three semester hours.
BAD 2853 Business Ethics
An exploration of the ethical problems faced in business theory and practice through which the student will recognize and analyze ethical dilemmas and implement ethical decisions within the context of today’s business environment. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
BIO 1111 Principles of Biology I, Lab
A laboratory course for non-science majors that contains experiments and exercises that reinforce the
principles introduced in BIO 1113 Principles of Biology I, Lecture. Two hours laboratory per week.
Credit, one semester hour.
BIO 1113 Principles of Biology I, Lecture
A lecture course for non-science majors that provides an introduction to the basic principles of modern biology and their relevance to modern life. Emphasis is placed on the nature and history of scientific thought, basic biological chemistry, cell biology, and genetics. Credit, three semester hours.
BIO 1121 Principles of Biology II, Lab
A laboratory course for non-science majors that contains experiments and exercises that reinforc the
principles introduced in BIO 1123 Principles of Biology II, Lecture. Two hours laboratory per week.
Credit, one semester hour.
BIO 1123 Principles of Biology II
A lecture course for non-science majors that emphasizes survey of the diversity of life, ecology, evolution, and an overview of organ systems. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
BIO 1131 General Biology I, Lab
A laboratory course for science majors that contains experiments and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced in BIO 1133 General Biology I, Lecture. Two hours laboratory per week. Credit, one semester hour.
BIO 1133 General Biology I, Lecture
A lecture course for science majors that covers the major themes of biology, the scientific method,
chemistry relevant to biological systems, cell processes including photosynthesis and cellular respiration, cell division, genetics, and molecular genetics. Credit, three semester hours.
BIO 1141 General Biology II, Lab
A laboratory course for science majors that contains experiments and exercises that reinforce the
principles introduced in BlO 1143 General Biology II, Lecture. Two hours laboratory per week.
Credit, one semester hour.
BIO 1143 General Biology II, Lecture
A lecture course for science majors that expands themes and concepts introduced in BIO 1133 General Biology I, while emphasizing the diversity of life. Topics covered include evolution, classification, ecology, detailed consideration of the domains of life and viruses, including their anatomy and
physiology. Credit, three semester hours.
BIO 1511 Principles of Anatomy and Physiology, Lab
A laboratory course that contains experiments and exercises that reinforce the principles taught in
BIO 1513 Principles of Anatomy and Physiology I, Lecture. Two hours laboratory per week. Credit, one semester hour.
BIO 1513 Principles of Anatomy and Physiology
A lecture course that provides an introduction to the anatomical and physiological study of the human
body at the molecular, cellular, tissue, organ, and organ system levels. Organ systems covered in this
course are the integumentary, muscular, skeletal, and nervous system. Three hours lecture per week.
Credit, three semester hours.
BIO 1613 Nutrition
A lecture course covering the nutrients for normal growth and reducing risks of major chronic diseases and applied to the selection of food for ingestion, the process of digestion, assimilation, and
absorption, and their applications for health care providers. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
BIO 1712 Biomedical Research I
This course will provide hands on instruction of the necessary skills in order to prepare students
to launch a unique investigation in the area of biomedical research. This course focuses on the
structural basics such as literature reviews, elements of a research proposal/publication/presentation,
experimental design, analysis of data, and technical skills such as micropipetting, centrifugation,
spectrophotometric analysis, etc. Two hours lecture. Credit, two semester hours.
BIO 1722 Biomedical Research II
This course will provide students with the opportunity to perform a unique investigation in the area
of biomedical research of data, and technical skills such as micropipetting, centrifugation, spectrophotometric analysis, etc. Two hours lecture. Credit, two semester hours.
BIO 2211 Introduction to Marine Science, Lab
A laboratory course that contains experiments and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced
in BIO 2213 Introduction to Marine Science, Lecture. Two hours laboratory per week. Credit, one semester hour.
BIO 2213 Introduction to Marine Science
A lecture course providing an introduction to oceanography with an emphasis on the measurement of
physical, chemical, and biological aspects of the marine environment as well as functional morphol-ogy and taxonomy of local marine biota. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
BIO 2411 Zoology I, Lab
A laboratory course that contains experiments and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced
in BIO 2413 Zoology I, Lecture. Two hours laboratory per week. Credit, one semester hour.
BIO 2413 Zoology I
A lecture course that includes in-depth studies of phylogeny and classification systems, protozoa and
major invertebrate phyla. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
BIO 2511 Anatomy and Physiology I, Lab
A laboratory course that contains experiments and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced
in BIO 2513 Anatomy and Physiology I, Lecture. Two hours laboratory per week. Credit, one semester hour. (Corequisite: BIO 2513)
BIO 2513 Anatomy and Physiology I
A lecture course that covers the anatomical and physiological study of the human body as an integrated whole. The course includes detailed studies of biological principles; tissues; and the integumentary, skeletal, muscular and nervous systems. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester
hours. (Corequisite: BIO 2511; Prerequisite: ACT composite of 18 or higher or successful completion
of BIO 1113/1111 or BIO 1133/1131, or BIO 1513/1511 with grade of C or higher.)
BIO 2521 Anatomy and Physiology II, Lab
A laboratory course that contains experiments and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced
in BIO 2523 Anatomy and Physiology II, Lecture. Two hours laboratory per week. Credit, one semester hour. (Corequisite: BIO 2523)
BIO 2523 Anatomy and Physiology II, Lecture
A lecture course that includes detailed studies of the anatomy and physiology of the human special
senses, endocrine, cardiovascular, lymphatic, and immune, respiratory, digestive, and urinary systems, as well as reproduction and development. Credit, three semester hours.
BIO 2611 Cell Biology, Lab
A laboratory course that contains experiments and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced
in BIO 2613 Cell Biology, Lecture. Two hours laboratory per week. Credit, one semester hour.
BIO 2613 Cell Biology
A lecture course providing a comparative study of cell structures among plant, animal, and bacterial
systems. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
BIO 2921 Microbiology, Lab
A laboratory course which provides experiments that reinforce principles introduced in the lecture
to include fundamental laboratory techniques in lab safety, microscopy, culturing, and identification
of microbes, and effectiveness of antimicrobial agents. Two hours laboratory per week. Credit, one semester hour.
BIO 2923 Microbiology
A lecture course providing a comprehensive study of the microbial agents to include taxonomy,
metabolism, physiology and genetics, concepts of pathogenesis and immunity. Three hours lecture
per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: ACT composite of 18 or higher or successful
completion of BIO 1113/1111, BIO 2513/2511, or CHE 1213/1211.)
CHE 1113 General Chemistry Survey (Basic)
A basic chemistry lecture course that covers terminology, measurements, atomic structure, nomenclature, chemical equations, and basic stoichiometry. (Does not satisfy core requirements in science
and math majors). Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
CHE 1211 General Chemistry I, Lab
A laboratory course that contains experiments and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced
in CHE 1213 General Chemistry I, Lecture. Two hours laboratory per week. Credit, one semester hour.
CHE 1213 General Chemistry I
A lecture course that covers the fundamental principles of chemistry and their application. Chemical
nomenclature, chemical reactions, stoichiometry, anatomic structure, bonding theories, energy, periodic properties, and gas laws are among the topics discussed in depth. Three hours lecture per week.
Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: Successful completion (C or higher) or currently enrolled
in MAT 1313 or MAT 1343 (CLIC A or semester class only).
CHE 1221 General Chemistry II, Lab
A laboratory course that contains experiments and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced
in CHE 1223 General Chemistry II, Lecture. Two hours laboratory per week. Credit, one semester hour.
CHE 1223 General Chemistry II
A lecture course that covers solutions, kinetics, equilibria, thermodynamics, acid-base chemistry,
and electrochemistry. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: CHE
1213)
CHE 1311 Principles of Chemistry, Lab
A laboratory course that contains experiments and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced
in CHE 1313 Principles of Chemistry I, Lecture. This course cannot be substituted for CHE 1211.
Credit, one semester hour.
CHE 1313 Principles of Chemistry, Lecture
A lecture course that emphasizes basic terminology, measurement, atomic structure, periodic table,
chemical bonding, stoichiometry, energy, and states of matter. This course cannot be substituted for
CHE 1213. Credit, three semester hours.
CHE 2421 Organic Chemistry I, Lab
 A laboratory course that provides students with techniques to characterize, identify, purify, and synthesize organic compounds, as taught in CHE 2423 Organic Chemistry I, Lecture. Two hours laboratory per week. Credit, one semester hour.
CHE 2423 Organic Chemistry I
A lecture course that covers carbon chemistry, bonding structure and behavior, aliphatic compounds,
stereochemistry, reaction mechanisms, and an introduction to spectroscopic methods. Three hours
lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: CHE 1223)
CHE 2431 Organic Chemistry II, Lab
A laboratory course that acquaints students with important manipulations and procedures, as well
as the preparation and study of aromatic and complex organic compounds being introduced in CHE
2433 Organic Chemistry II, Lecture. Two hours laboratory per week. Credit, one semester hours.
CHE 2433 Organic Chemistry II
A lecture course that covers spectroscopy, aromatic compounds, carbonyl compounds and other complex compounds with emphasis on reactions, and their mechanisms. Three hours lecture per week.
Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: CHE 2423)
COE 1010 Cooperative Education Work Experience I
First supervised work experience performed in a job setting related to the student’s major field of
study.
COE 1020 Cooperative Education Work Experience II
Second supervised work experience performed in a job setting related to the student’s major field of
study.
COE 1030 Cooperative Education Work Experience III
Third supervised work experience performed in a job setting related to the student’s major field of
study.
COE 1040 Cooperative Education Work Experience IV
Fourth supervised work experience performed in a job setting related to the student’s major field of
study.
COM 1423 Introduction to Broadcasting
A historical overview of the development and operation of electronic and film media, including
a brief survey of mass communication theory and effects research. Three hours lecture per week.
Credit, three semester hours.
COM 2463 Writing for the Electronic Media
Introductory course to teach the basic skills of broadcast writing, reporting and production. Three
hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
COM 2483 Introduction to Mass Communications
A study of the history, organization, and mechanics of various mass media. Designed to help the
student understand the role of mass media in life and in society. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
CRJ 1313 Introduction to Criminal Justice
History, development, and philosophy of law enforcement in a democratic society; introduction to
agencies involved in the administration of criminal justice; career orientation. Three hours lecture per
week. Credit, three semester hours.
CRJ 1323 Police Administration and Organization
Principles of organization and administration in law enforcement as applied to law enforcement
agencies; introduction to concepts of organizational behavior. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
CRJ 1363 Introduction to Corrections
An overview of the correctional field, its origins, historical and philosophical background, development, current status, relationship with other facets of the criminal justice system. Three hours lecture
per week. Credit, three semester hours.
CRJ 2513 Juvenile Justice
Organization, functions, and jurisdiction of juvenile agencies. Processing, detention, and disposition
of cases. Statutes and court procedures applied to juveniles. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
CSC 1113 Computer Concepts
This is an introductory digital competency course which includes concepts, terminology, operating
systems, electronic communications, security risks, digital ethics, and applications. Concepts are
demonstrated and supplemented by hands-on computer use. Three hours lecture/lab per week. Credit, three semester hours.
CSC 1123 Computer Applications I
This course is designed to teach computer applications to include: word-processing, electronic
spreadsheet, database management, presentation design, and electronic communications. Three hours
lecture/lab per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: CSC 1113 highly recommended)
CSC 1133 Computer Applications II
This course is a continuation of CSC 1123 with concentration on advanced computer applications
and emerging technology. Three hours lecture/lab per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: CSC 1123)
CSC 1613 Computer Programming I
Introduction to problem-solving methods and algorithm development; designing, debugging, branching, looping, scope rules, functions, input/output manipulation (to include text files), simple arrays,
and a variety of applications in an object-oriented programming language. Course has lecture with
integrated lab components. Three hours lecture/lab per week. Credit, three semester hours.
CSC 2134 Programming I with “C++”
An introduction to problem solving methods, algorithm development, designing, debugging, and
documentation in C++ language with a variety of applications including: I/O statements, operators,
conditional, looping, methods/functions, and array processing. Course has a required lab component.
Four hours lecture/lab per week. Credit, four semester hours. (Prerequisite: previous programming
experience or permission of instructor)
CSC 2144 Programming II with “C++”
This course is designed to be a continuation of program and algorithm development and analysis;
search/sort methods, dynamic memory management, abstract data types and object-oriented design;
designing and debugging larger programs. Course has a required lab component. Four hours lecture/
lab per week. Credit, four semester hours. (Prerequisite: CSC 2134)
CSC 2623 Computer Programming II
This course is a continuation of the object-oriented language from CSC 1613. This includes advanced
program development, algorithm analysis, string processing, recursion, internal search/sort methods,
simple data structures, debugging, and testing of large programs. Course has lecture with integrated
lab components. Three hours lecture/lab per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: CSC
1613)
CSC 2833 Discrete Structures
This course includes topics from logic and mathematical reasoning, set theory, recursion, cominatorics, number theory, Boolean algebra, digital logic, and graph theory, which are fundamental to the
study of Computer Science. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
CSC 2844 Data Structures
This course includes advanced data abstraction and corresponding algorithms, memory management,
searching and sorting techniques, hash tables, and algorithm analysis. Four hours lecture/lab per
week. Credit, four semester hours.
ECO 2113 Principles of Macroeconomics
The study of a nation’s economy to include the following topics: supply and demand, production
possibilities, monetary and fiscal policies, factors of production, GDP/business cycles and economic
growth, and circular flow of market economies. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
ECO 2123 Principles of Microeconomics
The study of firms, industries, and consumers to include the following topics: supply and demand,
elasticity of demand and supply, consumer choice theory, production and cost theory, and market
structures. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
EGR 1112 Introduction to Engineering
This course provides students with an introduction to engineering as a profession. Students will be
familiarized with the various career pathways in engineering as well as planning for success in their
chosen field. Two hours lecture per week. Credit, two semester hours.
EGR 1122 Introduction to Engineering Design
This course provides students with an overview of the engineering process ranging from design and
planning to construction and testing through projects and mentoring. Two hours lecture per week.
Credit, two semester hours.
EGR 2413 Engineering Mechanics I: Statics
A lecture course covering the equilibrium of point objects and extended objects in two and three
dimensions using vector algebra. Also discussed are distributed forces, structures, friction, and moments of inertia in two and three dimensions. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
(Pre or Corequisite: MAT 1613 and PHY 2313)
EGR 2433 Engineering Mechanics II: Dynamics
A lecture course that covers kinematics of particles and rigid bodies, kinetics of particles and rigid bodies using force-mass-acceleration, energy, and momentum methods. Three hours lecture per
week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: EGR 2413)
EGR 2453 Mechanics of Materials
A lecture course covering free body diagrams, equilibrium of simple structure, shear and moment
bending diagrams, analysis of stress and strain, and deflections of beams. Three hours lecture per
week. Credit, three semester hours.
ENG 0123 Intermediate English and Reading
This integrated course is designed to advance students to college-level writing skills and reading
strategies. Three hours lecture per week. Institutional Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite:
ACT English score of 14 - 16 or ACCUPLACER combined Next Generation Writing & Reading score
of 474-501 or successful completion of ENG 0113 with a grade of C or higher)
ENG 0124 Intermediate English and Reading
This integrated course is designed to advance students to college-level writing skills and reading
strategies. Four hours lecture per week. Institutional Credit, four semester hours. (Prerequisite: ACT
English score below 14 or ACCUPLACER combined Next Generation Writing & Reading score of
400-473.)
ENG 1113 English Composition I
This course prepares the student to think critically and compose texts for academic and professional rhetorical situations. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: ACT
English score of 17 or above or ACCUPLACER combined Next Generation Writing & Reading score
of 502 or above or successful completion of ENG 0123 with a grade of C or higher)
ENG 1114 English Composition I
This course prepares the student to think critically and compose texts for academic and professional
rhetorical situations. Four hours lecture per week. Credit, four semester hours. (Prerequisite: ACT
English score of 14 or above or ACCUPLACER combined Next Generation Writing & Reading score
of 474 or above or successful completion of ENG 0123 or ENG 0124 with a grade of C or higher)
ENG 1123 English Composition II
This course is a continuation of ENG 1113 with emphasis on research, argumentation, and composition. Readings, essays, and a research paper are required. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: ENG 1113 or ENG 1114)
ENG 2133 Creative Writing I
This course involves reading and writing poetry, short fiction, and/or other genre. Three hours lecture
per week. Credit, three semester hours.
ENG 2153 Traditional Grammar
This course focuses on the basic elements of English grammar and mechanics. Three hours lecture
per week. Credit, three semester hours.
ENG 2223 American Literature I
This course surveys representative prose and poetry of the United States from its beginnings to the
Civil War. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Pre-requisite: ENG 1113)
ENG 2233 American Literature II
This course surveys representative prose and poetry of the United States from Civil War to the present. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: ENG 1113)
ENG 2323 British Literature I
This course surveys British Literature from the Anglo-Saxon Period through the Restoration and
Eighteenth Century. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: ENG
1113)
ENG 2333 British Literature II
This course surveys British Literature from the Romantic Period to the present. Three hours lecture
per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: ENG 1113)
ENG 2423 World Literature I
This course surveys texts representative of global, historical and cultural diversity from the ancient
world through the early modern world. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
(Prerequisite: ENG 1113)
ENG 2433 World Literature II
This course surveys texts representative of global, historical and cultural diversity from the Enlightenment Period to the present. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: ENG 1113)
ENG 2523 African-American Literature I
This course surveys literature of major African-American writers from its beginning to the Harlem
Renaissance. Three lectures per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: ENG 1113)
ENG 2811 Writing Center Peer Tutor
This course introduces students to writing center history, theory, and practices; preparing them to
work in writing centers as peer tutors. One hour lecture per week. Credit, one semester hour.
EPY 2513 Child Psychology
A study of the various aspects of human growth and development during childhood and emerging
adolescence. Topics include biological, psychosocial and cognitive development. Three hours lecture
per week. Credit, three semester hours
EPY 2523 Adolescent Psychology
A study of various aspects of human growth and development during adolescence. Topics include
biological, psychosocial, and cognitive development. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
EPY 2533 Human Growth and Development
A study of various aspects of human growth and development from conception through death. Topics include bilogical, psychosocial, and cognitive development. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
FCS 1253 Nutrition
 A lecture course covering the nutrients for normal growth and reducing the risks of major chronic
diseases, and applied to the selection of food for ingestion, the processes of digestion, assimilation,
absorption, metabolism, and the applications for healthcare providers. Three hours lecture per week.
Credit, three semester hours.
GEO 1113 World Regional Geography
A regional survey of the basic geographic features and major new developments of the nations of the
world. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
GLY 1111 Physical Geology Lab
Laboratory course which may accompany GLY 1113. Study of the common rocks, minerals, topographic maps and geologic maps. One hour laboratory per week. Credit, one semester hour.
GLY 1113 Physical Geology
The course is designed to help students to more thoroughly understand the physical environment
and forces that shape our Earth and affect our lives. It primarily covers the relationships of Earth
processes and the resultant rocks, minerals, physical features, and natural resources on the Earth’s
surface and in its subsurface. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
GRA 1113 Engineering Drawing
The use of instruments, geometric construction, orthographic projection, sectional views, and lettering. Includes two-dimensional computer assisted drafting strategies. One hour lecture and five hours
laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
GRA 1143 Graphic Communication I
Instrumental drawing, geometric construction, orthographic projection, and descriptive geometry.
Includes computer aided design (CAD) in 2-dimensional and 3-dimensional construction. One hour
lecture and four hours lab. Credit, three semester hours.
HIS 1163 World Civilization I
A general survey of world history from ancient times to the 1500s. Three hours lecture per week.
Credit, three semester hours.
HIS 1173 World Civilization II
A general survey of world history since the 1500s. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
HIS 1613 African-American History
This is a survey of African-American History from Africa origins to modern times. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
HIS 2213 American (U.S.) History I
This is a survey of American (U.S.) history to 1877. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
HIS 2223 American (U.S.) History II
This course is a survey of American (U.S.) history since 1865. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
HON 1713 Honors Leadership Development I
The central focus is the development of leadership skills. This course integrates readings from the
humanities and experiential learning exercises with readings and discussions of traditional theories.
Credit, three semester hours.
HON 1911 Honors Forum I
Admission is by invitation only. Interdisciplinary studies of selected issues confronting the individual
and society with discussions led by scholars, faculty, and/or students. Credit, one semester hour.
HON 1921 Honors Forum II
Admission is by invitation only. Interdisciplinary studies of selected issues confronting the individual
and society with discussions led by scholars, faculty, and/or students. Credit, one semester hour.
HON 2713 Honors Leadership Development II
A continuation of HON/LEA 1713 Credit, three semester hour.
HON 2911 Honors Forum III
Admission is by invitation only. Interdisciplinary studies of selected issues confronting the individual
and society with discussions led by scholars, faculty, and/or students. Credit, one semester hour.
HON 2921 Honors Forum IV
Admission is by invitation only. Interdisciplinary studies of selected issues confronting the individual
and society with discussions led by scholars, faculty, and/or students. Credit, one semester hour.
HPR 1111 General Physical Education Activities I
This course is designed to give students a current concept of physical education and recreation by developing body skills while engaging in various anaerobic & aerobic activities. Some activity classes
are for varsity sport students only, and you must be a member of the designated varsity team to enroll.
Two hours per week. Credit, one semester hour.
HPR 1121 General Physical Education Activities II
This course is designed to give students a current concept of physical education and recreation by developing body skills while engaging in various anaerobic & aerobic activities. Some activity classes are for varsity sport students only, and you must be a member of the designated varsity team to enroll.
Two hours per week. Credit, one semester hour.
HPR 1131 Varsity Sports I
Participation in varsity sport. Credit, one semester hour.
HPR 1141 Varsity Sports II
Participation in varsity sport. Credit, one semester hour.
HPR 1213 Personal and Community Health
This course covers the application of principles and practices of healthful living to the individual and
community; major health problems and the mutual responsibilities of home, school, and health agencies. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
HPR 1313 Introduction to Kinesiology/Health, Physical Education & Recreation
This course covers an introduction to the various fields of study within kinesiology/health, physical
education, and recreation. Discussion of the responsibilities and opportunities of professional personnel. Orientation of student to opportunities in the field. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
HPR 1551 Fitness and Conditioning Training I
This course covers instruction and practice of basic principles of fitness and conditioning through a
variety of exercises and activities. One hour per week. Credit, one semester hour.
HPR 1561 Fitness and Conditioning Training II
This course covers instruction and practice of basic principles of fitness and conditioning through a
variety of exercises and activities. One hour per week. Credit, one semester hour.
HPR 1593 Health Concepts of Physical Activity, Wellness and Nutrition
This course is designed to help students develop an understanding of the concepts of physical fitness
and nutrition for a healthful lifestyle and a reduced risk of disease. The student will explore wellness
concepts and engage in assessments with emphasis on personal fitness, disease prevention, nutrition,
and weight management. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
HPR 2111 General Physical Education Activities III
This course is designed to give students a current concept of physical education and recreation by developing body skills while engaging in various anaerobic & aerobic activities. Some activity classes
are for varsity sport students only, and you must be a member of the designated varsity team to enroll.
Two hours per week. Credit, one semester hour.
HPR 2121 General Physical Education Activities IV
This course is designed to give students a current concept of physical education and recreation by developing body skills while engaging in various anaerobic & aerobic activities. Some activity classes
are for varsity sport students only, and you must be a member of the designated varsity team to enroll.
Two hours per week. Credit, one semester hour.
HPR 2131 Varsity Sports III
Participation in varsity sport. Credit, one semester hour.
HPR 2141 Varsity Sports IV
Participation in varsity sport. Credit, one semester hour.
HPR 2213 First Aid and CPR
This course covers the instruction and practice in methods prescribed in the American Red Cross or
American Heart Association standard and advanced courses. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
HPR 2423 Football Theory
This course covers and explores the theories, practices, tactics and strategies involved in coaching
football. Emphasis will be placed upon the objectives, rules, regulations, and policies of competitive
athletics, as well as on individual skills, team tactics, organization and management practices. Three
hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
HPR 2453 Baseball Theory
This course covers and explores the theories, practices, tactics and strategies involved in coaching
baseball. Emphasis will be placed upon the objectives, rules, regulations, and policies of competitive
athletics, as well as on individual skills, team tactics, organization and management practices. Three
hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
HPR 2551 Fitness and Conditioning Training III
This course covers instruction and practice of basic principles of fitness and conditioning through a
variety of exercises and activities. One hour per week. Credit, one semester hour.
HPR 2561 Fitness and Conditioning Training IV
This course covers instruction and practice of basic principles of fitness and conditioning through a
variety of exercises and activities. One hour per week. Credit, one semester hour.
HPR 2723 Prevention and Care of Athletic Injuries
This course covers the theory and practice for the prospective athletic trainer or coach in the prevention and care of athletic injuries. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
JOU 1313 News Writing and Reporting I
An introductory course in journalism designed to teach news writing and reporting, the construction
of the news article with an emphasis on source news, features, sports, and interview stories and editorials. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
JOU 1323 News Writing and Reporting II
An advanced journalism course designed to teach news writing and editing with an emphasis on
news, features, sports, and editorials. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: JOU 1313)
LEA 1713 Honors Leadership Development I
The central focus is the development of leadership skills. This course integrates readings from the
humanities and experiential learning exercises with readings and discussions of traditional theories.
Three hour lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
LEA 1811 Leadership and Organization Skills I
An introduction of leadership styles and skills, roles and functions of officers of student organizations. One hour lecture per week. Credit, one semester hour.
LEA 1821 Leadership and Organizational Skills II
A study of leadership styles and skills, roles and functions of officers of student organizations. One
hour lecture per week. Credit, one semester hour.
LEA 1911 Leadership & Communication Skills Dev. - Recruiting & Public Relations I
This course introduces the student to his/her responsibilities as a member of the recruiting/public
relations team. One hour lecture per week. Credit, one semester hour.
LEA 1921 Leadership & Communication Skills Dev. - Recruiting & Public Relations II
A continuation of LEA 1911. One hour lecture per week. Credit, one semester hour.
LEA 2713 Honors Leadership Development II
A continuation of HON/LEA 1713. Three hour lecture per week. Credit, three semester hour.
LLS 1151 College Life
This course is designed to assist the first time student in achieving academic, career, and personal
success. Credit, one semester hour.
LLS 1311 Orientation
This course is designed to help the new college student adjust to college life. It includes a study of
personal and social adjustments, and gives the student guidance in collegiate life. One hour lecture
per week. Credit, one semester hour.
LLS 1423 College Study Skills
This course is designed as an advanced course in study skills that fosters insight and practice of
critical reading skills and study techniques needed for efficient and effective mastery of collegelevel courses, both graduate and undergraduate. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
LLS 1713 Job Search Skills
This course is designed to prepare students for job networking skills, completing applications resume
writing, interviewing, and work ethic. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
LLS 1723 Employment Readiness
This course is designed to prepare students for employment by teaching the importance of interviewing skills, employer expectations, employability skills, work ethics, and job retention skills. Three
hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
MAT 1233 Intermediate Algebra
This course includes linear equations and their graphs; inequalities and number line graphs; rational
expressions; factoring; laws of exponents; radicals; polynomials. Three hours lecture/lab per
week. Institutional Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: ACT Math score of 16 - 18 or NextGeneration ACCUPLACER Math score of 231-253 or successful completion of MAT 0123 with a
grade of C or higher)
MAT 1234 Intermediate Algebra
This course includes linear equations and their graphs; inequalities and number line graphs; rational
expressions; factoring; laws of exponents; radicals; polynomials; additional prerequisite topics will
be covered as needed. Four hours lecture/lab per week. Institutional Credit, four semester hours.
(Prerequisite: ACT Math score of 1 - 15 or Next-Generation ACCUPLACER Math score of 200-230.)
MAT 1313 College Algebra
This course includes the following topics with applications: inequalities; functions; linear and quadratic equations, and their graphs; rational, radical, and higher order equations; polynomial and rational functions; logarithmic and exponential functions; systems of equations. Three hours lecture/
lab per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: ACT Math score of 19 or Next-Generation
ACCUPLACER Math score of 254 or above or successful completion of MAT 1233 or MAT 1234
with a grade of C or higher)
MAT 1314 College Algebra
This course includes the following topics with applications: inequalities; functions; linear and quadratic equations, and their graphs; rational, radical, and higher order equations; polynomial and rational functions; logarithmic and exponential functions; systems of equations; additional prerequisite topics will be covered as needed. Four hours lecture/lab per week. Credit, four semester hours. (Prerequisite: ACT Math score of 16-18 or Next-Generation ACCUPLACER Math score of 231-254 or
successful completion of MAT 1234 with a grade of C or higher)
MAT 1323 Trigonometry
This course includes trigonometric functions and their graphs; trigonometric identities; trigonometric
equations; radian measurement; solutions of right and oblique triangles; inverse trigonometric functions; applications. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: MAT
1313 or ACT Math Score of 24 or above)
MAT 1343 Pre-Calculus
This course is a review of college algebra and trigonometry in preparation for Calculus I. Topics include algebraic functions, algebraic equations, logarithmic and exponential functions, trigonometric
functions, trigonometric equations, and graphs of functions. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: ACT Math Score of 19 or above and high school trigonometry or
successful completion of MAT 1233/1234 and high school trigonometry)
MAT 1513 Business Calculus I
This course is a study of functions, limits, continuity, derivatives, and their applications to business
and economics. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: MAT 1313
or MAT 1343)
MAT 1523 Business Calculus II
This course is a study of antiderivatives, techniques of integration, applications of the definite integral, and applications to business and economics. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: MAT 1513)
MAT 1613 Calculus I
This course includes the following topics: limits; continuity; the definition of the derivative; differentiation; and applications. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite:
MAT 1313 and MAT 1323 or MAT 1343, or ACT Math Score of 26 or above)
MAT 1623 Calculus II
This course includes the following topics: antiderivatives, the definite integral, indefinite integrals,
techniques of integration, and applications. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester
hours. (Prerequisite: MAT 1613)
MAT 1723 Real Number System
This course is designed for elementary and special education majors. Topics include set theory, numeration systems, foundations of number theory, and properties and operations of real numbers.
Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: MAT 1313 or MAT 1343)
MAT 1733 Geometry, Measurement, and Probability
This course is designed for elementary and special education majors. Topics include geometric definitions, shapes, and formulas; linear and angular measurements; unit conversions, statistics and probability. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: MAT 1313 or MAT
1343)
MAT 1743 Problem Solving with Real Numbers
This course is designed for elementary and special education majors. Topics include logic, applications of real numbers, probability, and statistics. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: MAT 1313 or MAT 1343)
MAT 1753 Quantitative Reasoning
This course is designed for students who need only three hours of unspecified mathematics. Includes basic mathematical concepts from logic, algebra, set theory, probability, descriptive statistics, and
finance. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: ACT Math score
of at least 16 or Next-Generation ACCUPLACER Math score of 231-253)
MAT 2113 Introduction to Linear Algebra
This course includes the following topics: systems of linear equations; matrices; determinants; vector spaces; orthogonality; linear transformation; applications; eigenvalues and eigenvectors. Three
hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: MAT 1623)
MAT 2323 Statistics
This course is an introduction to statistical methods of describing, summarizing, comparing, and
interpreting data to include probability distributions, sampling, estimation, confidence intervals, and
hypothesis testing. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: MAT
1313 or MAT 1343)
MAT 2613 Calculus III
This course includes the following topics: analytical geometry; parametric equations; polar coordinates; improper integrals, infinite sequences and series; Taylor polynomial, vectors and geometry of
space. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: MAT 1623)
MAT 2623 Calculus IV
This course includes the following topics: partial differentiation; optimization; multiple integration;
vector calculus; quadric surfaces, line integrals, and divergence theorem. Three hours lecture per
week. Credit, three semester hours, (Prerequisite: MAT 2613)
MAT 2913 Differential Equations
This course includes the following topics: solution of first and higher order differential equations,
existence theorems, Laplace transforms; applications. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: MAT 2623 or Corequisite: MAT 2623)
MFL 1213 Spanish I
This course is an oral-aural approach which stresses conversation, pronunciation, listening comprehension, reading, writing, and functional grammar with emphasis on communication. Three hours
lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
MFL 1223 Spanish II
This course continues MFL 1213 with wider vocabulary and more complex structures and functions.
Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: MFL 1213)
MFL 2213 Spanish III
This course is a continuation of MFL 1223 with additional materials of literary and cultural value.
Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: MFL 1223)
MFL 2223 Spanish IV
This course is a continuation of MFL 2213 with additional literary and cultural readings and compositions as well as a review of essential elements of grammar. Three hours lecture per week. Credit,
three semester hours. (Prerequisite: MFL 2213)
MUA 1111, 1121, 2111, 2121 Class Brass I, II, III, & IV
Brass instruction for music majors and non-music majors. Designed to teach the fundamental principles of playing, explore varied levels of literature and develop the student’s knowledge of brass
instruction and performance. Credit, one semester hour each.
MUA 1141, 1151, 2141, 2151 Elective Brass I, II, III, & IV
Brass instruction for non-brass/music education majors and non-music majors. Designed to teach the
fundamental principles of playing, explore moderate levels of literature and develop the student’s
interest in playing. Credit, one semester hour each.
MUA 1172, 1182, 2172, 2182 Brass For Music Education Majors I, II, III, & IV
Brass instruction for music education majors and advanced non-music majors with an emphasis on
brass instrumental playing. Designed to teach the fundamental principles of playing, explore moderate to advanced levels of literature, develop the student’s interest in playing and strengthen the
student’s playing ability. Credit, two semester hours each.
MUA 1173, 1183, 2173, 2183 Brass For Music Majors I, II, III, & IV
Brass instruction for performance majors. Designed to teach the fundamental principles of playing,
explore advanced levels of literature, develop the student’s interest in playing and strengthen the
student’s playing ability. Credit, three semester hours each.
MUA 1211, 1221, 2211, 2221 Class Guitar I, II, III, & IV
Instruction for beginning guitar players that includes basic accompanying styles and an introduction
to classical guitar technique. Credit, one semester hour each.
MUA 1241, 1251, 2241, 2251 Elective Guitar I, II, III, & IV
Guitar instruction for non-music majors and music majors who wish to take guitar as an elective.
Introduction to guitar technique, repertoire, and performance of standard literature. Credit, one semester hour each.
MUA 1272, 1282, 2272, 2282 Guitar For Music and Music Education Majors I, II, III, & IV
Guitar instruction for music education majors with guitar as their area of emphasis. Introduction to
guitar technique, repertoire, and performance of standard literature. Credit, two semester hours each.
MUA 1411,1421,2411,2421 Class Percussion I, II, III, & IV
Percussion instruction for music majors and non-music majors. Designed to teach the fundamental
principles of playing, explore varied levels of literature and develop the student’s interest in playing.
Credit, one semester hour each.
MUA 1441, 1451, 2441, 2451 Elective Percussion I, II, III, & IV
Percussion instruction for music majors and non-music education majors. Designed to teach the
fundamental principles of playing, explore moderate levels of literature and develop the student’s
interest in playing. Credit, one semester hour each.
MUA 1472, 1482, 2472, 2482 Percussion For Music Education I, II, III, & IV
Percussion instruction for music majors and advanced non-music majors, with an emphasis on
percussion instrumental playing. Designed to teach the fundamental principles of playing, explore
moderate to advanced levels of literature and develop the student’s interest in playing. Credit, two semester hours each.
MUA 1473, 1483, 2473, 2483 Percussion For Music Majors I, II, III, & IV
Percussion instruction for music majors. Designed to teach the fundamental principles of playing,
explore advanced levels of literature and develop the student’s interest in playing. Credit, three semester hours each.
MUA 1511, 1521, 2511, 2521 Class Piano For Music Majors I, II, III & IV
Class piano instruction for music majors with no previous piano training. This curriculum is designed
to prepare students for their piano proficiency examination upon transfer to university. Credit, one semester hour each.
MUA 1541, 1551, 2541, 2551 Piano For Non-Music Majors I, II, III, & IV
Individual piano instruction for non-music majors. Credit, one semester hour each.
MUA 1572, 1582, 2572, 2582 Piano For Keyboard Majors (Music Education) I, II, III, & IV
Individual piano instruction including technique, appropriate repertoire, and memorization. Credit, two semester hours each.
MUA 1573, 1583, 2573, 2583 Piano For Keyboard Majors (Performance) I, II, III, & IV
Intensive individual piano instruction including technique, appropriate repertoire, and memorization.
Credit, three semester hours each.
MUA 1641, 1651, 2641, 2651 Strings for Non Majors (Elective Strings) I, II, III, & IV
Bowed string instrument instruction for music majors with strings as a secondary area of emphasis.
Introduction to tuning, tone production, bowings, fingerings, and positions. Credit, one semester hour
each.
MUA 1672, 1682, 2672, 2682 Strings for Music Education Majors I, II, III, & IV
Bowed string instrument instruction for music majors with strings as their area of emphasis. Introduction to string technique, literature, etudes and performance standard literature. Credit, two semester hours each.
MUA 1711, 1721, 2711, 2721 Class Voice I, II, III, & IV
Class voice is designed to teach the fundamental principles of singing, explore elementary to moderate levels of vocal literature and develop and improve the student’s vocal ability in a group setting.
Credit, one semester hour each.
MUA 1741, 1751, 2741, 2751 Voice For Non-Vocal Majors I, II, III, & IV
Voice for non-vocal majors is designed to teach the fundamental principles of singing, explore vocal
literature and develop and improve the student’s vocal ability. Credit, one semester hour each.
MUA 1772, 1782, 2772, 2782 Voice For Vocal Music Education Majors I, II, III, & IV
Voice for vocal music education majors is designed to teach the fundamental principles of singing,
explore varied vocal literature, and develop and improve the student’s singing ability. Credit, two semester hours each.
MUA 1773, 1783, 2773, 2783 Voice For Vocal Performance Majors I, II, III, & IV
Voice for vocal performance majors is designed to teach the fundamental principals of singing, explore varied vocal literature, develop and improve the student’s singing ability. Credit, three semester hours.
MUA 1811, 1821, 2811, 2821 Class Woodwinds I, II, III, & IV
Woodwind instruction for music majors and non-music majors. Designed to teach the fundamental
principles of playing, explore varied levels of literature, and develop the student’s knowledge of
woodwind instruction and performance. Credit, one semester hour each.
MUA 1841, 1851, 2841, 2851 Elective Woodwinds I, II, III, & IV
Woodwind instruction for music majors and non-music majors. Designed to teach the fundamental
principles of playing, explore varied levels of literature, and develop the student’s knowledge of
woodwind instruction and performance. Credit, one semester hour each.
MUA 1872, 1882, 2872, 2882 Woodwinds For Music Education Majors I, II, III, & IV
Woodwind instruction for music education majors and advanced non-music majors with an emphasis
on woodwind instrumental playing. Designed to teach the fundamental principles of playing, explore
moderate to advanced levels of literature, develop the student’s interest in playing, and strengthen the
student’s playing ability. Credit, two semester hours each.
MUA 1873, 1883, 2873, 2883 Woodwinds For Music Majors I, II, III, & IV
Woodwind instruction for performance majors. Designed to teach the fundamental principles of playing, explore advanced levels of literature, develop the student’s interest in playing, and strengthen the
student’s playing ability. Credit, three semester hours each.
MUO 1111, 1121, 2111, 2121 Band I, II, III, & IV
Designed to teach the principles of playing musical instruments, explore varied levels of literature
and develop the student’s knowledge of performance techniques. Five hours laboratory per week.
Credit, one semester hour each. (Wesson Campus) (Prerequisite: Consent of instructor)
MUO 1131, 1141, 2131, 2141 Small Instrument Ensemble I, II, III, & IV
Designed to explore varied levels of literature and develop the student’s knowledge of performance
technique in small ensembles and auxiliary groups. Credit, one semester hour each. (Wesson Campus)
MUO 1151, 1161, 2151, 2161 Small Mixed Ensemble I, II, III, & IV
Designed to explore varied levels of literature and develop the student’s knowledge of performance
technique in small ensembles and auxiliary groups. Credit, one semester hour each. (Wesson Campus)
MUO 1171, 1181, 2171, 2181 Large Jazz Ensemble I, II, III, & IV
A course designed to give students the opportunity to perform jazz and a variety of music styles in
a “big band” setting or similar instrumentation. Instructor permission required. Credit, one semester hour. (Wesson Campus) (Prerequisite: consent of instructor)
MUO 1211, 1221, 2211, 2221 Choir I, II, III, & IV
A course for music majors and non-majors focused on performing choral music from a variety of
style periods. Membership with consent of instructor. Four hours laboratory per week. Credit, one semester hour. (Wesson Campus)
MUO 1241, 1251, 2241, 2251 Small Voice Ensemble I, II, III, & IV
A course for select singers focused on performing from one or more genres of music. Groups less
than concert choir size, such as show choirs (Sojourners), chamber choirs (Ambassadors), or other
small vocal ensembles, Membership by auditions. Credit, one semester hour each. (Wesson Campus)
MUS 1113 Music Appreciation
 A course designed to give the student, thorough listening and written work, the ability to understand,
appreciate, and evaluate music of Western Culture. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
MUS 1133 Fundamentals of Music
Study of basic knowledge of music fundamentals to prepare students for music theory. Concepts
include: notation, scales, keys, rhythm, intervals, triads, and their inversions.
MUS 1211 Music Theory I, Lab
Lab instruction. Development of music sight-singing, ear training, and dictation skills. Credit, one semester hour. (Corequisite: MUS 1213)
MUS 1213 Music Theory I
Study of functional harmony through analysis and part writing. Three hours lecture per week. Credit,
three semester hours. (Prerequisite: ACT English score of 17 or above or ACCUPLACER combined
Next Generation Writing & Reading score of 474 or above or successful completion of ENG 0123
with a grade of C or higher)
MUS 1221 Music Theory II, Lab
Lab instruction. Development of music sight-singing, ear training, and dictation skills. Credit, one semester hour. (Prerequisite: Minimum grade of “C” in MUS 1211)
MUS 1223 Music Theory II
Continued study and review of functional harmony through analysis and part-writing. Three hours
lecture and one laboratory hour per week. Credit, three semester hours.
MUS 1233 Commercial Music Theory
Introduction to concepts and skills of reading music theory for pre-music and non-music majors.
Includes study of notation, rhythm, scales, key signatures, intervals, and triads. Three hours lecture
per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MUS 1133)
MUS 1313 Introduction to Music Industry
This course is an introductory overview of the entertainment industry’s scope, systems and practices.
Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
MUS 1413 Basic Computer Skills for Musicians
This course is designed to introduce students to digital media skills and the Apple Operating System.
Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
MUS 1423 Survey of Popular Music
Advanced listening course, designed to acquaint the Music Industry major with a broad overview of
popular musical styles and repertoire from the beginnings of American Popular Music to the present.
Three lecture hours per week. Credit, three semester hours.
MUS 1911 Recital Class I
Performances of solo and ensemble literature by students majoring in music. Attendance at a prescribed minimum number of departmentally approved musical performances per semester also required. Credit, one semester hour.
MUS 1921 Recital Class II
Performances of solo and ensemble literature by students majoring in music. Attendance at a prescribed minimum number of departmentally approved musical performances per semester also required. Credit, one semester hour.
MUS 2123 Music Survey (Majors)
Advanced listening course, designed to acquaint the music major with a broad overview of musical
style and repertoire from antiquity to the present. Students will demonstrate a basic knowledge of
historical periods, composers, and musical forms. Students will assess representative works through
evaluation of selected listening and score examples. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
MUS 2211 Music Theory III, Lab
Lab instruction. Development of music sight-singing, ear training, and dictation. Credit, one semester hour. (Prerequisite: Minimum grade of “C” in MUS 1221)
MUS 2213 Music Theory III
Continued study of functional harmony through analysis and part writing. Three hours lecture and
one laboratory and review hour per week. Credit, three semester hours.
MUS 2221 Music Theory IV, Lab
Lab instruction. Development of music sight-singing, ear training, and dictation skills. Credit, one semester hour. (Prerequisite: Minimum grade of “C” in MUS 2211)
MUS 2223 Music Theory IV
Continued study and review of functional harmony through analysis and part writing. Introduction
to twentieth century techniques.
MUS 2513 Music for Elementary Teachers
Designed for the needs of the elementary education student. Essentials of public school music; study
of the fundamentals of music. Reading music notations and terminology. Three hours lecture per
week. Credit, three semester hours.
MUS 2911 Recital Class III
Performances of solo and ensemble literature by students majoring in music. Attendance at a prescribed minimum number of departmentally approved musical performances per semester also required. Credit, one semester hour.
MUS 2921 Recital Class IV
Performances of solo and ensemble literature by students majoring in music. Attendance at a prescribed minimum number of departmentally approved musical performances per semester also required. Credit, one semester hour.
NUR 1113 Pharmacology
This course provides an introduction to pharmacology and pharmacotherapy. Drugs are learned
within groups (drug-classifications), focusing on the prototypes. Topics include drug-nomenclature,
standard abbreviations, terminology, and herbals/alternatives. The vital medication-administration
role of nurses is emphasized and addresses safety, legal, ethical, and cultural considerations. Important concepts that are introduced, discussed, and frequently reiterated, include critical-thinking,
evidenced-based practice, authoritative-resources, and interdisciplinary collaboration. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisites: Admission to the ADN Program, completion of ADN prerequisites.
Corequisite: NUR 1119)
NUR 1119 Fundamentals of Nursing
Fundamentals of Nursing is a didactic and clinical course that introduces the student to the basics
of nursing theory including the nursing process, health assessment, critical thinking, and selected
nursing skills. Physiological, psychological, sociological, developmental, spiritual, ethnic-cultural,
and socioeconomic factors are introduced and examined. Students begin to utilize and apply these
concepts and theories into the practice of nursing in a variety of structured settings. This course also
introduces the functions and roles of the associate degree nurse within evidenced-based nursing practice and identifies opportunities for interdisciplinary collaboration with members of the healthcare
team to ensure cotinuity of client care. Credit, nine semester hours, (Prerequisites: Admission to the
ADN program, completion of ADN prerequisites. Corequisite: NUR 1113)
NUR 1219 Medical-Surgical Nursing I
Medical-Surgical Nursing I is a didactic and clinical course which focuses on the holistic care of
Medical-Surgical clients with acute and chronic health alterations. Emphasis is placed on the synthesis of relevant theories, concepts and principles from nursing, social, behavioral, and natural sciences
when making nursing judgments. Students utilize the nursing process to plan nursing actions to assist Medical-Surgical clients to maximize their potential for wellness. Physiological, psychological,
sociological, developmental, spiritual, ethnic-cultural, and socioeconomic factors are examined. This course is also designed to enhance professional knowledge and understanding of the functions and
roles of the associate degree nurse within evidence-based nursing practice in the Medical-Surgical
and selected community settings. Selected clinical experiences are provided within the environment
of hospital based and community settings utilizing interdisciplinary collaboration to ensure continuity of care. Credit, nine semester hours. (Prerequisites: NUR 1113 and NUR 1119)
NUR 1953 Nursing Externship
This nursing elective course provides the student with additional opportunity to enhance knowledge
and skills in the practice of nursing while under the direct supervision of a registered nurse preceptor.
Affiliating hospitals provide preceptors along with monetary compensation for the student during the
externship program. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisites: NUR 1113, NUR 1119, and NUR
1219)
NUR 2316 Maternal-Newborn and Women’s Health Nursing
Maternal-Newborn Nursing is a didactic and clinical course designed to assist the learner to develop
the knowledge and expertise necessary to meet the needs of the childbearing family and health care
of women through the lifespan. Physiological, psychological, sociological, developmental, spiritual, ethnic-cultural, and socioeconomic factors involved in maternal-newborn and women’s health
nursing are emphasized. The student is required to utilize critical thinking skills when applying the
nursing process to the prioritzation of care for members of the childbearing family, and women
from adolescence to old age. The course is also designed to enhance professional knowledge and
understanding of the functions and roles of the associate degree nurse within evidence-based nursing
practice in the maternal-newborn and women’s health settings including interdisciplinary collaboration. Selected clinical experiences are provided within the environment of hospital based and community settings. Credit, six semester hours. (Prerequisites: NUR 1113, NUR 1119, NUR 1219, and EPY
2533. Corequisite: NUR 2326)
NUR 2326 Nursing Care and the Pediatric Client
Nursing Care and the Pediatric Client is a didactic and clinical course. This course is designed to provide the student with the knowledge and experience related to the nursing care of the pediatric client
(birth through adolescence). Theories of development and content related to the various life stages of
this age group within the context of the family will be considered. Content also includes the role of
the associate degree nurse in caring for the pediatric client with common health problems along the
wellness-illness continuum considering physiological, psychological, sociological, developmental,
and ethnic-cultural factors. The student is required to utilize critical thinking skills when applying
the nursing process to the prioritization of care for the pediatric client. This course is also designed
to enhance professional knowledge and understanding of the functions and roles of the associate
degree nurse within evidence-based nursing practice. Content includes a variety of components including management and delegation, role identity, successful role transition, teaching/learning, use
of technology, moral/ethical/legal issues impacting nursing care, interdisciplinary collaboration, and
empowered nursing practice. Selected clinical experiences are provided in a variety of clincial/community settings. Credit, six semester hours. (Prerequisites: NUR 1113, NUR 1119, NUR 1219, and
EPY 2533. Corequisite: NUR 2316)
NUR 2414 Psychiatric Mental Health Nursing
Psychiatric Mental Health Nursing is a didactic and clinical course which focuses on the holistic
care of clients experiencing mental health alterations in varying degrees along the health continuum.
Emphasis is placed on the synthesis of relevant theories, concepts and principles from nursing, social,
behavioral, and natural sciences when making nursing judgments. Students are required to utilize critical thinking to develop therapeutic nursing interventions to assist psychiatric mental health clients
to maintain their dignity and rights while maximizing their potential toward wellness. Physiological,
psychological, sociological, developmental, spiritual, ethnic-cultural, and socioeconomic factors are
examined. This course is also designed to enhance professional knowledge and understanding of the
functions and roles of the associate degree nurse within mental health settings. Content includes a
variety of components including management and delegation, role identity, moral/ethical/legal issues
impacting nursing care, and interdisciplinary collaboration within evidence-based nursing practice. Selected clinical experiences are provided to diverse populations within the environment of various
structured health care delivery settings. Credit, four semester hours. (Prerequisites: NUR 1113, NUR
1119, NUR 1219, NUR 2316, and NUR 2326. Corequisite: NUR 2426)
NUR 2426 Medical Surgical Nursing II
Medical-Surgical Nursing II is a didactic and clinical course that focuses on the holistic care of
medical-surgical clients of varying acuity levels: those with recurring health problems, those who are
critically ill and in need of specialized care, and those in need of emergency care. Emphasis is placed
on the synthesis of relevant theories, concepts and principles from nursing, social, behavioral, and
natural sciences when making nursing judgments. Students are required to utilize the nursing process
to assist medical-surgical clients to maintain their dignity and rights while maximizing their potential
for wellness within their physiological, psychological, sociological, developmental, ethnic-cultural,
and socioeconomic factors. This course is also designed to enhance professional knowledge and
understanding of the functions and roles of the associate degree nurse within evidence-based nursing practice. Content includes a variety of components including management and delegation, role
identity, successful role transition, teaching/learning, use of technology, moral/ethical/legal issues
impacting nursing care, interdisciplinary collaboration, and empowered nursing practice. Selected
clinical experiences are provided within the environment of various structure health care delivery
settings. Credit, six semester hours. (Prerequisites: NUR 1113, NUR 1119, NUR 1219, NUR 2316,
and NUR 2326. Corequisite: NUR 2414)
NUR 2432 NCLEX-RN® Preparation
This nursing course is designed to prepare students to take the National Council Licensure Examination for Registered Nurses (NCLEX-RN®). Content includes critical thinking activities, test-taking
strategies, and review of selected core nursing content. Credit, two semester hours. (Prerequisites:
NUR 1113, NUR 1119, NUR 1219, NUR 2316, and NUR 2326. Corequisites: NUR 2414, NUR 2426)
PHI 1113 Old Testament Survey
The student will survey the Old Testament (Hebrew Bible) with regard to its worth as a literary work,
along with significant dates, themes, concepts and contributions of its characters to that history and
literature. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
PHI 1133 New Testament Survey
A study of the New Testament covering the life of Jesus of Nazareth and the establishment of the
early church as presented in the Gospels, Acts, and other New Testament books. Three hours lecture
per week. Credit, three semester hours.
PHI 2113 Introduction to Philosophy I
An introduction to the major themes and history of the discipline of Philosophy with an emphasis
on the development of critical thinking skills. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
PHI 2143 Introduction to Ethics
An introduction to moral philosophy with the investigation of some selected moral problems. Three
hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
PHY 1111 Introduction to Astronomy, Lab
A laboratory course that contains experiments and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced
in PHY 1113 Introduction to Astronomy, Lecture. Two hours laboratory per week. Credit, one semester hour.
PHY 1113 Introduction to Astronomy
A lecture course that includes surveys of the solar system, our galaxy, and the universe. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
PHY 2241 Physical Science I, Lab
A laboratory course that contains experiments and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced
in PHY 2243 Physical Science Survey I, Lecture. Two hours laboratory per week. Credit, one semester hour.
PHY 2243 Physical Science I
A lecture course that includes studies of measurements and units, electricity, mechanics, heat, sound,
light, and astronomy. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
PHY 2251 Physical Science II, Lab
A laboratory course that contains experiments and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced
in PHY 2253 Physical Science Survey II, Lecture. Two hours laboratory per week. Credit, one semester hour.
PHY 2253 Physical Science II, Lecture
A lecture course that includes studies of chemistry and earth science. Three hours lecture per week.
Credit, three semester hours.
PHY 2313 Physics I, Lecture and Lab
A calculus-based combined lecture and laboratory course covering mechanics and conservation laws,
primarily for engineering, science, and mathematics majors. Labs associated with this course contain
experiments and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced in lecture classes. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Pre or corequisite MAT 1613)
PHY 2323 Physics II, Lecture and Lab
A calculus-based combined lecture and laboratory course covering electricity and magnetism, primarily for engineering, science, and mathematics majors. Labs associated with this course contain
experiments and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced in lecture classes. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: PHY 2313)
PHY 2333 Physics III, Lecture and Lab
A calculus-based combined lecture and laboratory course covering harmonic motion, waves, optics,
and an introduction to modern physics, primarily for engineering, science, and mathematics majors.
Labs associated with this course contain experiments and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced in lecture classes. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: PHY 2323)
PHY 2411 General Physics I, Lab
A laboratory course that contains experiments and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced
in PHY 2413 General Physics I, Lecture. Two hours laboratory per week. Credit, one semester hour.
PHY 2413 General Physics I, Lecture
A trigonometry-based lecture course covering mechanics and conservation laws primarily for preprofessional majors. Three hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
PHY 2414 General Physics I, Lecture and Lab
A trigonometry-based combined lecture and laboratory course covering mechanics and conservation
laws primarily for pre-professional majors. Labs associated with this course contain experiments
and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced in lecture classes. Credit, four semester hours.
PHY 2421 General Physics II, Lab
A laboratory course that contains experiments and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced
in PHY 2423 General Physics II, Lecture. Two hours laboratory per week. Credit, one semester hour.
PHY 2423 General Physics II, Lecture
A trigonometry-based lecture course covering electricity, magnetism, and optics primarily for preprofessional majors. Three hours lecture. Credit, three semester hours.
PHY 2424 General Physics II, Lecture and Lab
A trigonometry-based combined lecture and laboratory course covering electricity, magnetism, and
optics primarily for pre-professional majors. Labs associated with this course contain experiments
and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced in lecture classes. Credit, four semester hours.
PHY 2514 General Physics I-A, Lecture and Lab
A calculus-based combined lecture and laboratory course covering mechanics and conservation laws,
primarily for mathematics. Labs associated with this course contain experiments and exercises that
reinforce the principles introduced in lecture classes. Credit, four semester hours.
PHY 2524 General Physics II-A, Lecture and Lab
A calculus-based combined lecture and laboratory course covering electricity, magnetism, and optics, primarily for students of engineering, science or mathematics. Labs associated with this course
contain experiments and exercises that reinforce the principles introduced in lecture classes. Credit, four semester hours.
PLG 1113 Introduction to Paralegal Studies
The role of the paralegal in the practice of law. Introduction to legal research and source materials.
Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
PSC 1113 American National Government
Survey of the foundations, institutions, and political aspects of American national government. Credit, three semester hours.
PSC 1123 American State and Local Government
Survey of the relationship among American local, state, and national governments and the organization, function, and operation of the different levels of government. Three hours lecture per week.
Credit, three semester hours.
PSY 1513 General Psychology
An introduction to the scientific study of human behavior and mental processes. This includes history
and theories of psychology, research methods, biological bases of behavior, the principles of learning, personality and abnormal behavior. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
PSY 2223 Perspectives on Child Maltreatment of Child Advocacy
This introductory child advocacy studies course covers the historical, legal framework, responses
to child maltreatment, and current cultural controversies pertinent to child maltreatment and child
advocacy. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
PSY 2513 Child Psychology
A study of the various aspects of human growth and development during childhood and emerging
adolescence. Topics include biological, psychosocial and cognitive development. Three hours lecture
per week. Credit, three semester hours.
PSY 2523 Adolescent Psychology
A study of various aspects of human growth and development during adolescence. Topics include
biological, psychosocial and cognitive development. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
PSY 2533 Human Growth and Development
A study of various aspects of human growth and development from conception through death. Topics
include biological, psychosocial, and cognitive development. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
PSY 2553 Psychology of Personal Adjustment
A course to aid in developing an understanding of personal adjustment with emphasis placed on personal issues through life, love and relationships, wellness and career exploration. Three hours lecture
per week. Credit, three semester hours.
SOC 2113 Introduction to Sociology
This course introduces the scientific study of human society and social interaction and examines
social forces on individuals and groups. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
SOC 2133 Social Problems
This course is a study of the theoretical analysis, nature, scope, and effects of contemporary social
problems and policy measures used to address them. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
SOC 2143 Marriage and Family
A study of the development marriage and family as social institutions within society. Three hours
lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
SOC 2223 Perspectives on Child Maltreatment of Child Advocacy
This introductory child advocacy studies course covers the historical, legal framework, responses
to child maltreatment, and current cultural controversies pertinent to child maltreatment and child
advocacy. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
SPT 1113 Public Speaking I
Study and practice in making speeches for a variety of public forums. Major emphasis is placed on
effective speech preparation and delivery. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
(Prerequisite: ENG 1113)
SPT 2173 Interpersonal Communication
Theory and analysis of dyadic/two-person relationships (one-on-one interactions). The course explores topics such as perception, listening, conflict management, relationship building and maintenance, and relational power. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
SPT 2233 Theatre Appreciation
An introduction of the cultural, historical and social aspects of drama. Class content provides an
appreciation of theatre and performance art to develop audience standards through demonstration of
the unique characteristics of theatre. A fine arts elective. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
SWK 1113 Social Work: A Helping Profession
The course exposes students to a “helping” profession that plays a central role in addressing human
needs. Students are exposed to personal/lived experiences of social work clients and successes of
“real” social workers in respective practices such as mental health, child welfare, disaster, corrections, faith-based, military, international relief, and industry. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
SWK 2223 Perspectives on Child Maltreatment of Child Advocacy
This introductory child advocacy studies course covers the historical, legal framework, responses
to child maltreatment, and current cultural controversies pertinent to child maltreatment and child
advocacy. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
ACT 1003 Introduction to Heating and Air Conditioning Technology
This course is designed to introduce students to the fundamental skills associated with all HVAC
courses. Safety, basic tools, special tools and equipment, communication skills, employability skills,
and materials handling topics are included. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week.
Credit, three semester hours.
ACT 1124 Basic Compression Refrigeration
This course is an introduction to the field of refrigeration and air conditioning. Emphasis is placed
on trade math, thermodynamics and heat transfer. Two hours lecture and four hours laboratory per
week. Credit, four semester hours.
ACT 1133 Brazing and Piping
This course includes various tools and pipe connecting techniques. This course also includes
specialized tools and test equipment required in heating, ventilation, air-conditioning, and
refrigeration. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
ACT 1214 Controls
This course includes fundamentals of gas, fluid, electrical, and programmable controls. Two hours
lecture and four hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
ACT 1313 Refrigeration System Components
This course is an in-depth study of the components and accessories of a sealed system including
metering devices, evaporators, compressors, and condensers. Two hours lecture and two hours
laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
ACT 1713 Electricity for Heating, Ventilation, Air Conditioning and Refrigeration
This course includes basic knowledge of electricity, power distribution, components, solid state
devices, and electrical circuits. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
ACT 2324 Commercial Refrigeration
This course includes a continuation of various commercial refrigeration systems. This course also
includes installation, servicing, and maintaining systems. Two hours lecture and four hours laboratory
per week. Credit, four semester hours.
ACT 2414 Heating, Ventilation, Air Conditioning and Refrigeration I
This course includes residential air conditioning including indoor air quality. This course includes
modules on basic maintenance, air quality equipment, troubleshooting cooling, and troubleshooting
gas heating. Two hours lecture and four hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
ACT 2424 Heating, Ventilation, Air Conditioning and Refrigeration II
This course includes a continuation of Heating, Ventilation, Air Conditioning and Refrigeration I with
modules related to introduction to hydronic systems, troubleshooting heat pumps, and troubleshooting
accessories. Two hours lecture and four hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
ACT 2433 Refrigerant, Retrofit, and Regulations
This course includes regulations and standards for new retrofit and government regulations. This course includes EPA regulations, local, and state codes. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory
per week. Credit, three semester hours.
ACT 2513 Heating Systems
This course includes various types of residential and commercial heating systems. This course
includes gas, oil, electric, compression, and hydronic heating systems. Two hours lecture and two
hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
ACT 2624 Heat Load and Air Properties
This course includes introduction to heat load calculations for residential and light commercial
heating, ventilation, air conditioning, and refrigeration systems. This course includes air distribution,
duct sizing, selection of grills and registers, types of fans, air velocity, and fan performance. This
course introduces air testing instruments and computer usage. Two hours lecture and four hours
laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
ATT 1124 Basic Electrical/Electronic Systems
A course designed to provide advanced skills and knowledge related to all components of the vehicle
electrical system including lights, battery, and charging components. Two hours lecture and four
hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
ATT 1134 Advanced Electrical Systems
A course designed to provide advanced skills and knowledge related to all components of the vehicle
electrical system including gauges, driver information systems, horn, wiper/washer systems, and
accessories. Two hours lecture and four hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
ATT 1214 Brakes
A course to provide advanced skills and knowledge related to the repair and maintenance of brake
systems on automobiles. Includes instruction and practice in diagnosis of braking systems problems
and the repair of brake systems. Two hours lecture and four hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
ATT 1314 Manual Drive Trains/Transaxles
A course designed to provide advanced skills and knowledge related to the maintenance and repair of
manual transmissions, transaxles, and drive train components. It includes instruction in the diagnosis
of drive train problems, and the repair and maintenance of transmissions, transaxles, clutches, CV
joints, differentials, and other components. Two hours lecture and four hours laboratory each week.
Credit, four semester hours.
ATT 1424 Engine Performance I
A course designed to provide advanced skills and knowledge related to the maintenance and
adjustment of gasoline engines for optimum performance. It includes instruction, diagnosis, and
correction of problems associated within these areas. Two hours lecture and four hours laboratory
each week. Credit, four semester hours.
ATT 1714 Engine Repair
A course to provide advanced skills and knowledge related to the repair and rebuilding of automotivetype engines. Includes instruction and practice in the diagnosis and repair of engine components,
including valve trains, blocks, pistons and connecting rods, crankshafts, and oil pumps. Two hours
lecture and four hours laboratory each week. Credit, four semester hours.
ATT 1811 Introduction, Safety and Employability Skills
This is a course designed to provide advanced skills and knowledge related to all components of the
vehicle electrical system including lights, battery, and charging components. One hour lecture per
week. Credit, one semester hour.
ATT 2324 Automatic Transmissions/Transaxles
A course to provide technical skills and knowledge related to the diagnosis and repair of automotivetype automatic transmissions and transaxles. Includes instruction and practice in testing and
inspecting these devices and in disassembly, repair, and reassembly. Two hours lecture and four
hours laboratory each week. Credit, four semester hours.
ATT 2334 Steering and Suspension Systems
This is a course designed to provide advanced skills and knowledge related to the inspection and repiar
of steering and suspension systems of automobiles. This course includes instruction and practice
in the diagnosis of steering system problems and the repair/replacement of steering/suspension
components. Two hours lecture and four hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
ATT 2434 Engine Performance II
This is a course designed to provide advanced skills and knowledge related to the ignition system,
fuel, air induction, and exhaust systems. It includes instruction, diagnosis, and correction of problems
associated within these areas. Two hours lecture and four hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
ATT 2444 Engine Performance III
A course designed to provide advanced skills and knowledge related to the emissions control systems
and engine related service. It includes instruction, diagnosis, and correction of problems associated
within these areas. Two hours lecture and four hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
ATT 2614 Heating and Air Conditioning
A course to provide advanced skills and knowledge associated with the maintenance and repair of
automotive heating and air conditioning systems. Includes instruction and practice in the diagnosis
and repair of air conditioning system components, heater lines and cores, and control systems. Two
hours lecture and four hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
ATT 2914 Special Problems in Automotive Technology
A basic course to provide students with an opportunity to utilize basic skills and general knowledge
gained in other Automotive Technology courses. The instructor and student work closely together to
select a topic and establish criteria for completion of the project. Eight hours laboratory per week.
Credit, four semester hours.
BOT 1013 Introduction to Keyboarding
This course provides an introduction to keyboarding skill development using the touch system on
the alphabetic keyboard. Course emphasis will be on speed and accuracy when keying documents
and timed writings. Two hours lecture per week and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
BOT 1233 Microsoft® Word® I
This course focuses on improving keyboarding techniques using the touch method and on production
of documents using Microsoft® Word® functions . Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per
week. Credit, three semester hours.
BOT 1243 Microsoft® Word® II
This course is a continuation of Microsoft® Word® I and focuses on production of documents using
Microsoft® Word®. Production with accuracy is stressed and practice is given through a variety of
documents for skillbuilding . Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: BOT 1233 Microsoft® Word® I)
BOT 1273 Introduction to Microsoft® Office®
This course will introduce an operating system and word processing, spreadsheet, database
management, and presentation software applications using the Microsoft® Office® suite. Two hours
lecture per week and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
BOT 1313 Applied Business Mathematics
This course is designed to develop competency in mathematics for business use. Three hours lecture
per week. Credit, three semester hours.
BOT 1433 Business Accounting
This course is designed to develop an understanding of analyzing, recording, classifying, and
summarizing financial information of a sole proprietorship with insight into interpreting and reporting
the resulting effects upon the business. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
BOT 1443 Advanced Business Accounting
This course is a continuation of Business Accounting with emphasis in advanced accounting topics.
Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: BOT 1433 Business
Accounting or ACC 2213 Principles of Accounting I.)
BOT 1453 Introduction to Business Management
This course is a study of the basic principles and managerial functions of organizations management
with special emphasis on planning, organizing, coordinating, commanding, and controlling. The
importance of managing competitively and intelligently within a diverse environment is stressed.
Situational cases are completed to reinforce decision-making in each of the function areas. The
course will also consist of a series of ‘mini’ presentations related to each of the topics, delivered by
different types of business managers and guest speakers. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
BOT 1493 Social Media Management
This course teaches student how to develop and maintain a social media presence in a personal
and professional capacity. Students will engage in community and internet-based projects with
special emphasis on blogs, wikis, social networking sites, photo-sharing sites, instant messaging,
video-sharing sites, podcasts, widgets. virtual worlds, and more. Two hours lecture and two hours
laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
BOT 1613 Medical Terminology I
This course is an introduction to medical language relating to the various body systems including
human anatomy and physiology, diseases/pathology, physical conditions, procedures, clinical
specialties, and abbreviations. Emphasis is placed on correct spelling and pronunciation. Three hours
lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
BOT 1623 Medical Terminology II
This course is a continuation of Medical Terminology I (BOT 1613), which includes medical language
relating to the various body systems including human anatomy and physiology, diseases/pathology,
physical conditions, procedures, clinical specialties, and abbreviations. Emphasis is placed on correct
spelling and pronunciation. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
BOT 1763 Communication Essentials
This course focuses on the basic English competencies and communication skills necessary to be
successful and effective in the workplace in addition to effectively contributing to a team while
working with a diverse population. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
BOT 1823 Microsoft® Excel® I
This course focuses on application Microsoft® Excel® as an aid to management decision making. Two
hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
BOT 1853 Microsoft® Excel® II
This course is a continuation of Microsoft® Excel® I and focuses on advanced functions and
applications of the software. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three
semester hours. (Prerequisite: BOT 1823 Microsoft® Excel® I)
BOT 2133 Desktop Publishing
This course will present graphic design techniques, principles of page layout and design, and
electronic publishing terminology and applications to create a variety of documents such as flyers,
brochures, newsletters, and business cards using advanced features of desktop publishing software.
Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
BOT 2183 Career Readiness
This course is designed to prepare students for employment by teaching the importance of interviewing
skills, employer expectations, employability skills, work ethics, and job retention skills. Three hours
lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
BOT 2233 Human Resource Management
This course provides a general overview of the concepts and applications of the many parts of Human
Resources (HR). Students will learn how the interdependence of the major topics in HR are created
and implemented through the use of real world HR issues, community projects, and case studies.
Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
BOT 2333 Microsoft® Access®
This course applies database concepts for designing and manipulating data files and formatting
output as complex documents and reports using Microsoft® Access®. Two hours lecture and two
hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
BOT 2433 QuickBooks®
This course applies basic accounting principles using QuickBooks®. Two hours lecture and two hours
laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
BOT 2463 Payroll Accounting
This course provides an in-depth study of payroll accounting. Two hours lecture and two hours
laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisites: BOT 1433 Business Accounting or
ACC 2213 Principles of Accounting)
BOT 2613 Entrepreneurial Problem Solving
This course is designed to develop business students into entrepreneurs capable of operating their
own companies and to reduce the high failure rate of starting, conducting, and expanding a business.
Students will gain experience in problem solving through visits to businesses, analysis of case studies,
and projects and surveys of current business practices. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
BOT 2743 Medical Office Concepts
This course will provide coverage and integration of medical office skills. Problem solving will be
emphasized. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
BOT 2763 Electronic Health Records
This course covers electronic health records (EHR) in the healthcare environment as they pertain
to various healthcare settings. Two hours lecture and two hour laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
BOT 2833 Integrated Computer Applications
This advanced course integrates activities using the enhanced features of application software
including Microsoft® Office® suite. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit,
three semester hours. (Prerequisites: BOT 1273 Introduction to Microsoft® Office®)
CDT 1113 Early Childhood Profession
This course provides an introduction to the profession of early childhood, types of early childhood
programs, and theories of child development. Students are required to observe, assess, and record
child behavior through laboratory experience. Room arrangements, software, play, and safety are
explored. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
CDT 1214 Infant and Toddler Development
This course provides knowledge concerning the care and development of infants and toddlers in early
childhood programs. Practice of infant and toddler care giving skills (birth to 36 months) in group
setting is given in laboratory classroom or collaborative centers. Three hours lecture and two hours
lab per week. Credit, four semester hours.
CDT 1224 Preschool and Primary Development
This course provides knowledge concerning the care, development, and education of the preschool
child in group settings and school age children in after-school and summer programming. Practice is
given in preschool children caregiving in group settings through classroom laboratory or collaborative
centers (Ages 3–8). Three hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
CDT 1313 Creative Arts for Young Children
This course provides knowledge of the creative arts and strategies for developing and implementing
creative art experiences, both as a means of creative expression and as a part of integrated learning
with children birth to age eight. Experiences will be implemented during Practicum. Three hours
lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
CDT 1343 Child Health, Safety, and Nutrition
This course provides knowledge of general health, safety and nutrition practices in the care and
education of young children that includes health and safety issues required by the Mississippi
Department of Health (MDH) Regulations Governing Licensure of Childcare Facilities and
reference in the Infant Toddler Environmental Rating Scale Revised (ITERS-R) and Early Childhood Environmental Rating Scale Revised (ECERS-R). Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
CDT 1713 Language and Literacy Development for Young Children
This course provides knowledge of oral and written language development of young children and
the strategies for the development and implementation of developmentally appropriate language
and literacy experiences throughout the curriculum. The Mississippi Early Learning Standards,
Infant Toddler Standards, Infant Toddler Environmental Rating Scale Revised (ITERS-R), and
Early Childhood Environmental Rating Scale Revised (ECERS-R) are utilized. Activities will be
implemented during Practicum. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
CDT 2233 Guiding Social and Emotional Behavior
This course provides knowledge of the typical behaviors of young children at each stage of
development, environmental influences affecting their behavior, and the practice of positive
guidance principles by adult caregivers. Resources include the Mississippi Department of Health
Regulations Governing Licensure of Childcare Facilities, Mississippi Early Learning Standards, the
Infant Toddler Standards, Infant Toddler Environmental Rating Scale Revised (ITERS-R), and Early
Childhood Environmental Rating Scale Revised (ECERS-R). Lab activities will be implemented
during Practicum I and II. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
CDT 2413 Development of the Exceptional Child
This course provides knowledge of atypically developing children, family, and classroom
intervention strategies and available support services. Legal, ethical, legislative, and family issues
will be explored. Resources include Infant Toddler Environmental Rating Scale Revised (ITERS-R),
and Early Childhood Environmental Rating Scale Revised (ECERS-R). Two hours lecture and two
hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
CDT 2513 Family Dynamics and Community Involvement
This course provides knowledge for establishing successful partnerships with children’s families and
communities by creating respectful, reciprocal relationships that support and empower families while
involving families in their children’s development and learning. (Ages birth to 8 years). Three hours
lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
CDT 2613 Methods, Materials, and Measurements
This course provides knowledge of an integrated approach to planning, preparing, implementing, and
evaluating early childhood curriculum and environments. As students gain a broader understanding
of young children, this knowledge will be reflected in their curriculum planning. Students will gain
strategies for organizing, analyzing, and interpreting observation data to improve program quality
and meet the needs of individual children. The learning experiences will be implemented during
Practicum. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
CDT 2714 Social Studies, Math, and Science for Young Children
This course provides knowledge of strategies for developing and implementing developmentally
appropriate experiences in social studies, math, and science for young children. Lab activities with
the children are implemented during Practicum. Four hours lecture per week. Credit, four semester hours.
CDT 2813 Administration of Programs for Young Children
This course provides knowledge of the development and administration of early childhood education
programs. Emphasis is placed on evaluation of policies and procedures, organizational structure,
management and the quality measures through state agencies. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
CDT 2914 Initial Practicum
This course is a supervised practicum which includes a minimum of 180 clock hours of observation
and supervised teaching in an approved early childhood setting. The course provides the application
of evidence based best practices of early education principles and theories. Students work to create an
environment that is safe, healthy, and developmentally appropriate to promote an optimum learning
environment for young children. Eight hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
CDT 2934 Preschool Practicum Experience
This course is a supervised practicum which includes a minimum of 180 clock hours of supervised
teaching in an approved preschool setting. The course is a capstone course which focuses on the
student’s demonstration of competencies throughout the daily routine using a unit of study for young
children. It is usually the last course taken before completion of the program. Eight hours laboratory
per week. Credit, four semester hours.
CEV 1212 Safety I
Personal safety, fire safety, and rules for safety of each machine to include prestart, operational,
post-operation, and traffic. One hour lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, two semester hours.
CEV 1222 Safety II
Pedestrian safety, safety communications, and safety procedures in working near utilities. One hour
lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, two semester hours.
CEV 1313 Service and Preventive Maintenance I
Characteristics of oils and greases, fuel handling procedures, and performing minor mechanical
maintenance. Practice includes servicing a fuel filter system and changing engine oil. Two hours
lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
CEV 1323 Service and Preventive Maintenance II
Lubrication procedures; servicing air filters; servicing cooling systems; servicing hydraulic systems;
and installation, removal, and storage of batteries. One hour lecture and four hours laboratory per
week. Credit, three semester hours.
CEV 1416 Equipment Operation I
This course focuses on the application of proven management principles and techniques to the
management of safety and health and loss control programs. One hour lecture and ten hours laboratory
per week. Credit, six semester hours.
CEV 1426 Equipment Operation II
Operation of the dozer, loader, and excavator. Includes the controls and basic skills performed with
each machine and completing assignments by verbal and written instructions. One hour lecture and
ten hours laboratory per week. Credit, six semester hours.
CEV 1514 Grade Work I
Setting and checking grade stakes which are used on job sites. Instruction and practice of transferring
elevations are also included. One hour lecture and six hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
CEV 1524 Grade Work II
Additional instruction and practice regarding the setting and checking grades. Also instruction and practice on the compaction of various materials. One hour lecture and six hours laboratory per week.
Credit, four semester hours.
COV 1123 Cosmetology Orientation
This course will cover the history, career opportunities, life skills, professional image, Mississippi
Cosmetology laws, rules and regulations and communicating for success in the cosmetology industry.
Included are classroom theory and lab practice as governed by Mississippi cosmetology laws, rules
and regulations involved in cosmetology practices and safety precautions associated with each. Two
hours lecture and three hours clinical per week. Credit, three semester hours.
COV 1244 Cosmetology Science I
This course consists of the study of bacteriology, sterilization, and sanitation. Included are classroom
theory and lab practice as governed by Mississippi cosmetology laws, rules, and regulations involved
in cosmetology practices and safety precautions associated with each. Three hours lecture and six
hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
COV 1255 Cosmetology Science II
This course consists of the study of anatomy and physiology. Included are classroom theory and lab
practices as governed by and safety precautions associated with each. Three hours lecture and six
hours laboratory per week. Credit, five semester hours.
COV 1264 Cosmetology Science III
This course consists of the application and demonstration of chemistry and electricity. Included are
classroom theory and lab practice as governed by Mississippi cosmetology laws, rules, and regulations
involved in cosmetology practices and safety precautions associated with each. Two hours lecture
and three hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
COV 1426 Hair Care I
This course consists of the study of properties of the hair and scalp; principles of hair design;
shampooing, rinsing, and conditioning; haircutting; braiding and braid extensions; wigs and hair
enhancements; chemical texture services; and hair coloring. Included are classroom theory and lab
practice as governed by Mississippi cosmetology laws, rules, and regulation involved in cosmetology
practices and safety precautions associated with each. Two hours lecture and twelve hours laboratory
per week. Credit, six semester hours.
COV 1435 Hair Care II
This course consists of the advanced study of properties of the hair and scalp; principles of hair
design; shampooing, rinsing, and conditioning; haircutting; hairstyling; braiding and braid extensions;
wigs and hair theory and lab practice as governed by Mississippi cosmetology practices and safety
precautions associated with each. Two hours lecture and twelve hours laboratory per week. Credit, five semester hours.
COV 1443 Hair Care III
This course consists of the practical applications of the study of properties of the hair and scalp;
principles of hair design; shampooing, rinsing, and conditioning; haircutting; hairstyling; braiding
and braid extensions; wigs and hair enhancements; chemical texture services; and hair coloring.
Included are classroom regulations involved in cosmetology practice as governed by Mississippi
cosmetology laws, rules, and regulations involved in cosmetology practices and safety precautions
associated with each. Nine hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
COV 1522 Nail Care I
This course consists of basic nail care services including nail structure and growth, manicuring
and pedicuring, and advanced nail techniques. Included are classroom theory and lab practice as
governed by Mississippi cosmetology laws, rules, and regulations involved in cosmetology practices
and safety precautions associated with each. One hour lecture and three hours laboratory per week.
Credit, two semester hours.
COV 1532 Nail Care II
This course consists of basic nail care services including nail structure and growth, manicuring
and pedicuring, and advanced nail techniques. Included are classroom theory and lab practice as
governed by Mississippi cosmetology laws, rules, and regulations involved in cosmetology practices
and safety precautions associated with each. One hour lecture and three hours laboratory per week.
Credit, two semester hours.
COV 1542 Nail Care III
This course consists of basic nail care services including nail structure and growth, manicuring, and
pedicuring, and advanced nail techniques. Included are classroom theory and lab practice as governed
by Mississippi cosmetology laws, rules, and regulation involved in cosmetology practices and safety
precautions associated with each. Six hours laboratory per week. Credit, two semester hours.
COV 1622 Skin Care I
This course consists of basic skin care services including anatomy of the skin, disorders of skin, hair
removal, facials, and facial makeup. Included are classroom theory and lab practice as governed by
Mississippi cosmetology laws, rules, and regulations involved in cosmetology practices and safety
precautions associated with each. One hour lecture and three hours laboratory per week. Credit, two semester hours.
COV 1632 Skin Care II
This course consists of basic skin services including anatomy of skin, disorders of skin, hair removal,
facials, and facial makeup. Included are classroom theory and lab practice as governed by Mississippi
cosmetology laws, rules, and regulations involved in cosmetology laws, rules, and regulations
involved in cosmetology practices and safety precautions associated with each. One hour lecture and
three hours laboratory per week. Credit, two semester hours.
COV 1642 Skin Care III
This course consists of advanced skin care services including anatomy of skin, disorders of skin, hair
removal, facials, and facial makeup. Included are classroom theory and lab practice as governed by
Mississippi cosmetology law, rules, and regulations involved in cosmetology practices and safety
precautions associated with each. Six hour laboratory per week. Credit, two semester hours.
COV 1722 Salon Business I
This course will cover preparing to operate a successful salon. Included are classroom theory and lab
practice as governed by Mississippi cosmetology law, rules, and regulations involved in cosmetology
practices and safety precautions associated with each. One hour lecture and three hours laboratory
per week. Credit, two semester hours.
COV 1732 Salon Business II
This course will cover operating a successful salon and seeking employment. Included are classroom
theory and lab practice as governed by Mississippi cosmetology laws, rules, and regulation involved
in cosmetology practices and safety precautions associated with each. One hour lecture and three
hours laboratory per week. Credit, two semester hours.
COV 2815 Cosmetology Teacher Training I
Instruction will be given in developing appropriate communication skills, effective use of visual aids,
identification of various teaching styles, and practical application of cosmetology instruction. Two
hours lecture, nine hours lab. Credit, five semester hours. (Pre or corequisite: Students who have at
least two years active practical experience as a licensed cosmetologist and currently hold a valid
Mississippi cosmetology license.)
COV 2825 Cosmetology Teacher Training II
Instruction will be given in development of instructional methods, development of visual aids,
development of effective evaluation, and practical application of cosmetology instruction. Two hours
lecture, nine hours lab. Credit, five semester hours. (Pre or corequisites: COV 2816 Cosmetology
Teacher Training I)
COV 2835 Cosmetology Teacher Training III
Instruction will be given in development of appropriate lesson plans and practical application of
cosmetology instruction. Two hours lecture, nine hours lab. Credit, five semester hours. (Pre or
corequisites: COV 2826 Cosmetology Teacher Training II)
COV 2845 Cosmetology Teacher Training IV
Instruction will be given in classroom management techniques; cosmetology laws, rules, and
regulations; and practical application of cosmetology instruction. Two hours lecture, nine hours lab.
Credit, five semester hours. (Pre or corequisites: COV 2836 Cosmetology Teacher Training III)
COV 2855 Cosmetology Teacher Training V
Instruction will be given in classroom management techniques; cosmetology laws, rules, and
regulations; and practical application of cosmetology instruction. Two hours lecture, nine hours lab.
Credit, five semester hours.
COV 2866 Cosmetology Teacher Training vi
Instruction will be given in classroom management techniques; cosmetology laws, rules, and
regulations; and practical application of cosmetology instruction. Two hours lecture, twelve hours
lab. Credit, six semester hours.
CTE 1111 Orientation
This course is designed to help the Career-Technical student adjust to college and the workforce.
It assists the student in professional development skills, leadership skills, interpersonal skills and
employment and life skills. Two hours lab. Credit, one semester hour.
CTE 1143 Fundamentals of Construction
This course includes basic safety, an introduction to construction math, an introduction to hand and
power tools, an introduction to construction drawings, employability skills and communications.
(In order to satisfy requirements to test for NCCER Core certification, this course is mandated to be
taught as a minimum of 72.5 clock hour course) Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory each
week. Credit, three semester hours.
CUT 1113 Culinary Principles I
Fundamentals of food preparation and cookery emphasizing high standards for preparation of meat,
poultry, seafood, vegetables, soups, stocks, sauces, and farinaceous items. Two hours lecture and two
hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
CUT 1123 Culinary Principles II
This course offers advanced study and application of Culinary Principles I to polish and perfect the
techniques of food preparation and cookery emphasizing high standards for food preparation. Two
hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
CUT 1133 Principles of Baking
This course focuses on fundamentals of baking science, terminology, ingredients, weights and
measures, and formula conversion and storage. Students will prepare yeast goods, pies, cakes, cookies,
and quick breads and use and care for equipment. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per
week. Credit, three semester hours.
CUT 1153 Introduction to Culinary Arts
This course is designed as an introduction to the culinary arts industry. The course includes
discussions and industry observations to discover the opportunities, trends, problems, and
organizations in the field. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
CUT 1513 Garde Manger
This course provides orientation to garnishing, preparation of charcuterie items, cold foods, and
buffet presentation. It explores the various duties of the modern garde manger. Two hours lecture
and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
CUT 2223 Menu Planning
This course focuses on the principles and concepts of menu planning, menu formats, and layout with
regard to a wide variety of eating habits and taste of the dining public. Emphasis will be on pricing,
menu design, merchandising, tools, nutritional considerations, schedules, and profitability. Effective
planning and layout of kitchen and equipment will also be emphasized. Two hours lecture and two
hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
CUT 2243 Dining Room Management
This course focuses on management of a restaurant dining room including good housekeeping
technique, fine food, and efficient service. It covers French, Russian, American, and English waited
table service, limited service, counter, tray, service, and catering. Emphasis will be placed on
staffing, scheduling, controls, and skills required to effectively supervise a dining room operation.
Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
CUT 2313 American Regional Cuisine
This exploration of the American Cuisine concept emphasizes freshness, seasonality, nutrition,
indigenous ingredients, and presentation. It is a thorough study into the cuisine characteristics and
traditions of the various regions of the United States of America. Two hours lecture and two hours
laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
CUT 2423 International Cuisine
This course is a study of cuisines of the world with emphasis on use of authentic ingredients, methods,
and terminology. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
CUT 2926 Supervised Work Experience in Culinary Arts Technology
This course is a cooperative program between industry and education and is designed to integrate
the student’s technical studies with industrial experience. Variable credit is awarded on the basis of
one semester hour per 45 industrial contact hours. Twelve hours laboratory per week. Credit, six semester hours.
DDT 1313 Computer Aided Design I
This course is designed to develop basic operating system and drafting skills on CAD. Two hours
lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
DET 1114 Fundamentals of Equipment Mechanics
A course to review and update of safety procedures; tools and equipment usage; handling, storing,
and disposing of hazardous materials; operating principles of diesel engines; and selection of fuels,
oils, other lubricants, and coolants. Three hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
DET 1213 Hydraulic Brake Systems
A course to develop skills and knowledge related to the diagnosis and repair of hydraulic brake
systems. Includes instruction in hydraulic and mechanical systems, power assist units, and anti-lock
braking systems. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
DET 1223 Electrical/Electronic Systems I
A course to develop skills and knowledge related to the diagnosis, service, and repair of electrical
and electronic systems on diesel engines. Includes instruction in general systems diagnosis, starting
and charging system repair, and auxiliary electrical systems repair. Two hours lecture and two hours
laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
DET 1263 Electrical/Electronic Systems II
Diagnosis, service, and repair of electrical and electronic systems on diesel engines. Includes
instruction on lighting systems, gauges and warning devices, and related electrical systems. One
hour lecture and four hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
DET 1364 Diesel Systems I
Diagnosis, service, and repair of basic engine operating principles, with an emphasis on cylinder
head and valve train engine block. Two hours lecture and four hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
DET 1374 Diesel Systems II
Diagnosis, service, and repair of lubrication systems, cooling system, and air induction and exhaust
systems. Two hours lecture and four hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
DET 1513 Hydraulics
A course to provide instruction and practice in the basic operation and maintenance of hydraulic
systems associated with diesel powered equipment. Includes instruction in safety, system operation,
seals and cylinders, and filters. One hour lecture and four hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
DET 1614 Preventive Maintenance and Service
A course to provide practice in the preventive maintenance of diesel powered equipment. Includes
instruction in general preventive maintenance of vehicles and equipment. Two hours lecture and four
hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
DET 1713 Transportation Power Train
A course to develop skills and knowledge related to the diagnoses, service, maintenance, and repair
of power train units on diesel equipment. Includes instruction on clutch, manual transmissions, drive shafts, and drive axles. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
DET 1813 Air Conditioning and Heating Systems
A course to provide skills and knowledge related to operation, maintenance, and repair of air
conditioning and heating systems used in commercial equipment. Includes instruction in theories and
operating principles, A/C system diagnosis and repair, clutch and compressor repair, evaporator and
condenser repair, and heating system repair. One hour lecture and four hours laboratory per week.
Credit, three semester hours.(Prerequisites: Completion of certification requirements to service and
repair air conditioning systems)
DET 2113 Welding for Diesel Equipment Technology
A basic course in welding and cutting techniques for diesel equipment mechanics. Includes instruction
in fundamental procedures and safety, oxyacetylene welding and cutting, shielded metal-arc welding,
and metal inert gas welding procedures. One hour lecture and four hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
DET 2253 Steering and Suspension Systems
A course to provide skills and knowledge related to operation, maintenance, and repair of heavy duty
steering and suspension systems. Includes instruction in steering column and steering gear, power
steering unit, steering linkage, suspension, wheel alignment, and related components diagnosis and
repair. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
DET 2273 Electrical/Electronic Systems III
Diagnosis, service, and repair of electrical and electronic systems on diesel engines. Includes
instruction in electronic fuel management systems. One hour lecture and four hours laboratory per
week. Credit, three semester hours.
DET 2623 Advanced Brake System (Air)
A course to provide instruction and practice in the maintenance and repair of air brake systems
commonly used on commercial diesel powered equipment. Includes instruction in maintenance and
repair of the air supply system, mechanical system, anti-lock braking system, and traction control
system. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
DET 2913 Special Project in Diesel Equipment Technology
A course to provide students with practical application of skills and knowledge related to a specific
instructor-approved topic. Instructor and student work closely together in planning and conducting
the project. Six hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: Consent of
the instructor)
DTV 1114 Commercial Truck Driving I
A course that provides fundamental instruction on safety, rules and regulations, driving practices,
air brakes, and emergencies. Includes instruction and practice in performing vehicle inspections,
coupling and uncoupling, maneuvering, backing, and driving a tractor-trailer truck under varying
road and climate conditions. Fifteen hours per week. Credit, four semester hours.
DTV 1124 Commercial Truck Driving II
A course that provides continuation of Commercial Truck Driving I with additional instruction on
safety, rules and regulations, driving practices, air brakes, and emergencies. Includes instruction and
practice in performing vehicle inspections, coupling and uncoupling, maneuvering, backing, and
driving a tractor-trailer truck under varying road and climate conditions. Fifteen hours per week. Credit, four semester hours
DTV 1137 Commercial Truck Driving Internship
Under the supervision of a company trainer, this course will enable the student to apply the training
he/she received at the Community/Junior College program they attended with the company of his/her
choice. The successful completion of this course will enable the student to drive independently with
minimum supervision with the company of his/her choice. (0 hours lecture, 315 hours lab)
EET 1114 DC Circuits
Principles and theories associated with DC circuits. This course includes the study of electrical
circuits, laws and formulae, and the use of test equipment to analyze DC circuits. Two hours lecture
and four hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
EET 1123 AC Circuits
Principles and theories associated with AC circuits. This course includes the study of electrical
circuits, laws and formulae, and the use of test equipment to analyze AC circuits. Two hours lecture
and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
EET 1192 Fundamentals of Electronics
This course is designed to provide fundamental skills associated with all electronics courses. This
course includes safety, breadboarding, use of calculator, test equipment familiarization, soldering,
electronic symbols, and terminology. One hour lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, two semester hours.
EET 1214 Digital Electronics
Number systems, logic circuits, counters, registers, memory devices, combination logic circuits,
Boolean algebra, and a basic computer system. Three hours lecture and two hours laboratory per
week. Credit, four semester hours.
EET 1334 Solid State Devices and Circuits
Active devices which include PN junction diodes, bipolar transistors, bipolar transistor circuits, and
unipolar devices with emphasis on low frequency application and troubleshooting. Two hours lecture
and four hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
EET 1363 Microcontrollers
This course begins with a brief overview of microprocessors as a precursor to microcontrollers.
Next, a basic understanding of the use, terminology, and potential of microcontrollers are discussed.
Programming skills and concepts taught in this course help students develop, execute, and debug
programs for a microcontroller. A hands-on approach will teach the essentials skills for creating a
simple sensor-driven microcontroller system, and will be reinforced with interactive projects. One
hour lecture and four hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
EET 1613 Computer Fundamentals for Electronics/Electricity
This course introduces the student to basic computer science as used in electricity/electronics areas.
Computer nomenclature, logic numbering systems, coding, operating system commands, editing,
and batch files are covered. (This course may be substituted for Introduction to Computers.) Two
hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
EET 1713 Drafting for Electronics/Electrical Technology
A course designed to provide instruction on the preparation and interpretation of schematics. One
hour lecture and four hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
EET 2334 Linear Integrated Circuits
A course designed to provide the student with skills and knowledge associated with advanced
semiconductor devices and linear integrated circuits. Emphasis is placed on linear integrated circuits
used with operational amplifiers, active filters, voltage regulators, timers, and phase-locked loops.
Three hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
EET 2414 Electronic Communications
A course designed to provide the student with concepts and skills related to analog and digital
communications. Topics covered include amplitude and frequency modulations, transmission, and
reception, data transmission formats and codes, the RS-232 interface, and modulation-demodulation
of digital communications. Two hours lecture and four hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
EET 2423 Fundamentals of Fiber Optics
A course designed to provide skills and knowledge to students concerning the use of fiber optic cable
in modern industry applications. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
EET 2912 Special Project
A course designed to provide the student with practical application of skills and knowledge gained
in other electronics or electronics-related technical courses. The instructor works closely with the
student to insure that the selection of a project will enhance the student’s learning experience. Two
hours laboratory per week. Credit, two semester hours.
ELT 1113 Residential Wiring
This course includes the advanced skills related to the wiring of single and multifamily buildings.
Includes instruction and practice in service-entrance installation, National Electrical Code®
requirements, and specialized circuits. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
ELT 1123 Commercial and Industrial Wiring
A course to provide instruction and practice in the installation of commercial and industrial electrical
services including the types of conduit and other raceways, NEC code requirements, and three-phase
distribution networks. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
ELT 1133 Introduction to the National Electrical Code®
This course is designed to place emphasis on developing the student’s ability to locate, interpret and
properly apply information in the National Electrical Code® in real-world applications. Two hours
lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
ELT 1144 AC & DC Circuits for Electrical Technology
This course covers principles and theories associated with AC and DC circuits used in the electrical
trade. Includes the study of electrical circuits, laws and formulas, and the use of test equipment to
analyze AC and DC circuits. Three hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
ELT 1192 Fundamentals of Electricity
This course is designed to introduce fundamental skills associated with all electrical courses. Safety,
basic tools, special tools, equipment, and an introduction to simple AC and DC circuits will be included. One hour lecture, and 2 hours laboratory per week. Credit, two semester hours.
ELT 1213 Electrical Power
A course to provide skills related to electrical motors and their installation. Includes instruction and
practice in using the different types of motors, transformers, and alternators. Two hours lecture and
two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
ELT 1223 Motor Maintenance and Troubleshooting
A course to provide instruction in the principles and practice of electrical motor repair. This course
includes topics on the disassembly/assembly and preventive maintenance of common electrical
motors. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
ELT 1253 Branch Circuits and Service Entrance Calculations
This course is designed to teach students the calculations of circuit sizes for all branch circuits and
service entrances in all electrical installation. Proper use of the National Electrical Code ® will be
required. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
ELT 1263 Electrical Drawings and Schematics
This course introduces architectural, industrial, mechanical, and electrical symbols needed to read
blueprints and schematic diagrams. Prints and drawings associated with electrical wiring will be
studied. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
ELT 1413 Motor Control Systems
Installation of different motor control circuits and devices. Emphasis is placed on developing the
student’s ability to diagram, wire, and troubleshoot the different circuits and mechanical control
devices. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
ELT 2113 Equipment Maintenance, Troubleshooting and Repair
This course includes maintenance and troubleshooting techniques, use of technical manuals and
test equipment, and inspection/evaluation/repair of equipment. Two hours lecture and two hours
laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
ELT 2423 Solid State Motor Controls
A course that deals with the principles and operation of solid state motor control. This course includes
instruction and practice in the design, installation, and maintenance of different solid state devices for
motor control. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
ELT 2613 Programmable Logic Controllers
Use of programmable logic controllers (PLCs) in modern industrial settings. Also, the operating
principles of PLCs and practice in the programming, installation, and maintenance of PLCs. Two
hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
ELT 2623 Advanced Programmable Logic Controllers
An advanced PLC course which provides instruction in various operations, installations, and
maintenance of electric motor controls. Also, information in such areas as sequencer, program
control, block transfer used in analog input and output programming, and logical and conversion
instructions. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
ELT 291(1-4) Special Projects I
This course provides practical application of skills and knowledge gained in other electrical or
electrical-related technical courses. The instructor works closely with the student to ensure that the
selection of a project will enhance the student’s learning experience. Two-six hours laboratory per
week. Credit, three semester hours.
ELT 293(1-4) Special Projects II
This course provides practical application of skills and knowledge gained in other electrical or
electrical-related technical courses. The instructor works closely with the student to ensure that the
selection of a project will enhance the student’s learning experience. Two-six hours laboratory per
week. Credit, one-three semester hours.
EMS 1118 Emergency Medical Technician
This course includes responsibilities of the EMT during each phase of an ambulance run, patient
assessment, emergency medical conditions, appropriate emergency care, and appropriate procedures
for transporting patients. Five hours lecture, four hours lab and three hours clinical per week. Credit,
eight semester hours. (Pre or corequisites: Current American Heart Association BLS Heath-care
Provider card.)
EMS 1142 Foundations of Paramedicine
This course includes a comprehensive review of the knowledge base and
skill set of the Emergency Medical Technician. History of EMS, wellbeing of the EMT, medical legal issues, communication and documentation will be expanded to the
role of the paramedic. This course includes the theory related to intravenous/intraosseous access,
medication administration, patient assessment, and introductory pharmacological calculations. Two
hours lecture per week. Credit, two semester hours.
EMS 1151 Foundations of Paramedicine - Lab
A laboratory experience designed to give psychomotor experience to the theoretical concepts
developed in the lecture. Two hours lab per week. Credit, one semester hour.
EMS 1242 Concepts of Airway and Respiratory Medicine
This course integrates complex knowledge of anatomy, physiology, and pathophysiology into the
assessment to develop and implement a treatment plan with the goal of assuring a patient airway,
adequate mechanical ventilation, and respiration for patients of all ages. Two hours lecture per week.
Credit, two semester hours.
EMS 1251 Concepts of Airway and Respiratory Medicine - Lab
This course in corequisite with the lecture portion will integrate comprehensive knowledge of
anatomy, physiology, and pathophysiology into the assessment to develop and implement a treatment
plan with the goal of ensuring a patient airway, adequate mechanical ventilation, and respirations for
patients of all ages. Two hours lab per week. Credit, one semester hour.
EMS 1343 Concepts of Cardiovascular Medicine
This course consists of the theory, anatomy, physiology, pathophysiology and treatments associated
with the conditions of the cardiovascular system. This includes the theory of introductory, advanced,
and multi-lead electrocardiogram interpretation. Changes in the lifespan will also be included. Three
hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
EMS 1352 Concepts of Cardiovascular Medicine - Lab
A laboratory experience designed to give psychomotor experience to the theoretical concepts
developed in the lecture. Four hours lab per week. Credit, two semester hours.
EMS 1514 Practicum I
Using supervised rotations in a definitive care setting, the students will apply the concepts developed
in the didactic and laboratory courses to live patients. This will include, but not be limited to, rotations in the emergency department, ICU, OR, respiratory therapy, and pediatrics. Twelve hours
clinical per week. Credit, four semester hours.
EMS 1525 Practicum II
A continuation of EMS 1514. Using supervised rotations in a definitive care setting, the student will
continue to develop assessment and treatment skills. The student will transition to field experience
upon achieving competencies in the definitive care setting. Fifteen hours clinical per week. Credit, five semester hours. (5 sch: 9-hr clinical, 6-hr field clinical)
EMS 1742 Concepts of Neurological Medicine
This course consists of the theory, anatomy, physiology, pathophysiology and treatments associated
with conditions of the nervous system. This includes conditions related to structure and those
associated with organic and non-organic brain disease. Changes in the lifespan will also be included.
Two hours lecture per week. Credit, two semester hours.
EMS 1751 Concepts of Neurological Medicine - Lab
A laboratory experience designed to give psychomotor experience to the theoretical concepts
developed in the lecture. Two hours lab per week. Credit, one semester hour.
EMS 1942 Concepts of Reproductive Medicine
This course consists of the theory, anatomy, physiology, pathophysiology and treatments associated
with conditions of the reproductive system. The course includes care of the newborn as part of the
concepts in reproductive medicine. Changes in the lifespan will be included. Two hours lecture per
week. Credit, two semester hours.
EMS 1951 Concepts of Reproductive Medicine - Lab
A laboratory experience designed to give psychomotor experience to the theoretical concepts
developed in the lecture. Two hours lab per week. Credit, one semester hour.
EMS 2343 Medical Emergencies of the Secondary Assessment
This course will integrate patient assessment and assessment findings with principles of epidemiology
and pathophysiology across the lifespan. At the conclusion of this course, the student will be able to
formulate a field impression and implement a comprehensive treatment/disposition plan for a patient
with a medical complaint. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
EMS 2351 Medical Emergencies of the Secondary Assessment - Lab
This course will integrate patient assessment and assessment findings with principles of epidemiology
and pathophysiology across the lifespan. At the conclusion of this course, the student will be
able to perform a secondary assessment in order to formulate a field impression and implement a
comprehensive treatment/disposition plan for a patient with a medical complaint. Two hours lab per
week. Credit, one semester hour.
EMS 2566 EMS Practicum III
Under the supervision of an approved program preceptor, the student will continue to apply the
concepts developed in the didactic, laboratory, and clinical settings to the care of patients in the
environment of EMS. Eighteen hours clinical per week. Credit, six semester hours. (6 sch: 9-hr
clinical, 9-hr field clinical)
EMS 2743 Concepts of Traumatic Medicine
This course will develop the basis for the pathophysiology, identification, and treatment of traumatic
emergencies including coverage of concepts related to trauma systems and shock management.
These concepts will be examined in patients across the life span. Three hours lecture per week.
Credit, three semester hours.
EMS 2752 Concepts of Traumatic Medicine - Lab
The trauma laboratory experience is designed to give psychomotor experience to the theoretical
concepts developed in the lecture. Four hours lab per week. Credit, two semester hours.
EMS 2912 Concepts of EMS Operations
Knowledge of operational roles and responsibilities to ensure safe patient, public, and personnel
safety. Two hours lecture per week. Credit, two semester hours.
EMS 2942 Paramedic Capstone
This course serves as a capstone experience course at the end of the Paramedic Program. This course
will include the following topics: special needs patient populations, EMS research, principles of
public health, integration of leadership, and emerging roles in EMS. Two hours lecture per week.
Credit, two semester hours.
EMS 2952 Paramedic Capstone - Lab
This course will provide the student with a final opportunity to incorporate their cognitive knowledge
and psychomotor skills through cumulative practical skill evaluations and a comprehensive Final
Examination. Four hours lab per week. Credit, two semester hours.
HRT 1213 Sanitation and Safety
Basic principles of microbiology, sanitation, and safety for a food service operation. Implementation
of sanitation procedures, cost control, and risk reduction standards in a hospitality operation are
covered. ServSafe Sanitation Certification from the National Restaurant Association or equivalent is
offered as a part of this course. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
HRT 2623 Hospitality Human Resource Management
This course is designed to explore the principles of hospitality human resource management with
an emphasis placed on the study of human behavior and human relations in the hospitality industry.
Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
HRT 2713 Marketing Hospitality Services
Introduction to practical sales techniques for selling to targeted markets and developing strategic
marketing plans for hospitality and tourism operations. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory
per week. Credit, three semester hours.
HRT 1223-4 Restaurant and Catering Operations
This course focuses on principles of organizing and managing food and beverage facilities and
catering operations. Two hours lecture and two/four hours laboratory per week. Credit, three or four semester hours.
IAT 1113 Introduction to Automation and Control I
This course is designed to introduce students to the fundamental skills associated with safety, basic
tools, special tools, and equipment. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit,
three semester hours. (Prerequisite: Instructor Approved)
IAT 1123 Electrical Wiring for Automation Control Technology
Basic electrical wiring for automation and controls including safety practices; installation and maintenance of raceways, conduit, and fittings; and three-phase service entrances, metering
devices main panels, raceways or ducts, sub-panels, feeder circuits and branch circuits according to
electrical codes. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
(Prerequisite: Instructor Approved)
IAT 1133 AC/DC Circuits for Automation and Control
Principles and theories with DC and AC circuits used in the automation trade. Includes the study of
electronic circuits, laws and formulas, and the use of test equipment to analyze AC and DC circuits.
Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite:
Instructor Approved)
IAT 1143 Fluid Power for Automation and Control
This basic course provides instruction in hydraulics and pneumatics. This course covers actuators,
accumulators, valves, pumps, motors, coolers, compression of air, control devices, and circuit
diagrams. Emphasis is placed on the development of control circuits and troubleshooting techniques.
Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite:
Instructor Approved)
IAT 1153 Motor Control for Automation and Control
This course includes the installation of different motor control circuits and devices. Emphasis is
placed on developing the student’s ability to diagram, wire, and troubleshoot the different circuits
and mechanical control devices. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three
semester hours. (Prerequisite: Instructor Approved)
IAT 1163 Manufacturing Skills for Automation and Control
Manufacturing skills is the initial course designed to provide the student with the basic skills needed
to be successful in a high-performance manufacturing environment. The course covers 5 major
areas of knowledge that are considered critical for employment in a high-performance manufacturing
company. The topics covered include: Basic Computer Literacy, Blueprint Reading, Precision
Measurement, and an introduction to manufacturing improvement methods that covers Lean
Manufacturing, Quick Changeover, 5S, Teamwork and Problem solving. Two hours lecture and two
hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: Instructor Approved)
IAT 1173 Control Systems I for Automation and Control
This is an introductory course to provide information on various instrumentation components and
processes. Topics include analyzing pressure processes, temperatures, flow, and level. Two hours
lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: Instructor
Approved)
IAT 2113 Programmable Logic Controller for Automation and Control
This course provides instruction in the use of programmable logic controllers (PLCs) in modern
industrial settings. The operating principles, installation and basic programming of PLCs will
be covered. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
(Prerequisite: Instructor Approved)
IAT 2123 Control Systems II for Automation and Control
This course is a continuation of Control Systems I with special emphasis on application of applied
skills along with new skills to develop instrument process controls. The student will be given a
process to develop the appropriate instruments and needed diagrams, utilizing various controlling
processes and demonstrating loop troubleshooting techniques. Two hours lecture and two hours
laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: Instructor Approved)
IAT 2133 Solid State Motor Controls for Automation and Control
This course provides knowledge of the principles and operation of solid state motor control, and
variable frequency drives. The design, installation, and maintenance of different solid state devices
for motor control will be introduced. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit,
three semester hours. (Prerequisite: Instructor Approved)
IAT 291 (1-3) Special Project in Automation and Control Technology
A course to provide students with an opportunity to utilize skills and knowledge gained in other
Automation and Control Technology courses. The instructor and student work closely together to
select a topic and establish criteria for completion of the project. Two, four or six lab hours per week.
Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: Instructor Approved)
IAT 292 (1-6) Supervised Work Experience in Automation and Control Technology
A course which is a cooperative program between industry and education and is designated to
integrate the student’s technical studies with industrial experience. Variable credit is awarded on
the basis of one semester hour per 45 industrial contact hours. (Prerequisite: Instructor Approved)
IST 1113 Fundamentals of Information Technology
Introduces microcomputer operation, word processing, spreadsheets, database management, and
online applications. This course is designed for students with limited computer proficiency and is to
be taken by those students in addition to the courses listed in the course sequence. Two hours lecture
and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
IST 1124 IT Foundations
This course covers the diagnosis, troubleshooting, and maintenance of computer components and
interpersonal communications for IT professionals. Topics include hardware compatibility, system
architecture, memory, input devices, video displays, disk drives, modems, printers, safety and
environmental issues, communication, and professional behavior. Two hours lecture and four hours
laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
IST 1133 Fundamentals of Data Communications
This course presents basic concepts of Internet Protocol (IP) telephony, local area networks, wide
area networks, data transmission, and topology methods. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory
per week. Credit, three semester hours.
IST 1134 Fundamentals of Data Communications
This course presents basic concepts of Internet Protocol (IP) telephony, local area networks, wide
area networks, data transmission, and topology methods. Two hours lecture and four hours laboratory
per week. Credit, four semester hours.
IST 1143 Principles of Information Security
This course is an introduction to the various technical and administrative aspects of information
security and assurance. This course provides the foundation for understanding the key issues
associated with protecting information assets, determining the levels of protection and response
to security incidents, and designing a consistent, reasonable information security system with
appropriate intrusion detection and reporting features. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory
per week. Credit, three semester hours.
IST 1153 Web and Programming Concepts
This course is an introduction to Web site development and programming logic. Students will gain
hands-on experience in the development of computer programs. Upon completion of this course, students will be able to create a Web site and post it on the Internet. Two hours lecture and two hours
laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
IST 1154 Web and Programming Concepts
This course is an introduction to Web site development and programming logic. Students will gain
hands-on experience in the development of computer programs. Upon completion of this course,
students will be able to create a Web site and post it on the Internet. Two hours lecture and four hours
laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
IST 1163 Database and SQL Concepts
This course is an introduction to the design and manipulation of relational databases. Emphasis is
placed on creation, manipulation, extraction, and display of data from existing databases. QBE and
SQL are explored. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
IST 1183 Essentials of Information Systems Technology
This course covers the diagnosis, troubleshooting, and maintenance of computer components. Topics
include hardware compatibility, system architecture, memory, input devices, video displays, dish
drives, modems, and printers. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
IST 1193 Practical Applications in Information Systems Technology
This course will provide experience with operating systems. Emphasis will be placed on support
personnel interaction (communication and professional behavior) with the platform to assist users in
business environments. Topics on safety and environmental issues are included. Two hours lecture
and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
IST 1214 Client Installation and Configuration
This course is designed to help the student install, support and troubleshoot a current client operating
system. Emphasis will be placed on common user operations as well as the network administrator’s
support of the client. Two hours lecture and four hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
IST 1223 Network Components
This course presents local area network and wide area network connectivity. It focuses on
architectures, topologies, protocols, and transport methods of a network. Two hours lecture and two
hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: IST 1134 Fundamentals of
Data Communications)
IST 1243 Network Administration Using Microsoft © Windows© Server
This course focuses on the management of a computer network using the Microsoft© Windows ©
Server network operating system. Emphasis will be placed on daily administrative tasks performed
by a network administrator. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
IST 1254 Network Administration Using Linux
This course focuses on the management of a computer network using the Linux operating system.
Emphasis is placed on installation, configuration, implementation, and administrative tasks of a
functional server. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
IST 1263 Microsoft® Office® Applications
This course will introduce an operating system and word processing, spreadsheet, database
management, and presentation software application. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per
week. Credit, three semester hours.
IST 1723 Programming in Python
This course is designed to provide an introduction to programming concepts and data informatics
using Python through lecture and a series of practical hands-on exercises. Two hours lecture and two
hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
IST 1314 Visual BASIC Programming Language
This introduction to the Visual BASIC programming language introduces the student to objectoriented programming and a graphical development environment. Two hours lecture and four hours
laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
IST 1414 Client-Side Programming
This course offers a comprehensive understanding of programming using JavaScript. Two hours
lecture and four hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
IST 1423 Web Design Applications
This course involves the application of various professional and personal Web design techniques.
Students will work with the latest WYSIWYG editors, HTML editors, animation/multi-media
products, and photo editors. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: Instructor approved)
IST 1483 Fundamentals of Virtualization
This course presents basic concepts of operating-system virtualization, server virutalization, cloning,
teams, and virtual networks. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratoy per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: Instructor approved)
IST 1513 SQL Programming
This course is the first of a two-part series that offers students an extensive introduction to data server
technology, covering the concepts of both relational and object relational databases and the structured
query language (SQL). Students are taught to retrieve data and produce readable output. Two hours
lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
IST 1613 Computer Forensics
This course provides an introduction to the various technical and administrative aspects of computer
forensics and laws pertaining to cybercrime. This course provides the foundation for understanding
the key issues associated with computer forensic investigations, understanding the boot processes
and disk structure for multiple operating systems, and understanding the processes related to data
acquisition during investigations. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three
semester hours. (Prerequisite: Instructor approved)
IST 1623 Network Security Fundamentals
This course provides the fundamental understanding of network security principles, implementations,
and the concepts, models, and technologies involved in creating a secure network environment.
Topics include, but are not limited to, authentication, types of attacks and malicious code, and best
practices for securing a network environment. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week.
Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: Instructor approved)
IST 1624 Network Security Fundamentals
This course provides the fundamental understanding of network security principles, implementations,
and the concepts, models, and technologies involved in creating a secure network environment.
Topics include, but are not limited to, authentication, types of attacks and malicious code, and best
practices for securing a network environment. Two hours lecture and four hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours. (Prerequisite: Instructor approved)
IST 1633 Wireless Security and Privacy
This course provides a fundamental understanding of wireless architecture, security principles, and
the technologies and principles involved in creating a secure wireless computer network environment.
Topics include wireless hardware, protocols, encryption, and how to prevent weaknesses in wireless
technology. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
(Prerequisite: Instructor approved)
IST 1634 Wireless Security and Privacy
This course provides a fundamental understanding of wireless architecture, security principles, and
the technologies and principles involved in creating a secure wireless computer network environment.
Topics include wireless hardware, protocols, encryption, and how to prevent weaknesses in wireless
technology. Two hours lecture and four hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
(Prerequisite: Instructor approved)
IST 1643 Network Defense and Countermeasures
This course provides a solid foundation of network security and the understanding of the process
to create a network defense and counter defense strategy measure policy to respond to intrusion
detection. Topics include network address translation, packet filtering, proxy servers, firewalls, and
virtual private networks used to design a network. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per
week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: Instructor approved)
IST 1644 Network Defense and Countermeasures
This course provides a solid foundation of network security and the understanding of the process
to create a network defense and counter defense strategy measure policy to respond to intrusion
detection. Topics include network address translation, packet filtering, proxy servers, firewalls, and
virtual private networks used to design a network. Two hours lecture and four hours laboratory per
week. Credit, four semester hours. (Prerequisite: Instructor approved)
IST 1723 Programming in Python
This course is designed to provide an introduction to programming concepts and data informatics
using Python through lecture and a series of practical hands-on exercises. Two hours lecture and two
hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
IST 2213 Network Security
This course provides an introduction to network and computer security. Topics such as ethics, security
policies, legal issues, vulnerability testing tools, firewalls, and operating system hardening will be
discussed. Students will receive a deeper understanding of network operations and protocols through
traffic capture and protocol analysis. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit,
three semester hours. (Prerequisite: Instructor approved)
IST 2223 Network Planning and Design
This course involves applying network concepts in planning and designing a functioning network.
Emphasis is placed on recognizing the need for a network, conducting an analysis, and designing
a solution. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
(Prerequisites: Network Operating Systems Elective; IST 1223 Network Components)
IST 2233 Network Implementation
This course is the culmination of all concepts learned in the network curriculum. Topics include
planning, installation, evaluation, and maintenance of a network solution. Two hours lecture and two
hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: IST 2223 Network Planning
and Design)
IST 2253 Advanced Network Administration Using Microsoft© Windows© Server
This course is a continuation of Network Administration Using Microsoft© Windows© Server.
Emphasis is placed on installation, configuration, and implementation of a functional server. Two
hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: IST
1243 Network Administration Using Microsoft© Windows© Server)
IST 2334 Advanced Visual BASIC Programming Language
This course is a continuation of the Visual BASIC Programming Language course. Four hours lecture
and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours. (Prerequisite: IST 1314 Visual
BASIC Programming Language)
IST 2344 Database Programming and Design
This course will introduce programming using a database management software application.
Emphasis will be placed on menus and file maintenance. Two hours lecture and four hours laboratory
per week. Credit, four semester hours. (Prerequisite: IST 1163 Concepts of Database Design)
IST 2454 Mobile Application Development
The emergence of a new generation of highly-capable mobile devices and platforms has opened
up opportunities for application developers. Mobile development differs from conventional desktop
development in that mobile devices operate in a constrained world with smaller screens, slower
network connections, as well as limited memory and processing power Two hours lecture and four
hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
IST 2483 Web Server
This course introduces students to Web, email, and proxy servers and the platforms on which they
reside. Students will be able to install and configure Web, email, and proxy servers. Two hours
lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisites: Instructor
approved)
IST 2613 Windows© Security
This course provides the knowledge and fundamental understanding of Windows© security, how
to harden current Windows© operating systems, and how to defend against attacks. Topics include
designing Active Directory, authentication for Windows©, group security and policy, service security,
remote access security, planning a public key infrastructure, securing file resources, Internet Protocol
Security, and additional Windows© security topics. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory
per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: IST 1243 Network Administration Using
Microsoft© Windows© Server)
IST 2614 Windows© Security
This course provides the knowledge and fundamental understanding of Windows© security, how
to harden current Windows© operating systems, and how to defend against attacks. Topics include
designing Active Directory, authentication for Windows©, group security and policy, service
security, remote access security, planning a public key infrastructure, securing file resources, Internet
Protocol Security, and additional Windows© security topics. Two hours lecture and four hours
laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours. (Prerequisite: IST 1243 Network Administration
Using Microsoft© Windows© Server)
IST 2623 Linux/Unix Security
This course provides the knowledge and fundamental understating of Linux/Unix security, how to
harden Linux/Unix, and how to defend against potential attacks against vulnerabilities and unused
system services. Topics include how to protect password files, monitor log files, and use port scanners and network scanners, and additional Linux/Unix security topics Two hours lecture and two hours
laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: Instructor approved)
IST 2633 Security Testing and Implementation
This course provides an in depth exploration of various methods for gaining access to networks
and explores network security concepts from the point of view of hackers and their methodologies.
Topics include hackers, crackers, ethical hackers, attacks, intrusion detection systems, malicious
code, computer crime, and industrial espionage. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per
week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: Instructor approved)
IST 2634 Security Testing and Implementation
This course provides an in depth exploration of various methods for gaining access to networks
and explores network security concepts from the point of view of hackers and their methodologies.
Topics include hackers, crackers, ethical hackers, attacks, intrusion detection systems, malicious
code, computer crime, and industrial espionage. Two hours lecture and four hours laboratory per
week. Credit, four semester hours. (Prerequisite: Instructor approved)
MIT 1313 Introduction to Military Science
This course provides training in general knowledge of military organization and culture, understanding
group combat skills, achievement of minimal physical conditioning standards and application of basic
safety and group living skills. Course includes lecture, demonstrations and performance exercises.
Three semester hours credit.
MIT 1323 Records and Information Management
This course provides training in proper collection, storage, processing and reporting of data in a
military or civilian environment. This includes oral and written reports and the production and
administration of staff journals, files, records and reports. Three semester hours credit.
MIT 1333 Personnel Supervision
This course provides training in planning, directing and controlling personnel functions in military or
civilian environments. Introduces students to personnel challenges and competencies that are critical
for effective leadership and learn how personal development of life skills such as time management,
physical fitness and stress management relate to leadership. Three semester hours credit.
MIT 1343 Leadership and Team Management
This course includes application of management and supervision principles. Lessons include
problem solving, critical thinking, leadership theory, group interaction, goal setting and effective
communication within a military environment. Three semester hours credit.
MLT 1112 Fundamentals of Medical Laboratory Technology/Phlebotomy
Includes an overview of the field of Medical Laboratory Technology, familiarization with laboratory
safety, microscopes, glassware, and equipment. Includes laboratory organization, medical ethics,
and employment opportunities. Basic laboratory specimen collection techniques are introduced. One
hour lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, two semester hours.
MLT 1212 Urinalysis/Body Fluids
Introduction to urinalysis and laboratory analysis of miscellaneous body fluids. Basic principles
of routine and special urine test, specimen examination through laboratory work. Theory and test
profiles presented for miscellaneous body fluids with correlation to diseased states. One hour lecture
and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, two semester hours.
MLT 1313 Hematology I
A study of the function of blood, morphology, and maturation of normal cells, blood cell counts,
differentials of white cells and blood collection and handling. Two hours lecture and two hours
laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
MLT 1324 Hematology II
The study of abnormal cell morphology and diseases involving blood cells, test procedures used
in laboratory diagnosis of hematological disease, normal and abnormal hemostasis, and diagnostic
procedures for evaluation of bleeding abnormalities and anticoagulant theory. Two hours lecture and
four hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours. (Prerequisite: MLT 1313 Hematology I)
MLT 1413 Immunology/Serology
Study of the basic principles of serology/immunology through the natural body defenses. Included are
basic antigen-antibody reactions, complement action, cellular response, humoral immune response,
and the basic serological procedures used to aid in the detection of certain diseases. Throughout
this course, special emphasis is placed on correlating laboratory results with the patient’s probable
condition. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
MLT 1515 Clinical Chemistry
Study of human biochemistry as an aid in the diagnosis of disease process, including chemical
procedures performed on body fluids. Three hours lecture and four hours laboratory. Credit, five
semester hours. (Prerequisites: Four semester hours of approved chemistry electives with a minimum
of “C” average or special permission by instructor)
MLT 2424 Immunohematology
The study of collection, processing, storage, and utilization of blood components. It also includes
the study of immunological principles and procedures for blood typing, cross matching, antibody
detection, identification, and investigation of hemolytic disease of the newborn. Two hours lecture and
four hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours. (Prerequisite: MLT 1413 Immunology/
Serology)
MLT 2522 Pathogenic Microbiology I
This covers basic skills, principles, and techniques for the staining, culturing, isolation, and
identification of parasites, viruses, and fungi of medical importance are emphasized in this course.
This course covers the morphology, physiology life cycles, and epidemiology of parasites with
emphasis on human pathogenic parasites. Identification of the parasites, viruses, and fungi from
human material is also included. Once hour lecture and two hours laboratory each week. Credit, two semester hours.
MLT 2614 Pathogenic Microbiology II
Basic skills, principles, and techniques for the staining, culturing, isolation, and identification of
microorganisms of medical importance are emphasized in this course. Included are techniques used
in determining the sensitivity of pathogenic bacteria to different antibiotics and other drugs. Two
hours lecture and four hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours. (Prerequisites: Four
semester hours of approved microbiology electives with a minimum of “C” average)
MLT 2916, MLT 2926, MLT 2936 Clinical Practice I, II, III
Clinical practice and didactic instruction in a clinical affiliate. Areas covered are hematology, clinical
chemistry, immunohematology, urinalysis, microbiology, coagulation, and serology. Eighteen hours
clinical per week for each course. Credit per course, six semester hours.
MMT 1113 Principles of Marketing
Study of principles and problems of marketing goods and services and methods of distribution from
producer to consumer. Topics include types, functions, and practices of wholesalers and retailers and
efficient techniques in the development and expansion of markets. Three hours lecture per week.
Credit, three semester hours.
MMT 1123 Marketing Management
A project based course as a continuation of MMT 1113. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three
semester hours. (Prerequisite: MMT 1113 Principles of Marketing)
MMT 1313 Selling
Basic principles and techniques of professional sales and their practical application. Topics include
basic elements of consumer behavior, developing selling strategies, closing and servicing a sale, and
developing consumer relations. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
MMT 1323 Advertising
The role of advertising as an integrated marketing communications tool. Topics included are product
and consumer analysis, media selection, and creation of advertisements. Three hours lecture per
week. Credit, three semester hours.
MMT 1413 Merchandising Math
Study of the mathematical calculations involved in basic business operations. Fundamental principles
and operations in buying, pricing, and inventory control. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
MMT 1753 Marketing Seminar
Develops leadership skills and human relations skills necessary for success in the field of marketing
management. Special programs and activities will address topics directly related to marketing
careers and career development. Emphasis will be placed on developing civic, social, and business
responsibilities. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
MMT 2213 Principles of Management
Study of the basic principles and functions of organizational management with special emphasis on
planning, organizing, leading, and controlling. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
MMT 2233 Human Resource Management
The study of the objectives, organizational structure and functions of human resource management.
Emphasis is placed on selection and placement, job evaluation, training, education, safety, health,
employer-employee relationships, and employee services. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
MMT 2323 Internet Marketing
This course introduces the online application of marketing communications. Topics include basic
Web site design, search engine optimization, digital promotions, email and social media marketing,
and opportunities and challenges associated with e-commerce activities. Three hours lecture per
week. Credit, three semester hours.
MMT 2353 Digital Media Applications
Design and deliver multimedia marketing presentations through the use of appropriate multimedia
software and tools. Topics include marketing design concepts and related marketing communication
strategies. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
MMT 2513 Entrepreneurship
Overview of key marketing concepts, methods , and strategic issues relevant to entrepreneurs and
the activities involved with planning, establishing, and managing a small business enterprise. Three
hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
MMT 2523 Event Management
An overview of event management to include the design of a plan for special events, trade and
consumer shows, and conventions. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
MST 1114 Power Machinery I
This course provides instruction of general shop safety as well as the operation of power machinery
which includes instruction and practice in the safe operation of lathes, power saws, drill presses, and
vertical mills. Two hours lecture and four hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
MST 1126 Power Machinery II
A continuation of Power Machinery I with emphasis on advanced applications of lathes, mills,
shapers, and precision grinders. Two hours lecture and eight hours laboratory per week. Credit, six semester hours.
MST 1313 Machine Tool Math
An applied mathematics course designed for machinists which includes instruction and practice in
algebraic and trigonometric operations. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
MST 1412 Blueprint Reading
Plans and specifications interpretation designed for machinists. Includes instruction and practice in
reading plans and applying specifications. One hour lecture and two hours laboratory per week.
Credit, two semester hours.
MST 1423 Advanced Blueprint Reading
A continuation of Blueprint Reading with emphasis on advanced features of plans and specifications.
Includes instruction on the identification of various projections and views and assembly components.
Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
MST 1613 Precision Layout
An introduction to the concepts and practice of precision layout for machining operations which
includes instruction and practice in the use of layout instruments. Two hours lecture and two hours
laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
MST 2135 Power Machinery III
A continuation of the Power Machinery II with emphasis on safety, and advanced applications of the
engine lathe, milling machine, and grinding machine. Two hours lecture and six hours laboratory per
week. Credit, five semester hours.
MST 2145 Power Machinery IV
A continuation of Power Machinery III with emphasis on highly advanced safe operations on the
radial arm drill, milling machine, engine lathe, and precision grinder. Two hours lecture and six hours laboratory per week. Credit, five semester hours.
MST 2714 Computer Numerical Control Operations I
An introduction of computer numerical control (CNC) and computer assisted manufacturing (CAM)
techniques and practices. Includes the use of the Cartesian coordinate system, programming codes
and commands and tooling requirements for CNC/CAM machines. Three hours lecture and two
hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
MST 2724 Computer Numerical Control Operations II
A continuation of Computer Numerical Control Operations I. Includes instruction in writing and
editing CNC programs, machine setup and operation, and use of CAM equipment to program and
operate CNC machines (CNC lathes, CNC mills, CNC machine centers, and wire EDM). Two hours
lecture and four hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
MST 2813 Metallurgy
An introduction to the concepts of metallurgy. Includes instruction and practice in safety, metal
identification, heat treatment, and hardness testing. One hour lecture and four hours laboratory per
week. Credit, three semester hours.
MST 2923 Special Problems in Precision Machining Technology
A course to provide students with an opportunity to utilize skills and knowledge gained in other
Machine Tool Technology courses. The instructor and student works closely together to select a
topic and establish criteria for completion of the project. Six hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
PNV 1213 Body Structure and Function
This course is a study of body structure and function essential to safe and effective nursing care. Each
system of the body is covered with applications to nursing. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
PNV 1443 Nursing Fundamentals and Clinical
This course provides the student with the basic knowledge and skills necessary to care for the
individual in wellness and illness and is applicable across the life span, as well as demonstration and
supervised practice of the fundamental skills related to practical nursing. Six hours lecture, ten hours
laboratory and six hours clinical per week. Credit, thirteen semester hours. (Total instructional hours
for the course: 90 hr. lecture, 150 hr. lab, 90 hr. clinical).
PNV 1524 IV Therapy & Pharmacology
This course provides the student with principles of IV therapy and pharmacology. Principles covered
in the course include the administration of medication, administration of IV fluids, and administration
of IV medications included in the scope of practice for the practical nurse. The expanded role of
IV therapy included in this course is in accordance with the Mississippi Nursing Practice Law and
Administrative Code. Three hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
PNV 1682 Adult Health Nursing Concepts & Clinical
This course is designed to provide the student with the basic theory and clinical experiences needed
to provide safe, effective care to the adult client experiencing acute, chronic, or life-threatening
physical health conditions in all body systems and the knowledge to prepare for the role transition
from student to practical nurse. Eight hours lecture and four hours clinical per week. Credit, twelve
semester hours. (Total instructional hours for the course: 120 hr. lecture, 180 hr. clinical)
PNV 1728 Specialty Areas in Nursing
This course provides the student with basic knowledge and skills to promote and/or provide safe and
effective care for clients and families during antepartum, intrapartum, and postpartum periods as
well as infancy through adolescence. It also provides the basic knowledge and skills to assist in the
promotion of the emotional, mental, and social well-being of the client and family experiencing a
mental health alteration. Seven hours lecture and two hours clinical per week. Credit, eight semester
hours. (Total instructional hours for the course: 110 hr. lecture, 30 clinical)
PNV 1914 Nursing Transition
This course prepares the student for role transition and the National Council Licensure Examination
(NCLEX-PN). Three hours lecture and three hours clinical per week. Credit, four semester hours.
RCT 1214 Respiratory Care Science
This course is designed to introduce the student respiratory care therapist to fundamental elements
important to the delivery of health care in a safe, efficient, and professional manner. The holistic
approach to patient care will be emphasized. Four hours lecture per week. Credit, four semester hours.
RCT 1223 Patient Assessment and Planning
This course is a fundamental approach to subjective and objective evaluation, assessment, and care
plan formation for the individual needs of the patient. It is an introduction to cardiopulmonary diseases
including etiology, pathophysiology, complications, occurrences, clinical manifestations, treatment,
and prevention. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
RCT 1313 Cardiopulmonary Anatomy and Physiology
This course is a study of cardiopulmonary physiology in relation to the practice of respiratory care.
Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours.
RCT 1322 Pulmonary Function Testing (PFT)
This course is an introduction to pulmonary function technique and testing equipment. One hour
lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, two semester hours. (Prerequisites: RCT 1313
Cardiopulmonary Anatomy and Physiology, or instructor approval.)
RCT 1416 Respiratory Care Technology I
This course is a study of respiratory treatments and equipment design and operation related to noncritical care procedures. Two hours lecture and eight hours laboratory per week. Credit, six semester hours.
RCT 1424 Respiratory Care Technology II
This course is a continuation of Respiratory Care Practitioner. It is a study of the management of
respiratory failure, including mechanical ventilation, pulmonary rehabilitation, and home care. Three
hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
RCT 1516 Clinical Practice I
Patient assessment, performance of respiratory care procedures, and care plan formation are presented
in the hospital environment. A procedural guide is utilized to evaluate student competencies and
performance of respiratory care procedures. Eighteen hours clinical. Credit, six semester hours. (Pre
or corequisites: RCT 1214 Respiratory Care Science, RCT 1223 Patient Assessment and Planning,
and RCT 1313 Cardiopulmonary Anatomy & Physiology. Corequisite: RCT 1416 Respiratory Care
Practitioner I)
RCT 1523 Clinical Practice II
In this course, students rotate through various respiratory care subspecialty areas for evaluation of
competency and performance of respiratory care procedures. Nine hours clinical per week. Credit,
three semester hours. (Prerequisites: RCT 1516 Clinical Practice I)
RCT 1613 Respiratory Care Pharmacology
This course is designed to introduce the student to the pharmacology related to cardiopulmonary
disorders. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Pre or corequisites: RCT
1214 Respiratory Care Science, RCT 1313 Cardiopulmonary Anatomy & Physiology, and RCT 1223
Patient Assessment and Planning)
RCT 2333 Cardiopulmonary Pathology
This course is a study of the cardiopulmonary pathophysiology. It includes etiology, clinical
manifestations, diagnostics, and treatment of various cardiopulmonary diseases incorporating
clinical practice guidelines, and therapist driven protocols. Case studies and/or clinical simulations
will be utilized to enforce learning and evaluate progress. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: RCT 1313 Cardiopulmonary Anatomy and Physiology)
RCT 2434 Respiratory Care Technology III
This course is an advanced study of respiratory care in the critical care setting. Topics include
nonconventional modes of mechanical ventilation, hemodynamics, special procedures, and advanced
cardiac life support. Three hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester
hours. (Prerequisite: RCT 1523 Clinical Practice II)
RCT 2533 Clinical Practice III
In this course, students rotate through various clinical areas for evaluation of competency and
performance of respiratory care procedures. Nine hours clinical per week. Credit, three semester
hours. (Pre or corequisites: RCT 1516 Clinical Practice I and RCT 1523 Clinical Practice II)
RCT 2546 Clinical Practice IV
This course is a continuation of Clinical Practice III. In this course, students rotate through respiratory
care areas. A procedural guide is utilized to evaluate student competency and performance. Eighteen
hours clinical per week. Credit, six semester hours. (Prerequisites: RCT 2533 Clinical Practice III)
RCT 2613 Neonatal/Pediatrics Management
This course is a study of fetal development and the transition to extrauterine environment. It includes
the most common cardiopulmonary disorders, neonatal and pediatric disease processes, and the
modes of treatment. Three hours lecture per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Pre or corequisites:
RCT 2434 Respiratory Care Technology III and RCT 2546 Clinical Practice IV)
RCT 2713 Respiratory Care Seminar
This course is designed to integrate the essential elements of respiratory care through the use of
care plans, case studies, and clinical simulations in a laboratory environment. Students develop an
analytical approach to problem solving. Critical thinking is emphasized. Two hours lecture and two
hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours. (Pre or corequisites: RCT 1523 Clinical
Practice II)
RGT 1114 Clinical Education I
This course includes clinical practice and instruction in a clinical affiliate. Areas included are patient care and management, radiation protection, operation of equipment, and radiologic procedures.
Twelve hours clinical each week. Credit, four semester hours. (Prerequisites: CPR-Health Care
Provider must be completed before Clinical I experience begins)
RGT 1124 Clinical Education II
This course involves clinical practice and instruction in a clinical affiliate. Areas included are patient
care and management, radiation protection, operation of equipment, and radiologic procedures.
Twelve hours clinical each week. Credit, four semester hours. (Prerequisites: All core courses as
scheduled)
RGT 1139 Clinical Education III
This course is a clinical practice and instruction in a clinical affiliate. Areas included are patient care
and management, radiation protection, operation of equipment, and radiologic procedures. Twentyseven hours clinical each week. Credit, nine semester hours. (Prerequisites: All core courses as
scheduled)
RGT 1212 Fundamentals of Radiography
This course is an introduction to Radiologic Technology including professional, departmental, and
historical aspects. Included are terminology, medical ethics, and fundamental legal responsibilities.
Two hours lecture each week. Credit, two semester hours.
RGT 1223 Patient Care in Radiography
Content provides the concepts of patient care, including consideration for the physical and
psychological needs of the patient and family. Routine and emergency patient care procedures will
be described, as well as infection control procedures using standard precautions. The role of the
radiographer in patient education will be identified. Two hours lecture and two hours lab each week.
Credit, three semester hours.
RGT 1312 Principles of Radiation Protection
This course is designed to present an overview of the principles of radiation protection including
the responsibilities of the radiographer for patients, personnel and the public. Radiation health and
safety requirements of federal and state regulatory agencies, accreditation agencies, and health care
organizations are incorporated. Two hours lecture each week. Credit, two semester hours.
RGT 1323 Principles of Exposure and Image Production
This course is a study of the principles involving manipulation of factors controlling and influencing
exposure and radiographic quality. Included are the prime factors of radiographic exposure, beam
limiting devices, filtration, production and control of scatter and secondary radiation, exposure
systems, technical conversions, and problem solving. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory
each week. Credit, three semester hours.
RGT 1333 Digital Image Acquisition Display
Content imparts an understanding of the components, principles and operation of digital imaging
systems found in diagnostic radiology. Factors that impact image acquisition, display, archiving and
retrieval are discussed. Principles of digital system quality assurance and maintenance are presented.
Two hours lecture and two hours lab each week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: RGT
1323 Principles of Exposure and Image Production)
RGT 1513 Radiographic Procedures I
This course includes terminology, principles, and procedures involved in routine radiographic
positioning for demonstration of the chest, abdomen, upper extremities, shoulder, girdle, urinary
system, and digestive system. Included is a review of radiographic anatomy on each procedure. Two
hours lecture and two hours laboratory each week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisites: BIO
2513 & 2523 Anatomy & Physiology I & II and labs)
RGT 1523 Radiographic Procedures II
This course includes principles and procedures involved in the radiographic positioning of the spinal
column, pelvic girdle, lower extremities, bony thorax, and mobile and trauma radiography procedures.
Included is a review of radiographic anatomy on each procedure. Two hours lecture and two hours
lab each week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: RGT 1513 Radiographic Procedures I)
RGT 1613 Physics of Imaging Equipment
This course is designed to establish a knowledge base in radiographic, fluoroscopic, mobile,
tomographic equipment requirements and design. The content will also provide a basic knowledge
of quality control. Computer applications in the radiologic sciences related to image capture, display,
storage, and distribution are presented. Three hours lecture each week. Credit, three semester hours.
(Prerequisites: All core courses as scheduled)
RGT 2132 Ethical and Legal Responsibilities
Legal terminology concepts and principles will be presented in this course. Topics include misconduct,
malpractice, legal and professional standards and the ASRT scope of practice. The importance of
proper documentation and informed consent is emphasized. This course will prepare students to
better understand their patient, the patients’ families and professional peers through comparison
of diverse populations based on their value system, cultural and ethnic influences, communication
styles, socio-economic influences, health risks and life stages. Two hours lecture per week. Credit, two semester hours. (Prerequisite: RGT 1212 Fundamentals of Radiography)
RGT 2147 Clinical Education IV
This course is a clinical practice and instruction in a clinical affiliate. Areas included are patient
care and management, radiation protection, operation of equipment, and radiologic procedures.
Twenty-one hours clinical each week. Credit, seven semester hours. (Prerequisites: All core courses
as scheduled)
RGT 2157 Clinical Education V
This course includes clinical practice and instruction in a clinical affiliate. Areas included are patient
care and management, radiation protection, operation of equipment, and radiologic procedures.
Twenty-one hours clinical each week. Credit, seven semester hours. (Prerequisites: All core courses
as scheduled)
RGT 2533 Radiographic Procedures III
This course includes principles and procedures involved in radiographic positioning of the entire
cranium and facial bones. Included is a review of radiographic anatomy on each procedure. Two
hours lecture and two hours laboratory each week. Credit, three semester hours. (Prerequisite: RGT
1523 Radiographic Procedures II)
RGT 2542 Radiographic Procedures IV
This course is a study of specialized radiographic procedures which utilize sterile techniques and
specialized equipment. It also includes basic concepts of pharmacology. In addition it also incudes
principles and procedures involved in radiographic positioning of the reproductive system. Two hours
lecture each week. Credit, two semester hours. (Prerequisite: RGT 2532 Radiographic Procedures
III)
RGT 2912 Radiation Biology
This course is a study of the biological effects of radiation upon living matter. It includes genetic and
somatic effects. Two hours lecture each week. Credit, two semester hours.
RGT 2922 Radiographic Pathology
This course is designed to introduce theories of disease causation and the pathophysiologic disorders that compromise health systems. Etiology, pathophysiologic responses, clinical manifestations,
radiographic appearance, and management alterations in body systems will be presented. Two hours
lecture each week. Credit, two semester hours. (Prerequisites: All core courses as scheduled)
RGT 2932 Certification Fundamentals
This course is designed to correlate scientific components of radiography to entry level knowledge
required by the profession. Two hours lecture each week. Credit, two semester hours. (Prerequisites:
All core courses as scheduled)
RST 1313 Freshman Orientation
This course is designed to help students adjust to college life. Course content includes personal,
academic, and financial information to assist the student in succeeding in college. The course is
designed to teach effective study habits, reading methods, use of the library, note taking, report
writing, financial responsibility education and gives the student guidance in collegiate life. Three
hours lecture each week. Credit, three semester hours.
TCT 1113 Fundamentals of Telecommunications
This course provides a history of voice/data communication, fundamental concepts, and basic
telephone service. Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
WBL 191(1-3), 192(1-3), 193(1-3), 291(1-3), 292(1-3), 293(1-3) Work-Based Learning
A structured worksite learning experience in which the student, program area instructor, work-based
learning coordinator, and worksite supervisor/mentor develop and implement a training agreement.
The training agreement is designed to integrate the student’s academic and technical skills into
a work environment. Includes regular meetings and seminars with school, business and industry
personnel for supplemental instruction and feedback (progress reviews). Credit, three semester hours.
WLV 1114 Shielded Metal Arc Welding I (SMAW)
This course is designed to teach students welding techniques using E-6010 electrodes. One hour
lecture and six hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
WLV 1124 Gas Metal Arc Welding (GMAW)
This course is designed to give the student experience in various welding applications with the M.I.G.
welder. One hour lecture and six hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
WLV 1135 Gas Tungsten Arc Welding (GTAW)
This course is designed to give the student experience in various welding applications with the
GTAW welder. One hour lecture and eight hours laboratory per week. Credit, five semester hours.
WLV 1143 Flux Cored Arc Welding (FCAW)
This course is designed to give the student experience in FCAW. One hour lecture and four hours
laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
WLV 1153 Pipe Welding
This course is designed to give the student experience in pipe welding procedures. One hour lecture
and four hours laboratory per week. Credit, three semester hours.
WLV 1171 Welding Inspection and Testing
This course is designed to give the student experience in the inspecting and testing of welds. Two
hours laboratory per week. Credit, one semester hour.
WLV 1224 Shielded Metal Arc Welding II
This course is designed to teach students welding techniques using E-7018 electrodes. One hour
lecture and six hours laboratory per week. Credit, four semester hours.
WLV 1232 Drawing and Welding Symbols
This course is designed to give students advanced experience in reading welding symbols. One hour
lecture and two hours laboratory per week. Credit, two semester hours.
WLV 1314 Cutting Processes
This course is designed to give the student experience in oxyfuel cutting principles and practices, air
carbon cutting and gouging, and plasma arc cutting. Two hours lecture and four hours laboratory per
week. Credit, four semester hours.
