128 

SECTION NINE | Courses of Instruction

ART COURSES

ART 100/N ......................... ART APPRECIATION (3)
An introductory study of the visual arts; appreciation of art and its relationship to culture
and Christianity particularly.

ART 101 ............................ INTRODUCTION TO ART (3)
An introductory study of the principles and elements of art as they apply to basic art skills
and media to sharpen their aesthetic awareness and to equip students with the ability to
make visual statements with design, drawing, and painting.

AVT 101 ............................ INTRODUCTION TO AVIATION (3)
This course is an introduction to college life in aviation. The course is designed to
weave all the elements of the initial college experience with the reality of a flying career.
It will help aviators navigate priorities between campus and the airport where their flying
lessons originate. The class teaches planning for the demands of flying and academic
studies with an emphasis on preparing for flight training. The course prepares students
for their first flights by covering practical issues such as airport orientation, flight SOP,
checklists, radio procedures, etc. It also teaches the elements of Aeronautical Decision
Making and provides a comprehensive overview of the aviation degree and a career in
aviation.


AVT 115 ............................ PRIMARY GROUND INSTRUCTION - PPL (4)
Class designed to provide basic aeronautical knowledge for the pilot. Federal Aviation
Regulations, Aeronautical Information Manual, use of charts for navigation, radio
communication, aviation weather, safety, aircraft systems and performance, weight and
balance computations, aerodynamics, stall and spin awareness, Aeronautical Decision
Making and preflight preparation are covered. This course prepares students for the
FAA Private Pilot Knowledge Exam. Co-requisite: AVT 127A Prerequisite: AVT 127A
(CR/NC)



129 


AVT 121 ............................ HISTORY OF AVIATION (3)
Study of the origins and development of the aviation industry. This course includes a
study of the earliest accounts of man’s desire to fly, a historical review of aircraft and
industry developments from the Wright Brothers to the latest military, missionary, and
commercial aircraft. History is necessary to give perspective on the fast-paced changes
in an industry responding to advances in NextGen technology, ADS-B, advanced
avionics, new engine technology, and regulatory migration from old fatigue rules to
recent changes in FAA flight-time-duty-time regulations in FAR 117.

AVT 127A ............................. PRIMARY FLIGHT I – PPL (2)
This course is designed to provide students with the initial foundation necessary for
future success in career-oriented flight training goals. The course builds on what is
learned in the co-requisite AVT 115 (Private Pilot Ground) and is geared towards
preparing the student for solo flight. During Lessons 1-12, students will become familiar
with the training airplane in flight: Preflight procedures, checklist usage, proper use of
primary and secondary airplane controls, the airplane powerplant, avionics and
instrumentation, radio communication, and airspace, among other foundation
knowledge areas in application. The flight course is taught through our satellite campus
located at Gillespie Field. Requisites: Current or higher FAA medical certificate and
Student Pilot Certificate for successful course completion.

AVT 127 B .......................... PRIMARY FLIGHT II – PPL (2)
This course builds on what is learned in AVT 115 and AVT 127A, allowing the student to
further develop on a solo flight and meeting the FAA requirements through Lessons 13-
24, as follows; cross-country planning, night flight procedures, practice area solos,
airspace transitions, and radio communications, among other foundation knowledge
areas in the application. The flight course is taught through our satellite campus located
at Gillespie Field. Prerequisite: Current Student Pilot Certificate/current FAA Medical
Certificate.

AVT 127 C ........................... PRIMARY FLIGHT III – PPL (1)
This course is designed to provide the training required for the student to obtain the
Private Pilot Certificate and builds on what is learned in Prerequisites AVT 127A and
AVT 127B. By completing Lessons 25-30 the student will achieve private pilot level
competency and begin to prepare for the Private Pilot practical oral and flight tests. The
flight course is taught through our satellite campus school located at Gillespie Field.
Prerequisites: AVT 127A, AVT 127B, valid 3rd Class or higher FAA medical certificate,
130 

and Student Pilot Certificate.

AVT 201 ...........................INTRODUCTION TO MISSIONARY AVIATION (3)
This course will prepare pilots in Missionary Specialization for serving on the mission
field. The course will introduce missionary aircraft migration from avgas-driven to
turbine-powered equipment and covers the personal and technical skills required.
Also discussed are situational awareness, crew coordination, communication, human
error, fatigue, fitness, attitudes, motivation, lifestyle, language, cultural and spiritual
aspects, and family life in the field. It also covers the flight skills required to prepare for
the technical evaluation flight and maintenance training requirements for missionary
pilots. This course prepares students for their missionary cross-cultural exchange and
introduces aspects of accounting, raising support, and international travel.

AVT 204 ............................ AVIATION WEATHER (3)
This course introduces aviation weather basics, atmospheric circulation systems,
aviation weather hazards, and the application of aviation weather knowledge. The
course teaches basic knowledge of weather pertinent to aviation with a view toward
understanding and safely flying in instrument meteorological conditions. Course
includes elements of flight weather briefings, chart and graphical interpretation, and
Aeronautical Decision Making.

AVT 215 ............................ INSTRUMENT GROUND INSTRUCTION - IR (3)
This course prepares students for the FAA Instrument Rating Knowledge Exam.
Consists of the Federal Aviation Regulations, the Aeronautical Information Manual, air
traffic control, navigation, and instrument approaches, use of both government and
Jeppesen en route and approach charts, analysis of aviation weather, safe and efficient
operation of aircraft in instrument meteorological conditions, recognition of critical
weather situations, Aeronautical Decision Making and Crew Resource Management.
Prerequisite: FAA PPL Certificate.

AVT 220 ............................ AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS & PERFORMANCE (3)
Aircraft Systems and Performance is designed to provide students with aircraft systems
knowledge beyond the basic private pilot level including engine operation, limitations,
and performance. Students will study the theory of carbureted and turbocharged
reciprocating engines as well as the theory of turbine engines. Students will learn simple
maintenance procedures and logging requirements. This course teaches the science of
engine operation, understanding angle of attack, and basic aerodynamics. It also
teaches aircraft performance in normal and abnormal situations as well as high altitude
operations. Prerequisite: FAA PPL Certificate.
131 


AVT 221 ............................ AVIATION SAFETY (3)
The course provides a detailed introduction to aviation safety and the associated
components of pilot psychology and human factors. Aircraft accidents due to human
factors, adverse weather, runway incursions, and mechanical failures are investigated.
Situational awareness, hazardous attitudes, and flight physiology as they pertain to
preventing aircraft accidents are emphasized. Prerequisite: FAA PPL Certificate.

AVT 222 ............................ ADVANCED FLIGHT PLANNING (1-3)
Advanced Flight Planning teaches students in-depth methods for planning complex VFR
or IFR flights using both an aviation manual computer (E6B) and internet flight planning
resources and applications. Course teaches technique, rules, and procedures required
by NIFA (National Intercollegiate Flying Association) competition standards for E6B and
SCAN competition and is compatible with the FAA ACS (Airman Certification
Standards). Prerequisite: Any FAA Pilot Certificate (Course may be repeated for 3
credits).

AVT 227A ............................. INSTRUMENT FLIGHT AIRPLANE I – IR (2)
This course is designed to provide the student with the foundation necessary to obtain a
single-engine airplane land instrument rating. During the training for an instrument
rating, students learn aircraft procedures for Instrument Meteorological Conditions (IMC)
and Instrument Flight Rules (IFR). Lessons 1-11 are covered in this course.
Instruction on instrument navigation with full and partial panel, approach, and departure
procedures will be provided. The instrument rating is a significant contributor to aviation
safety and a fundamental requirement of a professional career in aviation. This course
is taught by our satellite campus located at Gillespie Field. Prerequisite(s): All AVT 100-
level courses, and/or an FAA Private Pilot Certificate with a valid FAA medical certificate.
AVT 237 may be taken as a co-requisite to AVT 227A.

AVT 227B ............................. INSTRUMENT FLIGHT AIRPLANE II – IR (2)
This course is designed to provide the student with the foundation necessary to obtain a
single-engine airplane land instrument rating. During the training for an instrument
rating, students learn aircraft procedures for Instrument Meteorological Conditions (IMC)
and Instrument Flight Rules (IFR). Lessons 12-28 are covered in this course.
Instruction on airway navigation, holding procedures, SID/STAR procedures, and
emergency operations will be provided. This course is taught by our satellite campus
located at Gillespie Field. Prerequisite(s): AVT 227A and a valid FAA medical certificate.
132 

AVT 237 may be taken as a co-requisite to AVT 227B.


AVT 235 ............................ FUNDAMENTALS OF UNMANNED AERIAL SYSTEMS (3)
This course will provide the student with a study in the many areas concerning
unmanned aerial systems. A few of the areas touched on will be history, the elements of
command and control, the National Airspace System and how it relates to UASs,
current and planned Federal Aviation Administration regulations and directives, the
different categories and types of UASs, technology in areas such as propulsion,
sensors, communication, materials, etc., and the very latest operations and challenges
currently facing this new growth area in aviation.

AVT 237 ............................ ADVANCED INSTRUMENT & SYSTEMS (1)
This course is designed to increase aviation knowledge and enhance flight skills by
building on prior and providing new experiences after obtaining the Private Pilot
Certificate. Glass cockpit and complex aircraft will be introduced. During Lessons 1-11,
which build confidence as pilot-in-command while enhancing a student’s competency in
flight. This course is delivered in part 61 or part 141. Part 61-the flight course is taught
through our satellite campus affiliated school located at Gillespie Field and can be taken
concurrently with AVT 227A or AVT 227B. Prerequisite: AVT 127C, a current FAA
Private Pilot Certificate, and valid FAA medical certificate.


AVT 315 ............................ COMMERCIAL GROUND INSTRUCTION - CPL (3)
Provides aeronautical knowledge to pass the FAA Commercial Pilot Knowledge Exam.
Covers Federal Aviation Regulations, NTSB accident reporting requirements,
aerodynamics, meteorology, safe and efficient operation of aircraft, weight and balance
computations, performance charts and limitations, complex aircraft systems,
maneuvers, and emergency operations. It also includes night and high altitude
operations and complex flight maneuvers. Prerequisite: FAA PPL Certificate & IR
Rating.

AVT 320 ............................ AIRPLANE AERODYNAMICS (3)
This course studies the physical principles of airplane aerodynamics. Course involves
examining the factors affecting aircraft performance, stability and control, and special
flight conditions often experienced by commercial pilots of fixed-wing aircraft.
Emphasized are stall/spin awareness and recovery, and commercial aircraft design and
construction issues. This course will deal primarily with low-speed aerodynamics or
incompressible flow; includes a section on high-speed aerodynamics toward the end of
133 

the course. Prerequisite: FAA PPL Certificate.

AVT 321 ............................ AVIATION FLIGHT PHYSIOLOGY (3)
Aviation Flight Physiology teaches the basics of human anatomy, the atmosphere,
situational awareness, altitude physiology, hearing, vibration, vision, medical and
environmental stresses, sleep, jet-lag, fatigue, acceleration, medical fitness, and health
preservation. Students will study the causes, symptoms, prevention, and treatment of
flight environment disorders. Altitude effects, spatial disorientation, body heat
imbalance, visual anomalies, and psychological factors are included as they relate to
pilot performance and survival effectiveness. Prerequisite: FAA PPL Certificate.

AVT 327A ............................. COMMERCIAL FLIGHT I – CASEL (1)
This course is designed to provide students with parts of the training required for a
commercial airplane single-engine land pilot certificate (CASEL). It is the foundation
necessary for success as a professional pilot. During Lessons 1-12, students will
become familiar with complex aircraft and night operations, cross-country flights, and the
glass cockpit. The flight course is taught through our satellite campus located at
Gillespie Field.
Prerequisite: AVT 127C or Private Pilot License and a valid FAA medical certificate.
Requisites: 2nd Class or higher FAA medical certificate and Private Pilot Certificate for
successful course completion.

AVT 327B ............................. COMMERCIAL FLIGHT CASEL II (1)
This course is designed to provide students with parts of the training required for a
commercial airplane single-engine land pilot certificate (CASEL). It is the foundation
necessary for success as a professional pilot. During Lessons 13-30, students will
become familiar with commercial flight maneuvers, abnormal procedures, and cross-
country flight. The flight course is taught through our satellite campus located at
Gillespie Field. Prerequisite: AVT 327A or AVT 237 and valid FAA medical certificate.
Requisites: 2nd Class higher FAA medical certificate and Private Pilot Certificate for
successful course completion.

AVT 327C ............................. COMMERCIAL FLIGHT CASEL III (1)
This course is designed to provide students with parts of the training required for a
commercial airplane single-engine land pilot certificate (CASEL). It is the foundation
necessary for success as a professional pilot. During Lessons 31-43, students will
become proficient in flying commercial flight maneuvers, management of abnormal
134 

procedures, and recovery procedures. The flight course is taught through our satellite
campus located at Gillespie Field. Prerequisite: AVT 327B and valid FAA medical
certificate. Requisites: 2nd Class higher FAA medical certificate and Private Pilot
Certificate for successful course completion.

AVT 327D ............................. COMMERCIAL FLIGHT CASEL IV (1)
This course is designed to provide students with parts of the training required for a
commercial airplane single-engine land pilot certificate (CASEL). It is the foundation
necessary for success as a professional pilot. During Lessons 44-51, students will
become competent in all commercial pilot requirements including complex aircraft,
commercial flight maneuvers and operations, abnormal procedures, emergency
procedures, cross-country flight, and night operations. The flight course is taught
through our satellite campus located at Gillespie Field. Prerequisite: AVT 327C and valid
FAA medical certificate. Requisites: 2nd Class higher FAA medical certificate and Private
Pilot Certificate for successful course completion.



AVT 340 ............................ MANAGING THE AIRPORT ENVIRONMENT (3)
The theoretical and practical aspects of managing an airport are discussed, including
staffing, assets, monetary functions, and the full spectrum of airport operations.

AVT 345 ............................ AVIATION SECURITY (3)
This course offers a detailed study on the challenges facing the passenger airline & air
cargo industry with respect to aviation security. Since the aviation industry is in the
business of “selling time”, of particular importance is how the industry must balance
safety, time, and cost in the handling of aviation security. This course will review the
history of aviation security, the cost of security, past threats, and future threats; also
current and future technology. Security regulations and applications will be reviewed on
both a domestic and international level. Prerequisite: AVT 221

AVT 405 ............................ AVIATION LAW (3)
Designed to explore the scope of all regulations concerning aviation and the
development of federal, state, and local regulatory functions, and rights and liabilities of
pilots including buying and selling aircraft. Students will examine case histories, liens,
security interests in aircraft, international bilateral and multilateral agreements, and
criminal statutes. This course covers aspects of FAA certificate action, the appeal
process, and mitigation procedures including the NASA ASRS program.
135 

Prerequisite: FAA CPL Certificate, or permission from the Department Chair of Aviation.

AVT 410 ............................ ADVANCED FLIGHT INSTRUCTION (1-5)
[Variable 3 credits for ground instruction, 1- 2 credits for flight instruction.]
These courses prepare students in the maneuvers and procedures required by FAA for
an advanced aircraft rating such as helicopter, seaplane, glider, or other advanced FAA
rating. Credit hour units will be awarded according to the rating obtained.
Prerequisite: FAA CPL Certificate with FAA IR Rating and permission from Department
Chair of Aviation. (CR/NC)


AVT 411 ............................ FLIGHT INSTRUCTOR – INSTRUMENT FLIGHT - CFII (3)
This flight course covers the aeronautical experience necessary to meet the
requirements for an FAA Certificated Flight Instructor-Instrument add-on rating. Topics
covered include all those previously required for the instrument rating in AVT 215, 217A,
217B, and 223, but are presented from the instructor's perspective. The applicant will
obtain the instructional knowledge required to teach these subjects including
recognition, analysis, and correction of common student errors. The student will be
required to take the FAA Flight Instructor Instrument Knowledge Test and complete the
FAA Flight Instructor Instrument Practical Test with an FAA-designated pilot examiner.
Prerequisites: FAA CFI Certificate, permission of Department Chair of Aviation. (CR/NC)


AVT 412 ............................ FLIGHT INSTRUCTOR – MULTI-ENGINE FLIGHT - MEI (3)
This flight course covers the aeronautical experience necessary to meet the
requirements for an FAA Certificated Flight Instructor Multi-Engine add-on rating for
those pilots who already possess a Certificated Flight Instructor, Single-Engine
Certificate. Topics covered include all those previously required for AVT 417 and AVT
419, but presented from the instructor’s view. During the flight training, appropriate
maneuvers and procedures will be practiced including “1 engine inoperative” normal,
abnormal, and emergency maneuvers. The student will obtain the instructional
knowledge required to teach multi-engine flying, including recognition, analysis, and
correction of common student errors. The student will be required to complete the FAA
Flight Instructor Multi-Engine Practical Test with an FAA-designated pilot examiner.
Prerequisites: CFI Certificate, permission of Department Chair of Aviation. (CR/NC)


AVT 415 ............................ FLIGHT INSTRUCTOR (5)
This course prepares the student for the Initial Instructor, Airplane Single Engine Land,
136 

a certificate issued by the Federal Aviation Administration, and the associated
instructional techniques and instructor responsibilities. The student will learn course
development, neuroscience learning methods during preparation for the Fundamentals
of Instruction (FOI), and either the Flight Instructor Airplane (FIA) or Advanced Ground
Instructor (AGI) FAA Knowledge tests. Prerequisite: FAA Commercial Pilot Certificate
Requisites: Meet FAA attendance & hour requirements. All Exams must receive a score
of 80% or higher


AVT 417 ............................ FLIGHT INSTRUCTOR FLIGHT TRAINING - CFI (3)
This flight course involves Stage 1 Flight Lessons 1-13. Commercial Pilot will acquire the
proficiency and experience needed to meet the certification requirements for an FAA
Flight Instructor (ASEL) Certificate. The performance criteria specified in the syllabus
are based on the current FAA Flight Instructor (ASEL) Practical Test Standards (PTS).
All enrolled students are required to complete all lessons satisfactorily in order to satisfy
degree requirements. Prerequisite: FAA CPL Certificate & IR Rating. (CR/NC)

AVT 418 ............................ GAS TURBINE ENGINES THEORY (3)
This course is a study of gas turbine engine theory, design, systems, operation, and
application. Turbojet and turbofan engine systems will be covered to include the
different sections of a turbine engine and the associated lubrication, fuel, cooling,
ignition, electrical, and fire protection systems. A detailed study will be accomplished on
several specific turbine engines to include normal and emergency procedures.
Prerequisite: AVT 220 Aircraft Systems & Performance

AVT 419 ............................ MULTI-ENGINE AIRCRAFT RATING (3)
This flight course includes MEL Ground Lessons 1.1-1.4 and MEL Flight Lessons 1.1-
1.7. This course teaches the skills necessary to safely operate twin-engine aircraft.
Normal and abnormal procedures are included along with a discussion of the systems
and aerodynamics normally associated with these aircraft. Regulations for commercial
pilots are included. Flight course includes multi-engine flight and all related maneuvers
required by FAA Multi-Engine Rating Practical Test Standards. (CR/NC)


AVT 420 ............................ ADVANCED AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS TURBINE THEORY (3)
Course teaches propulsion systems for turbine-powered jets and turbo-propeller aircraft,
the basic operation of jet engines, and control of interrelated aircraft systems. This
course teaches jet engine theory and the operation of related systems. The practical
application of theory is demonstrated through simulator training in an advanced turbo-
137 

prop or jet simulator. Systems and Procedures are refined through extensive Crew
Resource Management (CRM) application of normal, abnormal, and emergency
procedures. Course includes PIC and SIC simulator training in the King Air or similar
aircraft. This course is offered through off-site vendors. Prerequisite: FAA CPL
Certificate, IR & ME ratings. Requires permission of Department Chair of Aviation,
Faculty Advisor, and supervising professor. (CR/NC)

AVT 440 ............................ AVIATION MANAGEMENT (3)
This course offers an intensive study of the practices and problems of management with
respect to the aviation industry. The importance of passenger airline and air cargo
service to the economy, development of the industry, regulations, complexity of the
market, airline management, carriers, airports and facilities, forecasting models, along
with rate and tariff problems, aircraft, and future prospects are all discussed.
Prerequisite: AVT 405.

AVT 450 ............................ CRM/PROFESSIONAL PILOT (3)
This course is designed to develop and demonstrate an attitude of professional
behavior as a member of a flight crew. The course emphasizes Crew Resource
Management concepts, problem-solving, workload management, and situational
awareness. Course covers Captain’s Authority and prepares students for the
airline/commercial/missionary command. Teaches the application process, resume’
preparation, and job interview preparation and practice. The final exam requires an
essay, job interview, and simulator check. Prerequisite: FAA Commercial Pilot
Certificate & IR Rating.

AVT 481/482 ............................ DIRECTED RESEARCH (1-3)
Directed research on a topic not covered in regular curriculum classes. May be
repeated, but the total number of credit hours in directed research may not exceed ten
percent (10%) of the total number of credit hours required for graduation. Requires
permission of Department Chair of Aviation, Faculty Advisor, and supervising professor.
Fee.

AVT 499 ............................ AVIATION INTERNSHIP (3)
Directed work experience in an area related to aviation. The internship will be
individually arranged and supervised by both the Aviation Department and a
professional in the aviation field. Internships can be offered within the Aviation Program
or at an aviation company approved by the Aviation Department. Prerequisite:
138 

Permission from the Department Chair of Aviation.

BIBLICAL STUDIES COURSES

BI 101/N ......................... OLD TESTAMENT SURVEY (3)
A survey of the entire Old Testament, giving attention to the authorship, historical
background, the Abrahamic Covenant as it is developed in the Old Testament, the
theme of each book with its doctrinal contribution, and a study of the history of the
Hebrew nation from its origin to the close of the Old Testament.

BI 102/N ......................... NEW TESTAMENT SURVEY (3)
A survey of the entire New Testament including the historical background of the inter-
Testament period, giving special attention to authorship, content, distinctive features,
main events, and the unfolding of God’s redemptive purposes through the Lord Jesus
Christ, His continuing work in the Acts, Epistles, and His culminating victory in
Revelation.

BI 105 ............................. INTRODUCTION TO A CHRISTIAN WORLD VIEW (3)
This course is to introduce a Biblical Christian Worldview and to show how it relates to
Christianity in its historic and global context. Five key areas will be covered: The Gospel,
what it is and why it should not be added to. Church History and why there are so many
different denominations. creed, these are the orthodox statements of faith professed by
Christendom. The Bible, how we got it, and why there are so many different
translations. Dan Diego Christian Collee's history and why it was founded.

BI 201 ............................. INTRODUCTION TO THE BIBLE (3)
A survey of the entire Bible, giving attention to the authorship, historical background,
and significant content of each book of the bible. Attention will be given to the doctrinal
contribution of bible books as well as the comparisons and contrasts evident between
the Old and New Testament time periods.

BI 213/N ......................... PRINCIPLES OF BIBLE STUDY (3)
An introduction to the theory and practice of biblical interpretation (hermeneutics); the
course will focus on methods of sound exegesis-seeking to determine the author’s
intended meaning through an analysis of literary form, historical and literary context,
and word and conceptual studies; special attention will also be given to the accurate
and relevant application of the biblical message to the present day.
139 


BI 214 ............................. ROMANS (3)
An analytical, exegetical, and expositional study of Romans with emphasis upon the
historical context of the book, its argument, its doctrinal themes, and its demands upon
the believer. Prerequisite: A grade of C (73%) or better in BI 213.

BI 230 ............................. SURVEY OF THE CULTS (3)
This course will study and evaluate the significant religious cults that have emerged from
the 18th to the 21st centuries. The goal will be to place each of these groups into their
respective historical contexts to determine why they arose and how some of them have
come to enjoy worldwide acceptance over time.
The doctrines of these religious groups will be examined and then compared with
biblical revelation so that an effective apologetic can be developed for both defending
the orthodox Christian faith against these groups and for seeking avenues of outreach
toward them.

BI 306/N ......................... GOSPEL OF JOHN (3)
An exegetical and expositional study of the fourth Gospel emphasizing its historical and
literary context, the development of John’s argument, key themes and doctrines, and a
critical examination of problem passages. Prerequisite: A grade of C (73%) or better in
BI 213.

BI 317 ............................. THE GOSPELS (3)
An introduction to the unique portraits of Jesus Christ provided by the four Gospel
writers; the course will include an introduction to key features of the interpretation of the
Gospels, including literary form, historical backgrounds, exegetical methodology,
composition, authorship, and distinctive of each book; this will be followed by an in-
depth study of one of the three Synoptic Gospels- Matthew, Mark or Luke. Prerequisite:
A grade of C (73%) or better in BI 213.

BI 318 ............................. BOOK OF ACTS (3)
An exegetical and expositional analysis emphasizing the literary nature of Acts as the
sequel to the Gospel of Luke, the birth and beginnings of the church, the biblical basis
for missions, the missionary journeys of the Apostle Paul, and the nature and form of the
Christian Church in its early development. Prerequisite: A grade of C (73%) or better in
BI 213.

BI 320 ............................. SELECTED EPISTLES OF PAUL (3)
140 

An exegetical and expositional study of select letters of Paul. The course will examine
one of the following groups of letters: Galatians and 1 & 2 Thessalonians; Corinthian
correspondence (1 & 2 Corinthians); Prison epistles (Ephesians, Philippians,
Colossians, and Philemon); or Pastoral epistles (1 & 2 Timothy, Titus). Prerequisite: A
grade of C (73%) or better in BI 213.

BI 322 ............................. ISAIAH (3)
The nature and function of Old Testament prophetism, the historical setting of the book,
special introductory problems, and survey of the entire book. The detailed study of
selected passages in Isaiah. Prerequisite: A grade of C (73%) or better in BI 213.

BI 325 .............. SELECTED GENERAL EPISTLES (3)
An exegetical and expositional study of select general epistles of the New Testament.
The course will examine one or more of the following general epistles: Hebrews, James,
1 & 2 Peter, 1, 2, 3 John, Jude. Prerequisite: A grade of C (73%) or better in BI 213.

BI 330 ............................. OLD TESTAMENT POETRY AND WISDOM LITERATURE (3)
An introduction to the poetic and wisdom books of the Old Testament. The course will
examine the nature of these literary forms and will include an exegetical analysis of one
or more of the following books: Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and Song of
Solomon. Prerequisite: A grade of C (73%) or better in BI 213.

BI 392N ............................ SERVANT LEADERSHIP (3)
A study of spiritual leadership discovered from the biblical text. Students will develop a
personal plan to apply biblical principles and requirements for leadership. A self-
evaluation of the student’s current role and leadership style is completed.


BI 393N ............................ HISTORIC PERSPECTIVES OF THE GOSPELS (3)
An exploration of the synoptic gospels utilizing the appropriate procedures of biblical
interpretation. Emphasis is placed upon the process of translating the life, ministry, and
teachings of Jesus into relevant ministry settings.

BI 394N ............................ INTERPRETING THE OLD TESTAMENT (3)
Study of the literary forms of the Old Testament literature with a concentration on
applying the teaching in contemporary ministry contexts and exegetical analysis of
141 

various passages.

BI 409 ............................. DANIEL AND REVELATION (3)
An analytical study of two of the most important prophetic books of Scripture. The
student will be guided in their study of the essential teachings of these books to develop
a sufficient base for further study in eschatology. Prerequisite: A grade of C (73%) or
better in BI 213.

BI 410 ............................. STUDIES IN GENESIS (3)
An in-depth exegetical and expositional study of the book of Genesis. Emphasis on the
major doctrine of creation as well as a brief study of events, characters, and doctrines of
the book. Prerequisite: A grade of C (73%) or better in BI 213.

BI 440N .......................... INTERPRETING ROMANS (3)
A historical and exegetical study of Romans with exposition and application of the
book’s leading themes and a model for the interpretation and study of other Pauline
epistles.

BI 482 ............................. DIRECTED RESEARCH (1-3)
Directed Research on a topic not covered in organized classes. May be repeated, but
the total number of credit hours in directed research may not exceed ten percent (10%)
of the total number of credit hours required for graduation. Requires permission of
Department Chair, and supervising professor, fee.

BIOLOGY COURSES

BIO 101 ............................ INTRODUCTION TO THE LIFE SCIENCES (3)
Introductory, multidisciplinary studies presenting the basic unifying principles of the life
sciences; including chemical principles, cell biology, plant and animal biology, genetics
and molecular biology, biological diversity, a critical analysis of evolutionary theory, and
ecology.

BIO 102 ............................ BIOLOGY LABORATORY (1)
General laboratory in biology with emphasis on group-based problem solving/discovery
experiences based on the method of science.

142 

BIO 201 ............................ HUMAN NUTRITION (3)
Fundamentals of nutrition with emphasis on diet management, weight control, disease,
food contaminants, and world hunger. Practical and computer-assisted application of
principles will also be stressed.

BIO 204/205 ............................ BIOLOGICAL SCIENCE I & II (4, 4)
Entry course for Biological Science Majors. Biological Science I emphasize the
principles of molecular and cellular biology, bioenergetics, molecular and population
genetics, and biological origins, including a critical evaluation of evolution. Biological
Science II emphasizes the principles of systematics (biological diversity), plant
physiology, animal physiology, and ecology. Laboratory includes both demonstration and
experimental approaches. (Course Fee)

BIO 211/212 .............. ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY I & II (4, 4)
A two-semester sequence incorporating an in-depth study of the structure and function
of cells, tissues, organs, and organ systems in humans with a special concentration on
biomedical applications. All body systems are included. Includes a laboratory component
focusing on dissection procedures and histology. (Course Fee)

BIO 214N .............. ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE (3)
A study of the principles of interdependence among organisms and their environment,
abiotic factors, and community relationships, within the context of the cultural mandate
and man’s stewardship under God.


BIO 230 .............. DINOSAURS: THEIR BIOLOGY, HISTORY, AND EXTINCTION (3)
This course will focus on the biology, systematics, origins, fossil record, extinction, and
behavior of dinosaurs.

BIO 300 ............................ BIOLOGICAL HEALTH EDUCATION (3)
A course promoting wellness through nutrition, fitness, STD awareness, and avoidance
of substance abuse. This course is designed to be a prerequisite for the California
Teaching Credential. Minimum sophomore standing. It May not be taken as a GE Life
Science requirement.

BIO 309 ............................ PRINCIPLES OF GENETICS (4)
143 

An introduction to molecular, neo-Mendelian, and population genetics: emphasizing
problem-solving, meiotic processes, and DNA. Includes discussion of the limits of
hereditary variability and the nature and origin of species. Laboratory involves projects
designed to develop science process skills, including the formulation and testing of
hypotheses, discriminating observation, and the proper use and evaluation of statistical
analyses. (Course Fee) Prerequisite: BIO 204 or consent of instructor.

BIO 321 ............................ MICROBIOLOGY (4)
A study of the major groups of microorganisms, stressing biomedical applications. The
course develops an understanding of a wide variety of bacteriological and microscopic
techniques. Includes basic microbiological techniques in selecting and preparing
different media, and the culturing, manipulations, and identification of selected
organisms. (Course Fee) Prerequisite: BIO 205 or consent of instructor.

BIO 381/382 ............................ DIRECTED RESEARCH (1-4)
Directed research on a topic not covered in organized classes. May be repeated, but
the total number of credit hours in directed research may not exceed ten percent (10%)
of the total number of credit hours required for graduation. Possible topic options include
plant morphology or taxonomy, paleontology, histology, and Grand Canyon Field Study.
Requires permission of the Department Chair and supervising professor. (Course Fee)

BIO 402 ............................ BIOCHEMISTRY (4)
Designed to integrate the major’s work in biology and chemistry, the course is an
analysis of the structure and metabolic interaction of biological compounds in the cell
milieu, emphasizing membrane phenomena, enzyme-mediated energy flow, and the
molecular biology of DNA. Includes laboratory study of the biochemical properties of
living systems. (Course fee) Prerequisite: BIO 204 CH 308 or consent of instructor.

BIO 403 ............................ CELL AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY (4)
Advanced study integrating molecular biology, cell biology, and cell chemistry into a
unified course. Particular concentration is placed on comprehension of cell function
control and an analysis of the most recent work in gene science and its applications.
(Course Fee).Laboratory included. Prerequisite: BIO 204 or consent of instructor.

BIO 420 ............................ SPECIAL TOPICS IN BIOLOGICAL SCIENCE (3)
The investigation, study, and seminar discussion of selected topics and/or
contemporary issues in biological science not covered in regular classes. Topics are
144 

announced in the schedule of classes and will be arranged as interest deems. May be
repeated, but not more than 12 credit hours may be applied to graduation requirements.
Junior standing and permission from the instructor are required.

BIO 481/482 ............................ DIRECTED RESEARCH (1-4)
Directed research on a topic not covered in organized classes. May be repeated, but
the total number of credit hours in directed research may not exceed ten percent (10%)
of the total number of credit hours required for graduation. Possible topic options include
plant morphology or taxonomy, paleontology, histology, and Grand Canyon Field Study.
Requires permission of Department Chair, and supervising professor. Fee required.

BIO 490 A & B ......................... BIOLOGY SEMINAR (2, 1)
The culminating experience for the biological science major student. Comprises a
thorough current literature review in an area related to the student’s academic
concentration, development of a research topic, preparation of a scholarly research
paper, and an oral presentation before peers and faculty. (Course Fee) Prerequisite:
Senior status required-biological science major student. (CAPSTONE) Prerequisite: BIO
490A to enter BIO 490B.

BIO 499 ............................ BIOLOGY INTERNSHIP (1-6)
A directed work experience in an area related to biological science; including a medical
clinic, biotech industry, or other biology or medical-related area.
Prerequisite: Senior standing and consent of Department Chair. May be repeated, but
total credit hours applied toward major limited to six. (CAPSTONE)

BUSINESS MANAGEMENT COURSES

BMGT 315N ................. PRINCIPLES OF MANAGEMENT AND SUPERVISION (3)
A study of the components of management: planning, organizing, staffing, leading, and
controlling as applied in both for-profit and nonprofit organizations. An introduction to
various management planning models with application to business cases will be
included.

BMGT 395N ................. MARKETING FOUNDATION (3)
A study of marketing concepts and practice, highlighting the role of marketing in society
and within the firm. Organizational responses to diverse market needs as a function of
the diversity of consumers, planning, and executing a balanced marketing mix will be
145 

investigated. Emphasis is on the development of the Christian businessperson’s
philosophy of marketing.

BMGT 435N ............................ LEADERSHIP AND ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE (3)
A study of the concepts of leadership in the context of organizational change. The
concepts that provide a foundation for the understanding of leadership and its
relationship to the management of organizational change, with special emphasis on
managing the human side of quality improvement will be emphasized.

BMGT 460N ............................ HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT (3)
Analysis and discussion of case problems concerning typical leadership and personnel
situations that impact the supervisor/manager. Emphasis directed toward the
development of attitude, philosophy, analytical ability, and problem-solving skills within
the working environment.

BMGT 475N ............................ FINANCIAL ANALYSIS IN ORGANIZATIONS (3)
A study of financial institutions, instruments, and policies; emphasis on financial aspects
of business, taxes, working capital management, rates of return, leverage, and the
international financial environment.

BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION COURSES

BU 101 ............................ INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS (3)
An introduction to contemporary business organization through a Christian perspective.
Examination includes, but is not limited to, the changing business environment; forms of
business ownership; management; and finance.


BU 105 ............................ MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS (3)
Broad exposure to the theory and practice of managing business information using
current computer technology. Emphasis will be placed on innovative technical and
managerial issues involved in the design and use of information systems in operations,
management, and strategic planning.

BU 201 ............................ FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING (3)
A survey of the principles and purposes of accounting, the accounting cycle, the primary
146 

financial statements, manufacturing, and cost accounting. Prerequisite: MA 118

BU 202 ............................ MANAGERIAL ACCOUNTING (3)
The use of accounting concepts in management decision-making, ratio analysis,
present and future value concepts, planning, and policy-making based on accounting
statements and reports. Prerequisite: A grade of C (73%) or better in BU 201

BU 205 ............................ BUSINESS LAW (3)
Introduction to law and the judicial system followed by a study of the law of contracts,
warranties and product liability, consumer protection, real property, landlord and tenant,
agency and employment, partnerships, and corporations. Prerequisite: BU 101.
Prerequisite waived for non-business majors.

BU 301 ............................ PRINCIPLES OF MANAGEMENT (3)
Introduction to management practice and decision-making; organizational structures;
the role of managers in planning and organizing, leadership and communication, and
controlling business; emphasis on the development of the Christian business person’s
philosophy of management. Prerequisite: BU 201

BU 303 ............................ GLOBAL BUSINESS (3)
An examination of the operational environment of international business with an
emphasis on trade, marketing, finance, and investment, including an overview of the
dynamics of the international monetary system, foreign exchange market, and the
balance of payments. The impact of regional culture and politics on multinational
corporations will also be assessed. Prerequisite: BU 301, EC 201.

BU 306 ............................ SOCIAL MEDIA MARKETING (3)
This course offers an overview of how marketing has changed as a result of the rise of
social media. It will equip students with the relevant knowledge, perspectives, and
practical skills required to develop marketing strategies that leverage the opportunities
inherent in social media and consumer-to-consumer social interactions for achieving
business and marketing goals. This course emphasizes understanding consumers’
social interactions, the various social media channels available to marketers, how to
build social marketing strategies, and how to track their effectiveness.

147 

BU 310 ............................ CORPORATE FINANCE (3)
An overview of financial institutions, instruments, and policies; emphasis on financial
aspects of business, taxes, working capital management, rates of return, leverage, and
the international financial environment. Prerequisites: BU 202. Prerequisite waived for
non-business majors.


BU 322 ................. QUANTITATIVE METHODS FOR BUSINESS ANALYTICS (3)
Introduction to operations research, applications of probability and statistics to
management decisions, forecasting, decision theory, linear programming, and network
analysis. Prerequisites: BU 105, MA 210.

BU 324 ............................ PRINCIPLES OF MARKETING (3)
This course provides an introduction to marketing concepts and practice, with a focus on
the role of marketing in society and within the firm, responding to diverse market needs
as a function of the diversity of consumers, and determining, planning, and executing a
balanced marketing mix consisting of product, distribution, promotion and pricing
considerations. Emphasis is on the development of the Christian business person’s
philosophy of marketing. Prerequisite: EC 201.

BU 328 ............................ MARKETING RESEARCH (3)
This course will examine the concepts and techniques used in marketing research as a
problem-solving aid in marketing. Problem definition, research design, types of
information and measurement scales, and utilization of secondary data with an
emphasis on electronic access are discussed. Basic methods of primary data collection
including structured and unstructured interviews focus groups, and surveys are covered.
Required sample size, questionnaire design, data analyses, and interpretation are
emphasized. Prerequisites: BU 105, BU 324, MA 210.

BU 336 ............................ MARKETING COMMUNICATION (3)
The nature and dynamics of the processes, methods, and media used in promoting
products, services, and company or institutional images. Practical applications of
copywriting, advertising layout and presentation; principles of promotion and public
relations. Prerequisite: BU 324.

BU 352 ............................. PRINCIPLES & PRACTICES OF REAL ESTATE (3)
Overview of the basics of Real Estate background and terminology required for the
148 

California state license exam. Understanding the economics of the real estate market,
ownership and transfer of property, contracts, lessor and lessee relationships, escrow
and title insurance, real estate finance, appraisal methodologies, agency, government
control, taxes, management, and development. This course has additional course fees if
students decide to pursue licensing.

BU 353 ............................. PRINCIPLES & PRACTICES OF LENDING (3)
General Mortgage Knowledge including mortgage programs, mortgage loan products,
terms used in the mortgage market. The course covers Federal Mortgage-Related
Laws, including RESPA, ECOA, TILA, The SAFE Act. Ethics as it pertains to federal
mortgage laws, appraisal practices, fraud, and ethical behavior. Mortgage Loan
Origination Activities covering application and requirements, qualification (processing
and underwriting), appraisals, title reports, specific program guidelines, closing, financial
calculations. This course meets the federal mortgage training requirements found in the
SAFE Mortgage Licensing Act of 2008 and helps to prepare students for the National
Mortgage Loan Originator Test. This course has additional course fees if students
decide to pursue licensing.

BU 354…… FUNDAMENTALS OF VALUATION & INVESTMENT RISK
MANAGEMENT (3)
Introduction to practical tools and methods to value a broad range of assets presented in
the framework of accepted financial theory. Understanding of market risk and credit risk
toward practical relevance using real-word case studies.
BU 355…… BUSINESS COMMUNICATION & PRACTICE (3)
A survey of principles and practices of effective business communication. The course
focuses on planning, creating, and transmitting business information within a variety of
environments by oral and professional written correspondence.

BU 370 ............................ BUSINESS STUDIES ABROAD (3)
This course is based on a trip to a specific region of the world. The students will analyze
the relationships between political systems and economic development in that region.
Students will also evaluate the impact of U.S. import/export policy as well as review
recent regional history and its impact on the region’s long-term economic outlook. As
part of this course, each student will develop a business plan for a product to be
imported from or exported to a country in the region. Prerequisites: BU 101 and EC 201.
EC 201 prerequisite will be waived for non-business majors. (Additional course fees
apply. TBA)

149 


BU 421 ............................ SEMINAR IN ENTREPRENEURSHIP (3)
Stages for starting a business enterprise, types of organization, legal requirements,
financing, market research, and administrative support systems. Ideal for students
planning to start their own business or wanting to strengthen entrepreneurship skills
required in a large business or corporation. Prerequisite: BU 101, BU 324. (Note:
typically offered every other year.)

BU 430 ............................ BUSINESS SENIOR SEMINAR (4)
This course illustrates the development, execution, and review of business strategy for
both small and large organizations. Emphasis is placed on the need for, awareness of,
and accommodation to changes in the organization’s remote, industry, and internal
environments. Analytic tools and application of generic strategies will be applied to a
series of case studies. This course will include an online simulation where student teams
compete against each other in operating a global business organization. At the end of
this simulation, each team will present their results in a Saturday session, to a board
comprised of local business leaders. Prerequisites: Senior standing: BU 301, BU 310,
and BU 324 or permission from the instructor. (CAPSTONE GP, FP) Fee.


BU 440 ............................ STRATEGIC MARKETING MANAGEMENT (3)
A strategic approach to the management of the marketing programs of an organization.
Includes detailed studies of strategic choices of target markets, positioning, finding, and
capitalizing on product opportunities, strategic marketing communication programs,
application of the product life cycle and product adoption curves to strategic planning,
and other advanced marketing topics. Makes extensive use of case studies.
Senior standing; BU 324, BU 325, and BU 336.

BU 481 ............................ DIRECTED RESEARCH (1-3)
Students are encouraged to pursue guided research in their own areas of business
interest. The findings will be presented in a thoroughly documented formal business
report. Requires permission of the Department Chair, and supervising professor, fee.

BU 499 ............................ BUSINESS INTERNSHIP (1-6)
A directed work experience in an area related to the student’s major concentration and
career interest. Each internship will be individually arranged and supervised by both the
Department of Business and a professional manager in the workplace (U.S.A. or
abroad). The internship will culminate in a formal written business report and an oral
presentation conducted before a faculty committee of the Department of Business.
150 

Requires Junior standing, permission of the Department Chair, and a supervising
instructor.

CHEMISTRY COURSES

CH 201/202 ............................ GENERAL INORGANIC CHEMISTRY I, II (4, 4)
Basic principles of atomic and molecular structure, states of matter, chemical bonding,
classification and properties of elements and compounds, molecular shapes and model
building; analysis of chemical equations, including principles of kinetics, equilibrium, and
thermodynamics; emphasis on problem-solving involving acid-base and oxidation-
reduction reactions, ionization, and solution equilibria. Includes an inorganic chemistry
laboratory. (Course Fee) Prerequisites: Must have taken or currently be enrolled in MA
118 or higher. A grade of C (73%) or better in CH 201 is required to be enrolled in CH
202. Exemptions to this policy must be approved by the instructor.

CH 308/309 ............................ ORGANIC CHEMISTRY I, II (4, 4)
The nomenclature, structure, and properties of carbon compounds with emphasis on
biological applications. Includes a laboratory in organic chemistry. (Course Fee)
Prerequisite: CH 202, a grade of C (73%) or better in CH 308 is required to be enrolled
in CH 309. Exemptions to this policy must be approved by the instructor.

CHRISTIAN MINISTRY COURSES

CM 305N ............................ SPIRITUAL FORMATION (3)
This course will focus on the understanding and knowledge of who we were created to
be in Christ and what that should look like in college and the workplace. Students will
discover the gifts and talents God has given to them and how those gifts and talents can
be used to further the Kingdom of God through their life while pursuing their career
objectives.


CM 320N ............................ EVANGELISM & THE 21ST CENTURY CHURCH (3)
Development of a biblical theology of evangelism, including the place of God and His
Word in evangelism, biblical considerations of components of personal evangelism, and
the importance of proper follow-up through a careful study of the Scriptures. The course
will suggest models of the intercultural person to multicultural and intergenerational
relationships.

151 

CM 330N ............................ COMMUNICATION FOR MINISTRY (3)
Develops the student’s philosophy of preaching. Includes study of the principles and
practices of verbal communication as well as types of sermons, creation of sermon
outlines, analysis of sermons by great preachers of all time, and sermonic research.

CM 340N ............................ WORSHIP (3)
Study of worship focusing on the contrasts of true, false, and vain worship as seen in a
survey of biblical examples from the Old and New Testaments. Emphasis is placed on
the development of creativity and balance in the corporate worship experience.

CM 410N ............................ NURTURE AND DISCIPLESHIP (3)
Study of the nature of spiritual formation and discipleship. Development of models for
ministries to a selected group (families, youth, children, singles, etc.) based on the
needs of that particular group and principles of effective guidance for that group.

CM 440N ............................ COUNSELING FOR CHURCH LEADERS (3)
To provide students a basis for counseling by ministers and other church leaders.
Various counseling styles and methods will be considered and related to typical
situations faced in church ministry. Counseling ethics, referral, and the integration of
counseling with other forms of pastoral staff care will be emphasized (e.g. premarital,
personal/family crisis, guidance, grief, and death and dying).

COMMUNICATION COURSES

COM 100 ............................ INTRODUCTION TO COMMUNICATION (3)
This course focuses on developing business and professional communication skills and
techniques within the workplace. Students participate in various business exercises,
conduct business meetings and interviews, solve problems through group discussions,
and deliver a technical presentation adapted to a specific field of interest or workplace.

COM 102/N ......................... PUBLIC SPEAKING (3)
This course emphasizes the principles of speech organization, methods of delivery,
ethical use of argumentation, and effective presentation skills. Students study and
present introduction, demonstration, informative, special occasion, and persuasive
speeches.

152 

COM 204 ................. FUNDAMENTALS OF STORYTELLING AND SCRIPTWRITING (3)
The principles of effective storytelling are introduced and practiced. Students are
evaluated as they tell stories that relate to various age groups and speech situations.
Students will learn the process involved in writing a script. Students will learn the basic
guidelines for writing scripts, including script format and layout, as well as production
and publication.

COM 205 ............................ PERFORMANCE AND THE ART OF DIRECTING (3)
This foundational course studies the basic theory and techniques of realistic
performance and acting styles. Students learn and apply script and character analysis,
as well as rehearsal techniques and improvisational exercises. Students will learn
directorial concepts, blocking, composition, and movement. A study of various
directorial styles will enable students to examine and develop their own style of
directing.

COM 209 ............................ ARGUMENTATION AND DEBATE (3)
This course provides a thorough overview of research, construction of arguments,
principles of logic, rules of formal debate, and a study of the analytical skills necessary
for a successful debate. Students participate in classroom debates and make formal
public presentations. Prerequisite: COM 102.



COM 210 ............................ INTERPERSONAL COMMUNICATION (3)
An introduction to the theory and application of effective communication principles in
both intimate and non-intimate relational contexts, including interpersonal,
organizational, marital, parental, and ministerial. Theoretical and empirical evidence on
communication strategies and behaviors in relationship initiation, development, and
termination are explored. Students investigate relationship behaviors in comparison to
relational goals, with a focus on strategic and healthy formats of communication and
conflict resolution.

COM 220 ................. SURVEY OF COMMUNICATION THEORY & RESEARCH (3)
An introduction to communication theory, concepts, principles, and practices. Overview
of macro and micro views of communication. Students develop skills in APA formatting
and research. Emphasis on rhetorical, mediated, organizational, relational, and health
communication.

COM 300 ............................ COMMUNICATION ETHICS (3)
153 

An overview of the classical and modern ethical concepts in communication.
Consideration of relational, political, organizational, medical, global, and mass forms of
communication.


COM 302/N ......................... MEDIA LITERACY (3)
An analysis of the impact of the social context on the individual, examining the
relationship of the individual to the family, the group, and the larger social sphere
through the lens of media socialization. Theoretical and practical underpinnings are
examined as students analyze social behavior, including social cognition, attitude
formation, media socialization, conformity, prejudice, and group processes.

COM 322/N .......................... DIVERSITY AND CULTURAL COMMUNICATION (3)
This course considers issues of human diversity broadly defined to include race,
ethnicity, culture, nationality, religion, gender, and ability. Through an interdisciplinary
social science lens, students will explore the contours of difference and the dynamics of
diversity, privilege, and oppression in domestic and global contexts. Building on
standard models of multicultural competence that emphasize knowledge, awareness,
and skills, students will be introduced to cultural humility, culturally specific approaches
to practice, and frameworks for equity and empowerment. Biblical principles will be
applied to the concepts of diversity and culture.

COM 340/N ................. ORGANIZATIONAL COMMUNICATION & LEADERSHIP (3)
A study of leadership and applied approaches to organizational communication with an
emphasis on developing an understanding of leadership roles and communication
strategies that maximize the speaker’s effectiveness. Coursework includes formative
discussion, critical thinking in a learning community, and applied assignments designed
to connect students to professional organizations. Prerequisites: COM 220

COM 401 ............................. NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION AND PERSUASION (3)
This course will explore different aspects of nonverbal communication. A theoretical
perspective will be understood, and the areas of visual and auditory codes (kinesics,
physical appearance, and vocalics); contact codes (haptics and proxemics); place and
time codes (environment, artifacts, and chronemics); relationship between verbal
and NV communication; emotion and NV behavior; NV coding and decoding of
deception will be addressed. A major portion of the course will apply nonverbal
communication to students’ lives. This course will also provide an understanding of
persuasion theory and practice from both the perspective of the consumer and producer
154 

of persuasion. This course provides a comprehensive view of persuasion by analyzing
how persuasion operates at both an interpersonal and social level.

COM 410 ............................ CONFLICT AND CRISIS COMMUNICATION (3)
An introduction to the techniques and practical applications of effective organizational
communication to address crisis, examining both contemporary theories and practices
in preventing, mitigating, and managing crises. Several conceptual frameworks for
analyzing the character, impact, and consequences of crises will be presented and
applied to case studies. Course participants will use a model best practice crisis and
continuity plan as a template, and student teams, representing top- level strategy
functions, will be involved in an ongoing simulation/lab experience throughout the
course in order to produce a Crisis Communication Plan. Successful students are able
to transfer to the workplace the knowledge and skills developed in this course.

COM 495 ............................ COMMUNICATION RESEARCH CAPSTONE (3)
This course will require students to produce a comprehensive, synthesizing project
applying the knowledge and skills learned in the courses that comprise the
communication degree program. Projects must have theoretical/academic and applied
components. The Capstone Project is the final course in the program and is preferably
taken in a student’s final semester. The Capstone Project should be a creative
endeavor that produces and reports new knowledge or professional methods. At a
minimum, it should demonstrate mastery of new professional skills. Prerequisites: COM
220, SS 210, and Senior standing.

COM 499 ............................ COMMUNICATION INTERNSHIP (1-3)
To assist students with the transition from college to the world of work, the
Communication department requires students to serve in an internship of their choosing
prior to graduation. The COM internship is designed to allow students to experience the
professional world while they are still involved in their academic training, providing an
understanding of the relationship of their academic preparation to their career
aspirations and helping them learn to cope with the demands of the professional world.
The internship culminates in a series of career-focused preparations, including resume
writing, interview preparation, and a mock-job interview. External internship advisors
complete an evaluation form on the student intern, which serves as a component of the
student’s final grade. The internship contract must be completed prior to beginning
service hours. Prerequisites: COM 102, COM 220, and Senior Standing.

COMPUTER INFORMATION SYSTEMS COURSES
155 

CIS 141N ............................. INTRODUCTION TO COMPUTERS (3)
Provides students with up-to-date concepts of PC applications. The accompanying
laboratory will teach the student Windows, Microsoft Word, Excel, PowerPoint, and
Access. Students will gain conceptual knowledge and the practical experience to use
word processing, spreadsheets, presentation graphics, and databases to increase their
effectiveness and productivity as end-users.

CIS 300 ............................ SURVEY OF COMPUTER SYSTEMS AND SECURITY (3)
Survey of computer technology, concepts, terminology, and the role of computers in
business and society. Emphasis will be on understanding how computer security plays
an important role in overall systems management.

CIS 301 ................. FUNDAMENTALS OF GRAPHIC DESIGN AND APPLICATIONS (3)
A hands-on course in design concepts and applications, along with principles and
theories and how they impact layout, type, and color. This course serves as a useful
foundation for working across a range of fields and a variety of job functions, including
marketing, IT, development, management, and design roles.

CIS 400 ................. PRINCIPLES OF DATA STRUCTURES AND DATA MINING (3)
This course provides an introduction to Data Mining and will examine data techniques for
the discovery, reading, and conception of patterns in large collections of data such as
classification, rule-based learning, decision trees, association rules, and data
visualization.


CIS 401 ............................ DATABASE DESIGN AND BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE (3)
This course is a foundation of database management systems and strategies. Students
examine various types of database techniques with design and implementation toward
the use of Business Intelligence applications, and practices for the collection, integration,
analysis, and presentation of business information.

ECONOMICS COURSES

EC 201 ............................ MACROECONOMICS (3)
The theoretical and institutional framework of modern national economics. Theories
underlying government policies for business cycles; levels of total economic activity;
unemployment, inflation, and the balance of payments. Also included is an analysis of
policies for economic growth and development, the money supply, and the federal
156 

budget. An overview of the international economy, including comparative economic
systems.

EC 202 ............................ MICROECONOMICS (3)
The theory of consumer behavior, including supply and demand; theory of the firm, the
factors of production and the role of individual markets; government regulation of
business, and an overview of American and international financial institutions.

EDUCATION COURSES

ED 200 ............................ LIBERAL STUDIES INTEGRATION SEMINAR (3)
The Liberal Studies Integrative Seminar links the content of college coursework in the
Liberal Studies major to the field of teaching. This course includes an overview of the
major along with learning about program outcomes, information and timelines on the
teacher tests, preparation for the writing section of the CSET, and the introduction of the
APA style for research and writing in the field. This course also requires 15 hours of
fieldwork with EL students at the IMC. The CBEST or the writing portion of CSET must
be attempted during this course in order to receive a grade for the course.

ED 300 ............................ INTRODUCTION TO EDUCATION (3)
This course is intended to serve as a general introduction to the field of education on
both the elementary and secondary levels. It covers principles, materials, terms, the role
of the teacher, aims, objectives, curriculum, trends, and helps students develop a
personal philosophy of education and theory of learning. Emphasis is given to the
California frameworks/standards, Common Core Standards, and adapting instruction to
the needs of special populations. (Prerequisite for Liberal Studies Majors: ED 200).

ED 303 ............................ EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY (3)
This course applies principles of psychology to the teaching/learning process. It
includes an overview of human growth and development in physical, mental, social,
emotional, and moral areas; learning theory; motivation; classroom management; and
measurement and evaluation. This course requires 10 clock- hours per semester of
laboratory fieldwork outside of class in an educational setting. Prerequisites: PSY
201.*Psychology Elective.

ED 312 ............................ SCIENCE METHODS FOR EDUCATORS (2)
157 

This course focuses on planning content-specific instruction and delivery methods
consistent with California state-adopted K-8 science standards and framework. Science
topics covered are the major concepts, principles, and investigations in the science
disciplines including effective strategies for laboratory and field activities. Critical
thinking skills, basic analysis skills, hypothesis testing, and study skills are incorporated
into the course. The process of interrelation of ideas and information within and across
science, mathematics, and other subject areas utilizing the academic content standards
is emphasized. This course requires 3 clock hours of observation and participation
specific to science in a culturally diverse and inclusive school setting. Candidates are
responsible for transportation to and from the school site. Prerequisite: Completed at
least two Physical, Earth, or Biological Science courses.

ED 313 ............................ INTEGRATION OF VISUAL & PERFORMING ARTS (1)
During interrelated activities that connect with the K-6 core curriculum, Multiple Subject
candidates learn specific methods and strategies of teaching artistic perception, creative
expression, and understanding cultural and historical origins of the arts with direct
application to the elementary classroom. Emphasis is given to examining and applying
the visual and performing arts frameworks and standards for K-6 grades. Content
knowledge of this area is demonstrated through the passage of the CSET.


ED 315 ............................ INSTRUCTIONAL AND EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY (3)
This course provides training in the most up-to-date advances in the use of technology
at both the school district and classroom levels. Pedagogical training will be given in the
use of LMS and Edmoto systems, learn both app-based and cloud-based systems,
development in the use of presentation tools (PowerPoint, Prezzi), implement
classroom resources that promote blended learning, learn to read and apply information
from data reports, use social media to curate information, and integrate principles of the
flipped classroom and problem-based learning into classroom planning.


ED 400 ............................ HISTORY AND PHILOSOPHY OF EDUCATION (3)
This course is a requirement for all prospective teachers and the capstone course for
Liberal Studies Majors. It emphasizes philosophy as it has impacted education during
various periods of history. It gives special attention to the development of a personal
philosophy of education for the contemporary Christian educator based on a Christian
worldview. This course is required for the Association of Christian Schools International
Teaching Certificate. (ACSI) Ten hours of laboratory fieldwork in an educational setting
is also required. CSET testing is embedded. Prerequisite: ED 300 or permission from
the department chair.
158 


ED 501A ....................... TEACHING OF READING – LEARNING TO READ (3)
This course is a study of the basic principles of teaching reading and language arts in
primary grades K-3. Approaches, proven techniques, and the use of materials are
taught and observed in classroom situations. Emphasis is given to working with the
Common Core State Standards, administering assessments, and planning for
individualized instruction. This course requires at least 10 clock-hours per semester of
laboratory fieldwork outside of class in an elementary classroom setting. Preparation for
RICA testing within the domains of Assessment, Phonemic Awareness, Phonics,
Spelling, and Fluency is embedded. Prerequisite: ED 300, ED 505, EN 316, SS 205, and
BIO 300 or SCI 310.

ED 501B ....................... TEACHING OF READING – READING TO LEARN (3)
This course is a study of the principles of teaching reading and language arts grades 3
through 8. Approaches, proven techniques, and the use of materials are taught and
observed in classroom situations. Emphasis is given to working with the Common Core
State Standards in planning lessons that focus on building comprehension and
language skills. This course requires at least 10 clock-hours per semester of laboratory
fieldwork outside of class in an elementary classroom setting. Preparation for RICA
testing in the domains of comprehension and language is embedded. Prerequisite: ED
300, ED 501A, ED 505, EN 616, SS 205, and BIO 300 or SCI 310.

ED 503 ....................... EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY (3)
This course applies principles of psychology to the teaching/learning process. It
includes an overview of human growth and development in physical, mental, social,
emotional, and moral areas; learning theory; motivation; classroom management; the
needs of special populations; and measurement and evaluation. This course requires
10 clock hours per semester of laboratory fieldwork outside of class in an educational
setting. Prerequisites: ED 300, EN 316, SS 205, and BIO 300 or SCI 310. *for CA
Teaching Credential candidates only post-graduate.

ED 504 ....................... ADOLESCENT LITERACY (3)
This course is a study of the basic principles of teaching reading and how they relate to
all subject-matter areas. Approaches, proven techniques, and use of materials will be
taught and observed in classroom situations. Emphasis is given to working with the
Reading/ Language Arts California 6-12 frameworks and standards and adapting
instruction to the needs of special populations. This course requires at least 10 clock-
hours per semester of laboratory fieldwork outside of class in a classroom setting.
159 

Prerequisites: ED 300, EN 316, SS 205, and BIO 300 or SCI 310.



ED 505 ................. CURRICULUM AND INSTRUCTION IN ELEMENTARY EDUCATION (3)
This is a fundamental course in the principles and techniques involved in teaching
elementary school students. It covers how to select and/or develop curriculum; and how
to assess learning. Attention is given to developing long- and short-range curriculum
plans and creating an orderly and motivating learning environment.
Emphasis is given to working with the History/Social Science California K-6 frameworks
and standards and adapting instruction to the needs of special populations. This course
requires at least 10 clock-hours of laboratory fieldwork in an elementary classroom
setting. Prerequisite: ED 300, EN 316, SS 205, and BIO 300 or Sci 310.


ED 506 ................. CURRICULUM AND INSTRUCTION IN SECONDARY EDUCATION (3)
This is a fundamental course in the principles and techniques of teaching secondary
school students. It covers how to select and/or develop curriculum, how to present
instruction, and how to assess learning. Attention is given to developing long- and short-
range curriculum plans and to creating an orderly and motivating learning environment
specialized in the subject fields of the students in the course. Emphasis is given to
working with the subject-specific content California 6-12 frameworks and standards and
adapting instruction to the needs of special populations. This course requires at least 10
clock-hours of laboratory fieldwork in classrooms in the subject areas which the teacher
candidates plan to teach. Prerequisites: ED 300, EN 316, SS 205, and BIO 300 or SCI
310.

ED 508 ....................... SECONDARY TEACHING METHODS (3)
This course equips future secondary teachers to be prepared to develop and teach an
effective program in their subject area for a diverse school population, along with
methods of communicating expectations to students and parents, use of appropriate
instructional methods and internet resources as learning tools, and motivating students
to examine pertinent contributions from research. Emphasis is given to working with the
subject-specific content California P-12 curriculum frameworks and standards and
adapting instruction to the needs of special populations. This course requires at least 10
clock-hours of laboratory fieldwork in classrooms in the subject areas which the teacher
candidates plan to teach. Taken concurrently with ED 503, 505. Prerequisite: ED 300,
EN 316, SS 205, and BIO 300 or SCI 310. (ED 508 can be repeated for credit in a
second subject area.)


160 

ED 516 ................. INCLUSION, COLLABORATION, & THE EXCEPTIONAL CHILD (1)
This course is designed to provide the teacher candidate with the knowledge skills and
abilities to meet the individual needs of students with disabilities within the general
education environment. An emphasis on the role of the general education teacher as a
valued member of the IEP team, data collection, providing accommodations, and
modifications to ensure the student can access the general education curriculum will be
provided. In addition, special attention is given to state and federal law pertaining to the
historical and legal perspectives of providing an appropriate education within a student’s
least restrictive environment. Prerequisites: ED504, ED505/506


ED 547 ....................... STUDENT TEACHING IN ELEMENTARY SCHOOL (12)
A student-teaching fee is assessed upon enrollment in this course. This course is
designed to permit students who have met all the requirements for the liberal studies
major and professional courses to teach in actual classroom situations.
Students teach under the direction of qualified teachers and with supervision from
Education Department personnel. Emphasis is given to working with the California K-6
frameworks and standards and adapting instruction to the needs of special populations.
Prerequisites: CBEST/CSET passed and Departmental clearance for student teaching.
(Course Fee)



ED 548 ....................... STUDENT TEACHING IN SECONDARY SCHOOL (12)
A student teaching fee is assessed upon enrollment in this course. This course is
designed to permit students who have met all requirements for the single-subject major
and professional courses to teach in actual classroom situations. Students teach under
the direction of qualified teachers and with supervision from Education Department
personnel. Emphasis is given to working with the California 6-12 frameworks and
standards and adapting instruction to the needs of special populations.
Prerequisites: CBEST/CSET passed and Departmental Clearance for student teaching.
(Course Fee)


ED 551 ....................... SEMINAR IN DIRECTED ELEMENTARY TEACHING (3)
This course is designed to permit students who are completing their student teaching
assignments to meet once a week to discuss problems, share ideas, and receive further
professional instruction. TPAs 2, 3, and 4 are assessed during this course.
Emphasis is given to working with the Health California K-6 frameworks and standards
and adapting instruction to the needs of special populations. Portfolio required.


161 

ED 552 ....................... SEMINAR IN DIRECTED SECONDARY TEACHING (3)
This course is designed to permit students who are completing their student teaching
assignments to meet once a week to discuss problems, share ideas, and receive further
professional instruction. TPAs 2, 3, and 4 are assessed during this course. Emphasis is
given to working with the Health California 6-12 frameworks and standards and adapting
instruction to the needs of special populations. Portfolio required.


ED 601 ................. ETHICAL DISPOSITIONS AND DECISION MAKING IN
CLASSROOM LEADERSHIP (3)
This is a fundamental course in the principles and techniques involved in ethics and
philosophy in teaching. This course integrates the three dimensions of the teaching
profession, a Christian perspective, and the impact of one’s ethics both personally and
professionally in educational relationships. A primary focus of this course will include an
ongoing reflection of how one’s Christian values impact the educational community.
Attention will be given to three essential aspects of classroom leadership, personal and
professional ethics, character education, and the identification of philosophical
assumptions that guide classroom leadership as well as scholarly research.
Prerequisites: CTC-approved credential.


ED 602 ................. COMMUNITY PARTNERSHIPS IN MULTICULTURAL EDUCATION (3)
Serving as an introduction to this course will be the overview of cultural concepts,
cultural diversity in California and the U.S., and the powerful influence of culture in the
classroom, both in instruction and relationships. Moving forward, this course will focus
on community dynamics and community building that includes collaboration with
parents, service providers, business leaders, and fellow educators. Additionally, students
will examine the impact that community demographics can have in promoting diversity,
multicultural education, and civic-minded leadership. Prerequisite: CTC-approved
credential.

ED 603 ....................... QUALITATIVE METHODS IN EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH (3)
This course introduces MAT candidates to research methods in educational research
through qualitative and action research methods. Candidates will continue to learn and
demonstrate what it means to be a scholar-practitioner and learn how to discern the
level of credibility found in education to discern myth from scientifically based research.
Candidates will explore characteristics of research, review different approaches,
examine research studies, and engage in the stages of research. Goals for this course
include: becoming a critical reflector of qualitative research, assisting candidates in
developing research skills, and preparing candidates for applying research methods to
162 

an action research project. It is intended that this course provides the foundation for
developing a project that reflects the candidate’s passion, professionalism, and affirms
their role as a scholar-practitioner. Prerequisites: CTC-approved credential, ED 601 &
ED 602.

ED 650A ....................... CAPSTONE PROJECT (3)
This course is designed for MAT candidates to present a cumulative understanding and
demonstration of skills as a scholar-practitioner. Using their research skills and personal
interest, candidates will design and conduct an action research project in an educational
setting. Research will be based in a community of learners to share evidence-based
practices, strategies, and findings. Participants will work independently and conference
with a faculty member and their colleagues to draft their research design, and fully
review their data gathering, analyses, and results. An oral presentation of the
candidate’s project will be presented and approved by an adjudication committee. This is
a 16-week course offered in two 8 week blocks as of Fall 2019. Prerequisites: ED 601,
602, and 603.

ED 650B ....................... CAPSTONE PROJECT (3)
This course is designed for MAT candidates to present a cumulative understanding and
demonstration of skills as a scholar-practitioner. Using their research skills and personal
interest, candidates will design and conduct an action research project in an educational
setting. Research will be based in a community of learners to share evidence-based
practices, strategies, and findings. Participants will work independently and conference
with a faculty member and their colleagues to draft their research design, and fully
review their data gathering, analyses, and results. An oral presentation of the
candidate’s project will be presented and approved by an adjudication committee. This is
a 16-week course offered in two 8 week blocks as of Fall 2019. Prerequisites: ED 601,
602, 603, and ED 650A.

ENGLISH COURSES

EN 090 ............................ BASIC ENGLISH (3)
An intensive study and review of the fundamentals of English grammar, usage, diction,
sentence structure, spelling, and paragraph development. Several short compositions will
also be written. (Developmental—not applied toward graduation requirements.)


EN 096…………………..ACADEMIC ENGLISH FOR INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS (3)
163 

A course for international students that focuses on developing reading, writing, listening,
and speaking in an American academic setting. Instruction will focus on academic
reading strategies and skills, writing from text, academic vocabulary building, beginning
research skill development, note-taking in an academic setting, and class participation
(presentation, small group discussion, online discussion boards). Students are required
to earn a grade of C or better before initiating coursework in EN 101.

EN 101/N ......................... COLLEGE COMPOSITION I (3)
Fundamentals of English grammar, rhetoric, and composition and their application in
effective written communication. This course focuses on the process of writing, from
pre-writing through early drafts to publication-ready final drafts. Emphasis is placed on
writing skills needed for academic success. The passing of this class with a ‘C’ (73%) or
better is required to advance to EN 102/N.

EN 102/N ......................... COLLEGE COMPOSITION II (3)
Research, evaluation, analysis, argumentation, and their utilization in academic writing
and beyond. Prerequisite: A passing grade of 'C' (73%) or better in EN 101.


EN 115N ............................. THE FUNDAMENTALS OF WRITING (3)
This course is designed as an elective for students who desire additional assistance in
developing their writing skills beyond the required English courses. The material would
provide a skills-based writing foundation including grammar, mechanics, and
punctuation as well as strategies for writing stronger academic papers.

EN 140/141 ............................. INTRODUCTORY WRITING WORKSHOP (1)
A course designed for students to develop the writing of their choice.


EN 202 ............................ CRITICAL APPROACHES TO LITERATURE (3)
An introduction to the discipline of literary studies. The course offers a fundamental
understanding of the dominant schools of literary criticism and provides a conceptual
foundation for the exploration of texts and their contexts in both class discussions and
written critiques. Through this course, successful students will possess the skills
necessary to utilize current literary scholarship and to produce their own literary criticism
in a well-informed manner. Prerequisite: EN 101, EN 102, or equivalent.


164 

EN 210N………………..HISTORY AND CRITICISM OF CHILDREN’S LITERATURE (3)
This course explores the history and critical reading component of literature written for
children from pre-K through adolescence. Discussion topics will analyze age-
appropriate levels, moral and biblical lessons, and artistic qualities. Special emphasis
will be placed on how children’s literature has changed throughout history, and how the
art form often mirrors society.

EN 220/N ......................... INTRODUCTION TO LITERATURE (3)
An introduction to the critical reading, analysis, and writing of and about fiction, drama,
and poetry. Emphasizes both the form and content of literary works.
Prerequisites: EN 101, EN 102.

EN 221 ............................ CHRISTIAN LITERATURE I (3)
A survey of significant contributions to the Christian literary tradition from patristic times
into the Modern Age. The survey is designed to explore how the development of the
Christian worldview is reflected by the Christian literary tradition and to consider to what
extent the Church continues to be enriched by it.
Prerequisites: EN 101, EN 102.

EN 222/N ......................... CHRISTIAN LITERATURE II (3)
A survey of significant contributions to the Christian literary tradition through the Modern
Age to the present. Considers to what extent literature continues to play a role in the life
of the believer as well as in the body of the Church. Prerequisites: EN 101, EN 102.

EN 223/N ......................... WORLD LITERATURE (3)
Selected significant literary works from sources beyond the British and American
traditions from ancient times to the present. Prerequisites: EN 101, EN 102.

EN 240/241 ............................. INTERMEDIATE WRITING WORKSHOP (1)
A course designed for students to develop the writing of their choice.

EN 311 ............................ AMERICAN LITERATURE I (3)
A study of significant texts of the American literary tradition from its origins through the
Romantic period in relation to the nation’s diversity as well as its social and cultural
development. Prerequisites: EN 101, EN 102. Fall semester, odd-numbered years.

165 

EN 312 ............................ AMERICAN LITERATURE II (3)
A study of significant texts, literary trends, and the growing diversity in American
literature from the Realist period to the present.
Prerequisites: EN 101, EN 102. Spring semester, even-numbered years.

EN 316 ............................ INTRODUCTION TO LINGUISTICS (3)
An introduction to the basic components of human language including phonology,
morphology, syntax, semantics, and pragmatics. The course also includes the
physiology of human speech, the phonetics of English, and predictable sound/symbol
(alphabet) relationships. A brief survey of features of other languages is also included
and students will be required to study one language in-depth and be able to speak some
basic phrases. Prerequisites: EN 101, EN 102.

EN 331 ............................. SHAKESPEARE (3)
A concentrated study of the work of a pivotal figure in the literature of the English
language. Includes studies of significant tragedies, comedies, and histories along with
their place in Shakespeare’s world as well as their lasting effects on the literary tradition.
Prerequisites: EN 101, 102.

EN 332 ............................ CREATIVE WRITING (3)
Composition of creative texts through discussions and workshops focusing on
formalistic conventions and innovations as well as on audience reception. Forms
addressed may include poetry, fiction, creative non-fiction, drama, and screenwriting.
Prerequisites: EN 101, EN 102.

EN 334 ............................ THE DRAMA (3)
An analytical, interpretive, and evaluative study of significant contributions to the
dramatic literary tradition. Prerequisites: EN 101, EN 102.

EN 336 ............................ THE NOVEL (3)
A study of the novel’s development as a literary form; emphasis on critical reading and
writing in response to significant contributions to the genre. Prerequisites: EN 101, EN
102.

EN 340/341 ............................. ADVANCED WRITING WORKSHOP (1)
A course designed for students to develop the writing of their choice.
166 


EN 350/351 ............................. BOOK WRITING I & II (3, 3)
This course will take students through the writing process from concept to completion of
a full-length book within one academic year (2 semesters). Students will work
methodically through the various stages of drafting a full-length book as they will explore
best writing practices, structuring content, crafting content, editing content, and
techniques to perfect the manuscript to publishing industry standards. Prerequisites:
English 102 or equivalent (for EN 350); English 350 (for EN 351).

EN 381/382 DIRECTED RESEARCH (3, 3)
Directed research on a topic not covered in organized classes. May be repeated, but
the total number of credit hours in directed research may not exceed ten percent (10%)
of the total number of credit hours required for graduation. Requires permission of
Department Chair, and supervising professor. Course Fee)

EN 403 ............................ LITERATURE FOR CHILDREN (3)
Through extensive reading of both prose and poetry suitable for children, the student
develops the ability to appreciate and select appropriate literature. Attention is also
given to the historical development of children’s literature and the broad spectrum of
literature available. Prerequisites: EN 101, 102, and Senior standing. Taking multiple
subject CSET subtest 1 is a requirement of this course. Teacher Credential Students
Only

EN 411 ............................ BRITISH LITERATURE I (3)
Exploring the development of the British artistic, linguistic, and national identity in literary
form from its origins into the seventeenth century. Prerequisites: EN 101, EN 102. Fall
semester, even-numbered years.

EN 412 ............................ BRITISH LITERATURE II (3)
Explores the literature of the changing social and cultural landscape of Britain from
Romanticism to the present. Prerequisites: EN 101, EN 102. Spring semester, odd-
numbered years.

EN 415 ............................ APPROACHES TO GRAMMAR (3)
A review of the conventions in grammar, punctuation, and mechanics in Standard
American English. Prerequisites: EN 101, 102
167 


EN 418 ............................ THE PROFESSIONAL WRITER (3)
An exploration of the opportunities and challenges faced by writers in the professional
arena. The student will gain an overview of the available options for writing
professionally and develop a strategy for pursuing a career goal aligning with his or her
own interests. Prerequisite: EN 102 or equivalent.

EN 421 ............................ SEMINAR IN LITERARY CRITICISM (3)
An intensive study of the major critical theories utilized in literary studies. Includes a
capstone project. It can only be taken in the spring semester before graduation.
(CAPSTONE)

EN 440/441 ............................. SENIOR PORTFOLIO WORKSHOP (1)
A course designed for students to develop the writing of their choice.

EN 450 ............................ PRACTICUM IN TEACHING ENGLISH AS A SECOND
LANGUAGE (1)
This is a directed practicum to complete the TESOL Certificate. Placement will be in an
ESL setting related to the candidate’s area of interest, i.e. adult education, college-level
ESL, or public school English Learner specialization. The practicum will be individually
arranged and supervised by the Program Coordinator or other qualified faculty.
Requirements for satisfactory completion of the course include 15 hours of laboratory
fieldwork of observation and/or tutoring in the assigned placement and will culminate
with a teaching presentation in the designated location. Prerequisites: EN 316, EN415,
ICS 305, SS 204.

EN 481/482 ............................. DIRECTED RESEARCH (1-3)
Directed research on a topic not covered in organized classes. May be repeated, but
the total number of credit hours in directed research may not exceed ten percent (10%)
of the total number of credit hours required for graduation. Requires permission of
Department Chair, and supervising professor. Fee required.


EN 506 ............................ TESOL IN THE MULTICULTURAL CLASSROOM (3)
This course presents the concepts, methods, and skills for teaching English to speakers
of other languages (TESOL) in regular classrooms. This course covers principles of first
and second language acquisition, the history and current practice of language teaching,
and cultural issues. It also covers methods for teaching English learners in mainstream
classrooms, including ways to incorporate the four major skill areas (listening, speaking,
168 

reading, and writing) and the correlation of ELD Standards to California State Standards.
Assessment of student learning and the use of technology are also addressed. Tutoring
of an English learner is required. Prerequisites: EN 101, EN 102, EN 316, and ED 300.

GREEK COURSES

GR 211 ............................ NEW TESTAMENT GREEK I (3)
Introduction to the grammar and vocabulary of the Koine Greek; translation of I John
from the Greek New Testament.

GR 212 ............................ NEW TESTAMENT GREEK II (3)
Grammar and vocabulary of the Koine Greek; translation of I John from the Greek New
Testament.

GR 313 ............................ INTERMEDIATE GREEK I (3)
The study of intermediate grammar and syntax. Introduction to the principles of New
Testament exegesis including the application of the principles to I Thessalonians.
Prerequisites: GR 211, GR 212.

GR 314 ............................ INTERMEDIATE GREEK II (3)
The exegesis of I Peter with further study of New Testament Greek grammar, syntax and
exegesis. Prerequisite: GR 313.


GR 450 ............................ EXEGETICAL STUDIES IN NEW TESTAMENT GREEK (3)
An interpretative study of selected passages from the New Testament with special
attention to their background and doctrinal importance. Offered in accordance with
demand. Prerequisite: GR 314.


GR 490 ............................ INDEPENDENT STUDY IN GREEK (1, 2, or 3)
An independent study in a biblical language to give the student practice in translation,
parsing, syntax, and exegesis. Offered in accordance with demand.
Prerequisite: GR 314.

HISTORY COURSES

HI 101 ............................. HISTORY OF WORLD CIVILIZATION I (3)
169 

A survey of the great epochs of civilization from early Mesopotamian, Egyptian, Indian,
and Chinese beginnings in the ancient world, through the Greek, Roman, and Han
Empires of classical times, the Middle Ages, and the Reformation in the West, as well
as Byzantium, the rise of Islam, and the non-Western world to the seventeenth century.

HI 201 ............................. AMERICAN HISTORY TO 1877 (3)
A study of European expansion in America, colonial society, religion, and political
institution, the American Revolution, the Confederation, the Constitution, the new
nation, sectionalism, western expansion, slavery, the Civil War, and Reconstruction.

HI 202 ............................. AMERICAN HISTORY SINCE 1877 (3)
A continuation of American history from Reconstruction, transition to world power, as
well as foreign affairs, social, economic, political, religious, and cultural developments.


HI 204 ............................. CALIFORNIA HISTORY (3)
This course is a study of the historical, economic, social, intellectual, and political
development of multicultural California. This is a survey of the geography of the state,
the original Californians, discovery and exploration, missions, rancho, American
infiltration, Gold Rush, statehood, railroad development, the Great Depression, World
War II, the turbulent ’70s, and multicultural California today.

HI 318 ............................. HISTORY OF CHRISTIANITY (3)
A survey of Christianity from New Testament times to the present; concern for the
doctrinal and institutional development of the Church; consideration of various radical
and reform movements through which Christianity has made its appeal to mankind and
the world; special emphasis on the stratification and fragmentation of the institutional
church at various points in its history, as well as the influence of Christianity on secular
movements and events. Prerequisite: HI 101 or consent of the instructor. Sophomore
standing.

HI 410 ............................. CONSTITUTIONAL HISTORY (3)
American constitutional law and theory in historical context with a focus on modern
applications of the Constitution. Focus will be centered on the Supreme Court, studies,
decisions, and its role in defining constitutional doctrines such as: freedom of religion,
equal protection, due process, presidential powers, equality, civil liberties, and civil
rights. Prerequisite: HI 101, 201, or 202
170 


HUMAN DEVELOPMENT COURSES

HD 364N ............................. LIFE SPAN DEVELOPMENT (3)
A study of human growth and development through the life cycle. Consideration of
physical, emotional, cognitive, social, moral, spiritual, and personality development will be
included.

HD 380N ............................. MOTIVATION AND LEARNING (3)
An intensive study of the theories of motivation and learning within the context of modern
psychological systems.

HD 460N ............................. TRANSITION LOSS AND GRIEF (3)
An exploration, from a life-span perspective, of the issues of transitions, loss, and death.
Emphasis will be placed on natural transitions in life and healthy coping behaviors,
childhood losses, traumatic losses, and other issues relating to death and dying.

HD 462N ............................. COUNSELING THEORY (3)
A study of the various theoretical approaches to counseling. An emphasis upon the
counseling process, establishing and maintaining the counseling relationship, use of
diagnosis, testing, referral, and other counseling tasks

HD 470N ............................. CRISIS INTERVENTION (3)
An introduction to the theory of crisis intervention, with emphasis on short-term crisis
interviewing techniques, and assessment strategies for depression and suicide, sexual
and physical abuse, substance abuse, trauma, and abortion. Each student is expected to
participate in an applied learning experience in a crisis agency of some kind.

HUMANITIES COURSES

HU 305 ............................ FINE ARTS FOR EDUCATORS (3)
This course is a study of elementary visual and performing arts focusing on the
historical periods in art, music, & drama, including the Baroque, Classical, Romantic,
Impressionistic, and Contemporary periods. The elements of music, art, and drama as
stated in the K-12 California Standards will be studied. The course will culminate with a
171 

student presentation involving all areas of the fine arts. In order to receive credit for this
course, proof of registration for CSET Subtest III must be submitted.

HU 310 ............................ SURVEY OF HUMANITIES (3)
A historical study of the humanities, emphasizing the relationship of humanity and the
environment to the products of artistic expression, and understanding the artistic
temperament and biblical perspective of the development of human creativity.

INTERCULTURAL STUDIES COURSES


ICS 101 ............................ INTRO TO WORLD CHRISTIAN MOVEMENT (3)
An overview of the world Christian movement which examines the biblical, historical,
cultural, and strategic perspectives of God’s program for world evangelization.

ICS 202 ............................ BIOGRAPHICAL HISTORY OF MISSIONS (3)
A history of the advance of the world Christian movement focusing on men and women
who were at the heart of the movement.


ICS 220 ............................ CROSS-CULTURAL TEAM DEVELOPMENT (3)
Cross-cultural Team Development is designed to assist students in a cross-cultural
experience with a global outreach team. This course will walk through the steps
necessary to develop, plan, and implement a successful short-term cross-cultural
experience. Pre-trip, trip, post-trip work will be required of all students.

ICS 305/N ......................... INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION (3)
A presentation of basic propositions of human communication that provide the overall
framework for understanding how communication functions. The focus will be the use of
the communication process interculturally.


ICS 314 ............................ CONTEMPORARY PRACTICE OF MISSIONS (3)
A survey of mission practices with an assessment of evangelical mission agencies and
current opportunities for service. Prerequisite: ICS 101.

ICS 401/N ......................... WORLD RELIGIONS (3)
172 

A survey and comparison of the belief systems of Hinduism, Buddhism, Taoism, Islam,
Judaism, and the variant forms of Christianity with the Bible. Strategies are developed
and applied to establish a Christian witness to the uniqueness of Christ. Field trips are
taken to a local place of worship for each of the religions.

ICS 481/482 ............................ DIRECTED RESEARCH (1-3)
Directed research on a topic not covered in organized classes. The total number of credit
hours in directed research may not exceed ten percent (10%) of the total number of
credit hours required for graduation. Research may be coordinated with an extended
field assignment program. Requires permission of Department Chair, Faculty Advisor,
and supervising professor. (Course Fee)
ICS 499 ............................ INTERCULTURAL INTERNSHIP (3)
Supervised internship in a prospective area(s) of future ministry in conjunction with an
approved mission’s agency. The internship will occur between the junior and senior
years and may extend for up to one year. Three credit hours will be granted for
satisfactory completion of requirements for every four weeks of full-time internship.
Prerequisite: Permission of Department Chair.

JUSTICE COURSES

JST 310/N ......................... SURVEY OF THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM (3)
A survey of the criminal justice system, including the agencies and processes involved in
the administration of criminal justice. It provides an overview of the police, prosecution,
courts, and correctional system. The problems of the administration of justice in a
democratic society are also discussed.


JST 320/N ......................... POLICING THEORY AND PRACTICE (3)
This course is designed to provide students with the opportunity to gain a better
understanding of policing in the United States. As an introductory course, it offers a
historical perspective on policing as well as the foundation of policing, from police roles
to the issues that police officers are facing today.


JST 410/N ......................... CRIMINAL COURTS SYSTEMS (3)
An introduction and overview of the legal system, the participants, the courtroom
process, and the post-conviction process of the course system. It demonstrates the
connection among all participants and how they relate to each other. Additionally, the
course covers the history of the court system and the different types of courts at the
state and federal levels.
173 


JST 420/N…………..COMMUNITY CORRECTIONS & ALTERNATIVE SENTENCES (3)
An examination of the history of punishment in America, the effectualness of different
typologies, and their application to defendants, victims, and society in general. An
examination of the two main criminological schools-the Classical School of Criminology
and the Positivist School of Criminology-that influence modern penal philosophy will be
undertaken. Additionally, modern trends of alternative sentencing and their impact on
safety will be studied.

KINESIOLOGY COURSES

KIN 175 ............................ INTRODUCTION to HEALTH SERVICES (3)
This course will examine the various employment opportunities available in the health
services field. The course will provide essential information that will enable students to
understand the requirements for graduate and professional schools e.g. physical
therapy, medical school, and sports medicine.

KIN 200 ............................ PERSONAL HEALTH AND FITNESS (3)
The study and personal application of cardiovascular health, orthopedic health, weight
management, health nutrition, substance control, stress management, and utilization of
the medical system, in order to facilitate personal wellness.

KIN 201 ............................ INTRODUCTION TO KINESIOLOGY (1)
Students will be introduced to the two distinct areas of Kinesiology; the Profession of
Physical Education and the Academic Discipline of Kinesiology. The course will
emphasize the professional organizations that specialize in Kinesiology and allied
health care such as The American Academy of Kinesiology (AKA), American College of
Sports Medicine (ACSM), National Athletic Trainers Association (NATA), National
Association for Sport and Physical Education (NASPE), and the American Alliance of
Health, Physical Education, Recreation and Dance (AAHPERD). Traditional careers in
Kinesiology will be presented and discussed. The course will provide essential
information that will enable students to understand the requirements for graduate and
professional schools e.g. physical therapy, medical school, and sports medicine.

KIN 202 ............................ MEDICAL TERMINOLOGY (3)
Fundamentals of medical terminology emphasizing the roots, prefixes, suffixes, and
practical application across all fields of medical professionals. (Course Fee)

174 

KIN 204 ............................ MOTOR LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT (3)
Development of physical movement patterns across the life span, with concentration on
factors that influence the acquisition of motor skills and performance.

KIN 205 ............................ CARE AND PREVENTION OF ATHLETIC INJURIES (4)
Introduction to the understanding of athletic injuries including prevention, recognition,
assessment, rehabilitation, and basic athletic first aid of injuries to active individuals. Two
hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory. Prerequisites: BIO 211, 212 (May be taken
concurrently). (Course Fee)
KIN 301 ............................ PHYSICAL EDUCATION FOR EDUCATORS (3)
Emphasis is given to working with the subject-specific content. California frameworks
and adapting instruction to the needs of special populations. This course requires at
least 10 clock-hours of laboratory fieldwork in a public school in a Physical Education
setting. This course meets the general education requirements for majors to understand
and implement California-adopted Content Standards in Physical Education.

KIN 306 ............................ MEASUREMENTS AND STATISTICS IN KINESIOLOGY (3)
Lecture, laboratory, and field experience in the development, evaluation, and application
of tests in kinesiology; incorporating statistics and computer models. Prerequisite: MA
115 or higher.

KIN 310 ............................ SPORTS OFFICIATING (3)
Rules, scoring, interpretation, and mechanics of officiating athletic contests.

KIN 311 ............................ STRUCTURAL KINESIOLOGY (3)
Systematic study of Functional Anatomy-Emphasis on muscular-skeletal anatomy
specific to muscle origins and insertions, joint motion, and movement analysis.
Prerequisite: KIN 205.

KIN 320 ............................ EVALUATION OF ATHLETIC INJURY I (4)
First in the series of systematic approaches to injury recognition and evaluation.
Emphasis is placed on techniques for orthopedic and neurological evaluation of the
upper and lower extremities, spine, head, and face. Two hours lecture and two hours
laboratory. Prerequisite: KIN 205 or consent of instructor. Co-requisite: KIN 311 (Course
Fee)

KIN 322 ............................ EVALUATION OF ATHLETIC INJURY II (4)
175 

Second in the series of a systematic approach to injury recognition and evaluation.
Emphasis is placed on techniques for orthopedic and neurological evaluation of the
upper and lower extremities, spine, head, and face. Two hours lecture and two hours
laboratory. Prerequisite: KIN 320. (Course Fee)


KIN 323 ............................ METHODS OF TEACHING TEAM SPORTS (3)
This course prepares students to analyze basic skills and develop teaching methods for
progressive development in the team sports of football, soccer, basketball, volleyball,
and baseball. It is designed to be an effective balance between learning the content
needed to be an effective Physical Education teacher and the pedagogy needed to
effectively teach the content. Theory and laboratory experiences will prepare students
for teaching progression, practice techniques, rules, and strategies for these team
sports.

KIN 324 ............ METHODS OF TEACHING DUAL & INDIVIDUAL SPORTS (3)
Analysis of Individual sports commonly taught in physical education. It is designed to be
an effective balance between learning the content needed to be an effective Physical
Education teacher and the pedagogy needed to effectively teach the content. Theory
and laboratory experiences will prepare students for teaching progression, practice
techniques, rules, and strategies for these team sports.

KIN 325 ............................ COACHING THEORY (3)
Designed to study the different aspects of coaching including philosophies and
techniques. Introduction to current strategies used to analyze and evaluate instruction in
both sport and physical education settings. It will provide the student with a basic
understanding of coaching on all levels: youth, elementary, high school, and college,
and upon completion of this course students will be eligible to sit for the National and
State Coaching Certification exams.

KIN 390 .......... RESEARCH METHODS (3)
Learning in this course will include a basic introduction to methods used to answer
questions in a case study, observation, survey, experimental, and field study
procedures. Students will develop the ability to critically read, evaluate, and use
published research. Students will be introduced to interpreting research results, critically
evaluating research findings, and writing APA-style manuscripts. There will be a variety
of class projects and a final study implementing at least one of the research methods.

KIN 401 ............................ BIOMECHANICS (3)
176 

Analysis of human movement with an emphasis on the structure and function of the
skeletal, muscular, and nervous systems. Evaluation of simple mechanical principles
involved in movement skills. Prerequisite: BIO 211, 212 (PHY 210 also recommended).(
Course Fee) (CAPSTONE)

KIN 402 ............................ EXERCISE PHYSIOLOGY (3)
An examination of selected topics dealing with the physiological responses,
mechanisms, and adaptations that occur in response to exercise stress and training.
Also addressed are the physiological principles applied to the assessment of physical
fitness and improvement of physical performance. Prerequisite: BIO 211, 212.

KIN 403 PSYCHOLOGICAL & SOCIAL ASPECTS OF SPORTS & EXERCISE (3)
A study of the psychological and social aspects of teaching and coaching. Gain
knowledge in the areas of feedback, reinforcement, motivation, goal-setting, and other
strategies that are applied to enhance performance in athletic, rehabilitative, and
physical education settings. Prerequisites: Recommended PSY 201.

KIN 420 ............................ SPECIAL TOPICS IN KINESIOLOGY (3)
Investigation, study, and seminar discussion of selected topics and/or contemporary
issues in the science of kinesiology not covered in regular classes. Course Fee varies
by topic.

KIN 495 ............................ KINESIOLOGY SENIOR PROJECT (3)
This class will serve as the final capstone in Kinesiology. The student will produce an APA
manuscript that encompasses the areas of Kinesiology which were taught throughout the
program. Note: to pass this class the student must complete the capstone paper and present
the findings one evening at the end of the semester. Senior standing is necessary to enroll in
KIN 495. (Course Fee)

KIN 610 ....................... PRINCIPLES IN SPORTS ADMINISTRATION (3)
This course provides theories, policies, principles, and practical applications for leaders
of a sport or athletic Organization. It provides students an opportunity to explore vital
components such as human resources; Finance; governance; operations and facility
management. Students will develop and utilize a variety of materials pertaining to a
sports event and venue operations.

KIN 620 ....................... ETHICAL/LEGAL ASPECTS IN SPORT (3)
This course will familiarize students with the legal and ethical aspects surrounding
177 

sports organizations. Topics covered include tort law, contract law, agency law,
constitutional law, Title IX and IX, and ethical Theories within the workplace.

KIN 630 ....................... ATHLETIC & SPORT FINANCE (3)
In this course, students will analyze budget techniques and strategies for financial
planning and decision-making in sport and athletic programs. Emphasis will be given to
revenue productions and fundraising relevant to both community and school-supported
sports programs.

LEADERSHIP COURSES

LDR 300N .......... LEADERSHIP & MOTIVATION (3)
A study of the psychosocial influences that underscore human motivation. Students
learn strategies for Christian leadership and motivation that utilize persuasion, influence,
and common goal setting. This course will analyze strategic leadership through current
and historical leaders in both the Christian and secular environments to prepare the
student for a variety of leadership opportunities.

LDR 400N ……………. CONFLICT RESOLUTION & NEGOTIATIONS (3)
An overview of the foundational philosophies of interactive conflict management and
negotiation. Students gain skills enabling them to build common ground, develop
reflective learning practices, apply sound models for conflict analysis, work toward
collaborative and constructive outcomes, and apply both theoretical and pragmatic
approaches to conflict.

LDR 410N ………………LEADING IN THE GLOBAL MARKETPLACE (3)
A survey and assessment of the skills needed by leaders working in diverse,
multinational workplace environments. Students learn cultural adaptation, ethics, group
dynamics, cross-cultural negotiation, and leadership strategies for success in diverse
workplace environments.

LDR 510 ....................... LEADER & SPIRITUAL FORMATION (3)
This course is the exploration of the spiritual dynamics of a Christian leader. Students
will study the purpose and nature of formation, as well as the development of a holistic
spiritual transformation. Special attention will be given to the personal disciplines and
ethical decisions of a spiritual leader. Students will also seek to broaden their
understanding of spirituality within the Christian tradition and how to connect this
understanding to all aspects of their lives, including, but not limited to strengths, gifts,
talents, passions, and vision.
178 


LDR 520 ....................... LEADER & STRATEGIC INNOVATION (3)
This course will aid students in learning to improve their ability to lead creativity, develop
vision, and innovate change within their organization. They will learn strategies to
diagnose potential failures before they occur and find inventive solutions to manage
them when they do. Students will examine the frameworks that successful companies
have used to build innovation into their business and will use real-life examples to
strengthen creativity within the different students’ current working environments.

LDR 530 ....................... LEADER & CULTURAL INTELLIGENCE (3)
This course explores the various cultural intelligence (CQ) factors that can be managed
to mediate successful business relations within any organization. Students will learn
cross-cultural competencies used when dealing with customers or partners in countries
or cultures different than their own, with special emphasis placed on communication
within a global marketplace.

LDR 540 ....................... LEADER & EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE (3)
This course will explore emotional intelligence (EI) as students increase their awareness
of their responses and develop ways to improve personal leadership skills by learning
how to manage their emotions within tumultuous and other various situations. Students
will also identify patterns, triggers, and emotional habits of performance and learn to
suspend judgment as they effectively engage and influence others.

MATHEMATICS COURSES

MA 018 ............................. SUPPORT FOR COLLEGE ALGEBRA (1)
Support course focusing on the skills and concepts needed for success in College
Algebra. This course is for students concurrently enrolled in Math 118. Students will
receive extra support in arithmetic, algebra, and study skills.

MA 115/N ......................... LIBERAL ARTS MATHEMATICS (3)
A course that ensures that the student has a mastery of the concepts, methods, and
practical applications of quantitative reasoning, with emphasis on logical reasoning and
problem-solving skills. Included will be the study of sets and functions; the concept,
function, and solutions of algebraic equations and inequalities; application and
interpretation of graphs and statistical data; principles of mortgage, investment, and
personal finance; computer applications in mathematics; and the application of
179 

mathematical principles in deriving solutions to non-routine, cross-disciplinary problems.
Prerequisite: Qualifying math placement test.

MA 118 ............................. COLLEGE ALGEBRA (3)
Radical exponents, inequalities, elementary analytical geometry, functions and graphs,
polynomial equations, systems of equations, logarithmic and exponential functions,
elementary sequences, binomial theorem, and their applications.
Prerequisite: Qualifying math placement.

MA 151 ............................. CALCULUS I (4)
Functions and their graphs; limits; the derivative and some of its applications; the
integral; the fundamental theorem of calculus; some applications of the integral.
Prerequisite: A grade of C (73%) or better in MA 118.

MA 210 ............................. STATISTICS (3)
A basic course in statistical methods specific to the social sciences. Topics discussed
include frequency distributions, sampling theory, probability, measures of central
tendency and variability, linear regression, hypothesis testing, significance tests,
correlation coefficients, analysis of variance, and experimental design.
Prerequisite: MA 115 or MA 118.

MA 303 ............................. MATHEMATICS FOR EDUCATORS (2)
This course is a comprehensive approach to the mathematical knowledge necessary
(i.e. number theory, integers, rational numbers, real numbers, etc.) for a California
multiple subject teaching credential (K- 8). Planning of content-specific instruction and
the methods of delivery of that content consistent with California state-adopted K-8
mathematics standards and framework are the focus.
Prerequisite: MA 115. Taking multiple subject CSET subtest 2 is a requirement of this
course.

MUSIC COURSES
MU 437 ............ PEDAGOGICAL METHODS IN MUSIC FOR EDUCATORS (3)
A study of elementary music theory: notation, meter, rhythm, scales, intervals, and triads.
The course includes an introduction to melodic composition, a conceptual framework for
the study of music, and the interdisciplinary application of musical components. Junior
standing required.

180 

ORGANTIZATIONAL LEADERSHIP COURSES

ORG 610 ....................... FOUNDATIONS OF ORGANIZATION THEORY (3)
This course will consider the foundational study of the major contemporary conceptual
approaches to organizational structure, culture, change, and processes. A case study
approach will be used to demonstrate the application of abstract concepts of
organizational theory to leadership practices.

ORG 620 ....................... ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR (3)
This course will consider the behavior of individuals and groups in organizations,
examining the outcomes and effects of individual behavior, personalities, values, and
attitudes in various situations within an organization. Major theoretical positions and
research findings are examined with an emphasis on the implications for organizational
design, management practice, motivational factors, productive communication,
deducing culture, and implementing team development.



ORG 630 ....................... ORGANIZATIONAL DEVELOPMENT (3)
This course focuses on the application of behavioral science theory and research to the
theory and practice of organizational change. Emphasis will be placed upon the
management of change and the resistance to change at individual and group levels.

ORG 640 ....................... MANAGING CHANGE AND CONFLICT (3)
This course will examine personal, organizational, legal, and practical problems within an
organization, by discussing interpersonal issues, the legal system, negotiation, and
problem-solving. Emphasis will be placed on change and its impact on the
organizational culture and society.

PASTORAL MINISTRY COURSES

PM 200 ............................ FOUNDATIONS OF EDUCATIONAL MINISTRIES (3)
This course is intended to provide the vocational ministry individual, either pastoral or
mission-focused, a meaningful overview of the educational ministries of the church.
Attention will be focused on building a solid theological and philosophical foundation for
those discipling ministries globally. The course will also include a survey of the lifespan
developmental characteristic and their educational implications will be explored
Preparation of the church leader or church planter as organizer and administrator will be
addressed as well. Finally, selected para-church educational ministries will be surveyed
to give as complete a look at the educational task of ministry in the third millennium as
181 

is possible.

PM 250 ............................ INTRODUCTION TO EVANGELISM & APOLOGETICS (3)
A survey of the biblical doctrine of evangelism including proper motivations for winning
the lost, effective soul-winning methods, vital theological issues surrounding evangelism,
the Christian as an effective apologist in a world of false gospels (cults), cultivating an
evangelistic lifestyle, and the role of prayer in evangelism.

PM 350 ............................ COUNSELING FOR MINISTRY (3)
To provide students who are entering the ministry or currently in ministry, a basic
knowledge of counseling skills and approaches to pastoral counseling. The course will
give students a survey of how to help those in crisis and provide for a brief spiritual care
of those who are hurting. Students will also be taught when and how to refer people to
other mental health professionals.

PM 400 ............................ LEADERSHIP FOR MINISTRY (3)
Stretches the leadership skills of the youth worker enabling him to plan, organize,
supervise and administrate a full-orbed ministry for youth of any age. Focuses on the
skills of leading and developing volunteers in youth ministry. The course will emphasize
delegation, supervision, and equipping others for ministry functions.

PM 411 ............................ COMMUNICATION FOR MINISTRY (3)
Develops the student’s philosophy of preaching. Includes study of the principles and
practices of verbal communication as well as types of sermons, creation of sermon
outlines, analysis of sermons by great preachers of all time, and sermonic research.
PM 413 ............................ DISCIPLESHIP AND LEADERSHIP (3)
The importance and goals of discipleship, along with personal philosophy and
methodology for discipleship development patterned after Scriptural accounts of Christ
and His disciples. Special attention is given to the problems of bringing youth through
the adolescent period to the point of spiritual maturity. Current literature, problem areas,
practical experience, and biblical solutions will all be examined.

PM 420 ............................ ADVANCED HERMENEUTICS (3)
Building on the foundation of Principles of Bible Study (BI 213), a survey of some of the
more complex aspects of biblical hermeneutics including parabolic, wisdom, and
apocalyptic literature; allegories, symbols, and types; difficult to understand (9 so-called
problem passages) and apparent contradictions; hard sayings in the OT and NT; word
study fallacies and common reasons for eisegesis. This course assumes that the
182 

student has a solid grasp on basic biblical hermeneutics, is competent in writing biblical
mini-commentaries, and possesses better than average writing skills. Prerequisites: at
least a B grade in both EN 102 and BI 213.

PM 481 .............................. DIRECTED RESEARCH (3, 3)
Supervised research in the prospective area(s) of the disciplines of the Christian life as
defined in the book” Celebration of Discipline” by Richard J. Foster. Disciplines to be
studied and exercised are: Meditation; Prayer; Fasting; Bible study; Simplicity; Solitude;
Submission; Service; Confession; Worship; Guidance; and Celebration. Application of
these disciplines will be stressed on a daily basis for one month with a description of
each discipline and a journal to reflect how each discipline affected the student for the
one-month period.

PM 499 ............................ PASTORAL INTERNSHIP (1-6)
A supervised program of internship whereby the senior student gains practical
experience and insight into the day-to-day ministry as it is conducted in local area
churches, along with the study of the principles and practice of the pastoral ministry.
Topics include the pastor’s relationship to himself, his family, his staff, the church
membership, extra-church organizations, and involvements, plus the educational,
administrative, missionary, evangelistic, and functional aspects of the pastoral ministry.
Prerequisite: permission of Department Chair.

PERSONAL DEVELOPMENT COURSES

PD 095 ............................ ACADEMIC ACCOUNTABILITY (1)
This course has been established for students who are on Academic Probation but have
previously taken the regular section of PD 090/PD 100 or have had prior academic
success at SDCC. This section may also be taken by students who enter SDCC on
Academic Probation with the condition that they are on Accountability for the first
semester. (CR/NC)

PD 101N …………………. INTRODUCTION TO ONLINE LEARNING & SUCCESS (3)
A study of the experiential nature of online learning and how to create a positive
environment to enhance social and personal relationships using instruments that
provide a cognitive basis for personal analysis and understanding. This course also
provides learners support and insight on how to best utilize the tools and resources
provided to SDCC online students.

183 

PD 105 ............................ BECOMING A MASTER STUDENT (2)
This is an orientation course for first-time freshmen. The course is designed to provide
an overview of San Diego Christian College with a biblical perspective for exploring
God’s will and purpose as it relates to students’ academic work in college. The course
will review skill development in areas of decision-making, time management, memory,
reading, note-taking, testing, thinking, and communication. This course will also allow
students to explore career options as they relate to personal assessments of skills,
abilities, and interests.

PD 201/N………………..PERSONAL FINANCE (3)
Development of a personal financial plan based on Christian stewardship principles, the
evaluation of banking services, loan negotiation, consumer credit, housing costs,
insurance, investments, taxes, retirement, and estate planning.

PD 250N ............................. PRIOR LEARNING PORTFOLIO (0)
This course provides instruction on how to put together a portfolio containing detailed
evidence of learning outcomes, supporting documentation, and information of a
student’s personal and professional experiences which can be evaluated by a review
committee.


PD 340N ............................. ADULT DEVELOPMENT AND LIFE PLANNING (3)
The emphasis for this course is on the experiential nature of nontraditional education
and adult development theory. Students will become familiar with various theories and
instruments that provide a cognitive basis for personal analysis and understanding. The
objectives of the module are personal discovery and affirmation through an examination
of one’s strengths and the subsequent adjustments that may assist areas of personal
growth.

PHILOSOPHY COURSES

PHIL 201 ............................ INTRODUCTION TO PHILOSOPHY (3)
A survey and critical analysis of the various systems of philosophy, philosophical ideas,
and the major philosophers in the light of both logic and Scripture.
Introduction to the specialized vocabulary of philosophy.

PHIL 211 ............................ ANCIENT PHILOSOPHY (3)
A survey of ancient Greek philosophy from the pre-Socratics to Plotinus. References will
184 

also be made to the development of co-current eastern thought and biblical data.

PHIL 221 ............................ MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY (3)
This course will begin with the transition from the Greco-Roman period to Christianity in
the first century. The history of thought will be followed from the 1st to the 15th
centuries. Emphasis will be placed on St. Augustine, St. Anselm, Abelard, and St.
Thomas Aquinas. The rise of scholasticism and its connection to other disciplines
including art, architecture, and the rise of science will also be highlighted.

PHIL 231 ............................ MODERN PHILOSOPHY (3)
This course will follow the history of thought from Descartes to Kant. Emphasis will be
placed on radical doubt and Cartesian dualism and how they affected the development
of modern thought. Special concentration will also be given to the separation of science
and theology from philosophy and how they became disciplines in their own right.

PHIL 241 ............................ CONTEMPORARY PHILOSOPHY (3)
This course will begin with Hegel and his dialectic followed by the reactionary
philosophies of Marx and Kierkegaard. Emphasis will be placed on the development of
existential and postmodern philosophies counterbalanced against new-Marxism and
subsequent structuralist and deconstructionist philosophies.

PHIL 301 ............................ CROSS-CULTURAL PHILOSOPHY (3)
A multicultural philosophical investigation of subjects ranging from the mind/ body
problem and epistemology to ethics and religion, from human nature and determinism to
gender identity and social equality. Junior standing required.



PHIL 311 ............................ METAPHYSICS AND PHILOSOPHY OF ORIGINS (3)
This course begins with a brief introduction to the history of Western thought and the
basics of philosophy, specifically epistemology and metaphysics. Emphasis is placed on
the power of world views and the various presuppositions they possess. This provides
the framework through which the student will look at the topic of origins. Origins will be
studied from theistic, pantheistic, and naturalistic perspectives, where the student will be
able to compare and contrast the various worldviews and their relative merits and
weaknesses. Finally, these worldviews will be passed through the grid of scripture to see
what aligns with a Biblical Christian Worldview and what does not.

PHIL 341 ............................ EPISTEMOLOGY AND APOLOGETICS (3)
185 

This course will explore the theory of knowledge and such questions as is knowledge
possible, how do we know things, how do we verify knowledge. Concentration will be
placed on competing schools of epistemology including mysticism, rationalism,
empiricism, and existentialism. After the basics of epistemology have been covered the
information will be applied to apologetics and the defense of one’s beliefs. Students will
be shown how various epistemological positions will use different strategies in
defending their worldviews. Junior standing required.

PHIL 402/N ......................... ETHICS AND CONTEMPORARY THOUGHT (3)
This course is a survey of ethics, from Metaethics to their normative applications. These
theories will be presented on their own merits and then critiqued to see their various
merits and shortcomings. Finally, these ethical theories will be passed through the grid
of scripture to see what aligns and what is contrary. Following the critique of the major
ethical theories, the students will look at what the bible has to say about ethics and
morality, and how one is to live an ethical life. The last part of the course will be
contemporary issues and application where the students will be encouraged to wrestle
with the moral and ethical conflicts of our time, and to prepare themselves by knowing
the scriptures and formulating their own personal ethics. (GE CAPSTONE) As our
designated general education capstone course the students will be evaluated on their
knowledge of the Bible and basic doctrine, along with the ability to apply a Biblical
Christian Worldview to the topic of ethics and their personal lives.

PHIL 440 ............................ TOPICS IN PHILOSOPHY (3)
Study of a special topic in philosophy. May be repeated for credit. Examples are
existentialism, philosophy of religion, bioethics, historiography, etc. Topics to be
announced. Prerequisite: Junior standing or consent of the department.

PHIL 441 ............................ MAJOR PHILOSOPHERS (3)
Study of a specific philosopher or philosophers. Examples are Hegel, Marx, Plato,
Aristotle, Aquinas, etc. ....................... May be repeated for credit. Philosophers to be
announced. Prerequisite: Junior standing or consent of the department.

PHIL 450N ............................. CRITICAL AND CREATIVE THINKING (3)
This course focuses on developing both the critical and creative thinking skills
necessary to analyze and resolve various problems, establish a reliable basis for how
one makes decisions, and implements strategies. Students will learn to formulate
theories and find creative solutions for academic, social, and professional issues.
Students will analyze quantitative research findings relevant to the measurement of
186 

critical and creative thinking abilities.

PHIL 492N ............................. VALUES AND ETHICS (3)
A study of theoretical and practical problems of moral conduct and proposed solutions
with an emphasis upon the nature of ethics, values, rights, obligations, and opportunities.

PHYSICAL SCIENCE COURSES

PS 102/N…………. INTRODUCTION TO THE PHYSICAL AND EARTH SCIENCES (3)
Introductory, multidisciplinary studies in the physical and earth sciences; include general
and modern physics, general chemistry principles, meteorology, oceanography, mineral
and structural geology, and astronomy.

PS 103/N………..LABORATORY IN PHYSICAL SCIENCE AND EARTH SCIENCE (1)
Hands-on laboratory experiences with a concentration on problem-solving techniques.

PS 104 ............................. INTRODUCTION TO METEOROLOGY (3)
The basic theory of weather and climate, with special application to the operation of
aircraft. Included is the study of the atmosphere, air motion, clouds, precipitation, air
masses, fronts, storms, and the technology of weather forecasting. Material is primarily
descriptive, but with some calculations using basic algebra.

PS 105 ............................. GENERAL GEOLOGY (3)
An introductory survey of physical geology, with emphasis on the earth’s materials,
processes, and structure; introduction to minerals, rocks, fossils, erosion,
sedimentation, folds, faults, earthquakes, and landforms; analysis of the effects of the
earth on man’s activities and vice versa; evaluation of conceptual schemes for
interpreting geologic data.

PHYSICS COURSES

PHY 210/211 ............................ GENERAL PHYSICS I, II (4, 4)
A two-semester calculus-based approach to the fundamental and general principles and
application of physics. Topics covered are kinetics, dynamics, conservation laws, wave
motion, fluids, kinetic theory, thermodynamics, electromagnetism, optics, atomic and
nuclear physics, and relativity. Includes laboratory studies in the principles of Physics.
Prerequisites: MA 118 with a C (73%) or better, or permission of instructor. A grade of C
187 

(73%) or better in PHY 210 is required to be enrolled in PHY 211. Exemptions to this
policy must be approved by the instructor. (Course Fee)


PSYCHOLOGY COURSES

PSY 201/N ......................... INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOLOGY (3)
This course surveys psychology as an empirical science of behavior. Topics include
perception, methodology, development, memory, thinking, learning, motivation,
physiology, socialization, personality, and psychopathology.

PSY 202 ............................ GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT (3)
This course offers a life-span approach to psychology presenting the progression of
human development from the prenatal state, through infancy and early childhood, to the
final years of late adulthood. The determinants of human development are studied.

PSY 210 ............................ INTRODUCTION TO RESEARCH METHODS (3)
Learning in this course will include a basic introduction to methods used to answer
questions in psychology, including case study, observation, survey, experimental, and
field study procedures. Students will develop the ability to critically read, evaluate, and
use published psychological research. Students will be introduced to interpreting
research results, critically evaluating research findings, and writing APA-style
manuscripts. There will be a variety of class projects and a final study implementing at
least one of the research methods.

PSY 302/N ......................... BIOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY (3)
This course studies the biological foundations of psychological processes. The
relationship between brain and behavior is explored in the psychological functions of
vision and other senses, learning, and memory, hunger, and thirst, movement,
cognition, sleep, and emotions, as well as abnormal conditions such as schizophrenia
and depression. Prerequisite for Traditional Undergraduate: PSY 201.

PSY 303 ............................ COGNITIVE PSYCHOLOGY (3)
This course studies the cognitive foundations of behavior, how humans represent and
process information about their environment, with consideration of theoretical
perspectives and research. Topics include representation, memory, acquisition, and use
of language, reading, problem-solving, reasoning, and concept formation. Prerequisites:
PSY 201, BIO SCI ELT.
188 


PSY 304/N ......................... SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY (3)
This course studies the social foundations of behavior, how people think about,
influence, and relate to one another, with consideration of theoretical perspectives and
research. Topics include affiliation, aggression, altruism, attitude formation, and change,
attribution, helping behavior, group dynamics, compliance, conformity, and persuasion.
Prerequisite for Traditional Undergraduate: PSY 201.

PSY 308 ............................ PSYCHOLOGY OF ADDICTION (3)
This course introduces various types of addiction, along with the processes of treatment
and recovery. Topics include the interaction of the biological, cognitive, social, and
spiritual aspects of addiction. Prerequisite: PSY 201.

PSY 310/N ......................... PRINCIPLES OF PSYCHOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT (3)
This course introduces the principles of test construction, administration, scoring, and
interpretation of intelligence, aptitude, and performance tests. Topics include validity,
reliability, an overview of attitude and behavior assessment, interest and personality
tests, and how this information gets used in making decisions about peoples’ lives.
Prerequisites for Traditional Undergraduate: PSY 201, 210.

PSY 311/N ......................... ABNORMAL PSYCHOLOGY (3)
This course studies psychological disorders with a focus on the description and causes
of disorders, and various therapies for them. The causes are examined in light of the
interaction of biological, cognitive, and social factors as well as cultural and
developmental dimensions. Prerequisite for Traditional Undergraduate: PSY 201.

PSY 312 ............................ THEORIES OF PERSONALITY (3)
This course studies the principal theories and interpretations of personality
development, including the primary representatives of the major schools: analytic or
dynamic, humanistic-existential, cognitive, family systems, and behavioral. Prerequisite
for Traditional Undergraduate: PSY 201.

PSY 316 ............................ MOTIVATION AND LEARNING (3)
This course studies the historical theories of learning and contemporary approaches to
human motivation in a variety of settings. Prerequisite: PSY 201.


PSY 322 ............................ GROUP PROCESSES: THEORY & PROCEDURES (3)
189 

This course studies theories of group interaction and development, the structure of
organized groups in society. Topics include the worlds of family, work, and church. Skills
in process interpretation, leadership intervention, and counseling are addressed.
Prerequisite for Traditional Undergraduate: PSY 201.


PSY 330 ............................ CONTEMPORARY ISSUES IN PSYCHOLOGY (3)
This course studies current issues and trends in the field of psychology. The course may
either focus on one topic in-depth or examine several topics. The class format includes
critical evaluation of contemporary readings, a literature review, and class presentations.
Prerequisite for Traditional Undergraduate: PSY 201.

PSY 331……….DEVELOPMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY: INFANCY AND CHILDHOOD (3)
This course studies the complex interaction of biological, cognitive, social, and spiritual
development in childhood, with consideration of theoretical perspectives and research.
Topics include individual differences, and the interactions of individuals with their family,
peers, and environment. Prerequisites: PSY 201, 202.

PSY 332 ............................ DEVELOPMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY: ADOLESCENCE (3)
This course studies the complex interaction of biological, cognitive, social, and spiritual
development in adolescence, with consideration of theoretical perspectives and
research. Topics include individual differences, and the interactions of individuals with
their family, peers, school, and environment. Prerequisites: PSY 201, 210. (No
Prerequisite: Youth Ministry students)

PSY 333…………DEVELOPMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY: ADULTHOOD AND AGING (3)
This course studies the complex interaction of biological, cognitive, social, and spiritual
development in adulthood and later adulthood, with consideration of theoretical
perspectives and research. Topics include individual differences, and the interactions of
individuals with their family, peers, work, and environment.
Prerequisites: PSY 201, 210.

PSY 370 ............................ PSYCHOLOGY OF LOSS (3)
This course studies the stages and emotional states present in situations of loss, grief, or
death. Procedures for counseling the dying or bereaved are discussed. Prerequisite:
PSY 201.


PSY 421 ............................ INTRODUCTION TO COUNSELING (3)
This course studies the counseling process and the counselor’s role as a helping
professional. Topics include interviewing, reflective listening, as well as assessment,
190 

group and family counseling, career counseling, addictions and diversity, ethical and
legal issues. Prerequisites: PSY 201. Senior standing.

PSY 422 ............................ THEORIES OF COUNSELING (3)
This course studies an overview of theoretical perspectives on counseling, including
psychoanalytic, behavioral, family systems, cognitive approaches, etc. Prerequisite: PSY
421. Senior standing.

PSY 450 ............................ INDUSTRIAL / ORGANIZATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY (3)
This course studies the application of psychological theory and research to the
workplace. Topics include personnel selection and assessment, work performance,
training and development, motivation, attitudes, leadership and teams, and job
satisfaction. Prerequisites: PSY 201; junior or senior standing.

PSY 470 ............................ CULTURES AND CONTEXTS (3)
This course studies the relationship between identity development and primary
culture(s). A variety of ethnic, social, religious, and cultural group norms are considered
along with an examination of the extent of influence these may have on the individual.
The effects of global markets, internet collaborations, and multicultural neighborhoods
on work environments are examined. Prerequisite: Senior Psychology major.

PSY 481/482 ............................ DIRECTED RESEARCH (1-6)
Directed study on a topic not covered in organized classes. May be repeated but the
total number of credit hours in directed research may not exceed ten percent (10%) of
the total number of credit hours required for graduation. Prerequisites: senior status, the
permission of Department Chair, and supervising professor; fee.

PSY 490 ............................ PSYCHOLOGY SENIOR SEMINAR (3)
This course explores a topic that is pertinent to all areas of psychology. It considers the
biological, cognitive, individual differences, and social foundations, along with the
underlying theory and appropriate methods. Students plan, carry out, evaluate, and
write an APA-style report on a research project. Prerequisites: PSY 210; Senior
Psychology major. (CAPSTONE)

PSY 499 ............................ PSYCHOLOGY INTERNSHIP (3)
This course allows the student to apply psychological knowledge to various settings,
such as community agencies, business, prevention programs, and educational settings.
191 

The weekly seminar provides an opportunity for students to reflect on their experiences
in light of readings, psychological theories, and Christian beliefs. Prerequisites: Senior
Psychology major and permission of supervising professor.


PSY 602 .......... ADVANCED COUNSELING THEORIES OF PSYCHOTHERAPY (3)
Explores factors influencing counseling theories and techniques, including the history
and scope of the counseling process and skills. Students also explore the self,
interpersonal issues, and spiritual values as they impact the use of theoretical
frameworks. Students are exposed to an in-depth presentation of the theoretical
perspectives of counseling, including psychoanalytic, behavioral, family systems,
Cognitive approaches, motivational interviewing, ground theories, etc. Prerequisite: PSY
201, PSY 421, PSY 422. No prerequisite for MSL students

PSY 603 ....................... APPROACHES TO CRISIS AND SUICIDE INTERVENTION (3)
This course prepares students in the understanding and treatment of crisis and suicide
intervention that includes theories, techniques, and best practices. The content includes
experiential, visual, auditory, kinesthetic, and learning modalities. Special attention is
focused on developing student’s skills in diverse populations. Emphasis is placed on the
principles and procedures or awareness, detection, assessment, and intervention
strategies, and the risk of long-term effects of untreated crises such as suicide, PTSD,
chronic mental illness, and other related disorders.

PSY 604 ....................... LAW & ETHICS (3)
Students are introduced to the legal, ethical, and current trends for mental health
professionals in the state of California. Standards established by the Board of Behavior
Sciences, American Counseling Association, American Association of Marriage and
Family Therapists, and the American Psychological Association are reviewed and
contrasted. Legal issues of importance, as they relate to the behavioral health
professional are studied and applied to the counselor-client relationship. The
counselor’s sense of self, human values, professional behavior, the scope of practice,
and ethics are explored.

PSY 607 ....................... MARRIAGE AND FAMILY SYSTEMS (3)
Current theories of marriage and approaches of family systems therapy interventions
are surveyed in this course. The impact of diversity issues (e.g., ethnicity, socioeconomic
status, spirituality, marriage, blended families) and how family therapy integrates them
during the clinical session is emphasized. Major theories, founding clinicians, as well as
some of their contemporaries are introduced and studied.

PSY 608 ....................... SUBSTANCE ABUSE AND ADDICTIVE BEHAVIORS (3)
192 

This course examines current theories of the etiology of substance abuse and addictive
behaviors. Strategies, assessment, evaluation, intervention, and treatment are
emphasized; including the impact on mental, biological, relational, and community
systems. Issues of the recovery process, diversity, and access to care are considered.
Students will interact with various treatment modalities, outcomes, and treatment
opportunities.

RESEARCH COURSES

RSH 485A/B ............................. CRITICAL THINKING RESEARCH CAPSTONE (6, 6)
This course focuses on the practical implementation of theories and concepts through
an individual capstone experience while developing the critical and creative thinking
skills necessary to achieve resolving problems holistically. Interwoven in these courses
is a development of both the critical and creative thinking skills necessary to analyze
and resolve various problems within the context of the student's chosen career path and
establish a reliable basis for decision making and implements strategies. Students will
engage in a more complete understanding of organizational issues and develop a
propensity for adaptive leadership practice through the lens of scripture and a Christian
worldview. Prerequisite: for RSH 485B is RSH 485A.

RSH 495A-CN ............................. RESEARCH CAPSTONE (3, 3, 3)
A practical implementation of theories and concepts through an individual capstone. The
final capstone examines a problem in a student’s occupation or vocation and includes
an oral presentation. All majors will take the same Emporium Courses (RSH 495A:
Research Capstone I, RSH 495B: Research Capstone Statistics, and RSH 495C:
Research Capstone II). Students will have the ability to choose the focus of their final
project. The five choices are: (1) Paper (2) Project (3) Business Plan (4) Internship (5)
Ethnography. Students gather together to understand the components of research and
then will work in small groups with similar studies to share, formulate, and develop their
thesis. They will also have RSH 495B which involves the study of methods and
procedures used to evaluate and analyze data. Emphasis will be placed on learning the
basic tools of statistics, which are currently in use to interpret statistical data. An
overview of survey preparation and analysis will be provided. A faculty will be assigned
to assist the students in their capstone projects from beginning to completion.

RSH 610 ........... INTRODUCTION TO SOCIAL SCIENCE RESEARCH METHODS (3)
This course will be centered on the four foundational approaches to social research:
Experimentation, Survey Research, Field Research, and the use of Available Data.  The
course is a hands-on approach to research methods. The student will choose a topic
193 

and prepare a literature review (CAPSTONE 1). This class is the first of four sections of
the Research Capstone.

RSH 620............. DATA-DRIVEN DECISIONS (3)
This capstone will focus on the collection and understanding of ethical principles of
quality data collection. This course serves as the data collection and analysis of the
Capstone (CAPSTONE 3). This class is the third of four sections of the Research
Capstone. Prerequisites: RSH 610 & RSH 695A

RSH 695A ............. INTEGRATED AREA OF STUDY MAJOR PROJECT (3)
This capstone course is an integration of coursework and personal interest research
that addresses a particular issue/problem in the industry or desired occupation.
Students work with the instructor to prepare the first two chapters of the Capstone
(CAPSTONE 2). This class is the second of four sections of the Research Capstone.

RSH 695B ......... INTEGRATED AREA OF STUDY MAJOR PROJECT (3)
This capstone course is an integration of coursework and personal interest research
that addresses a particular issue/problem in the industry or desired occupation.
Students work with an advisor/instructor to develop a final capstone paper and
presentation approved by the instructor (CAPSTONE 4). Prerequisites: RSH 610 & RSH
695A

SCIENCE COURSES

SCI 302/N ......................... SCIENTIFIC MODELS OF ORIGINS (3)
Scientific evidence related to origins from the perspectives of astronomy, physics,
geology, chemistry, mathematics, and biology. Critical analysis of special creation and
naturalistic evolution and its variants as scientific models of origins. This course is
available every semester.

SCI 310/N ......................... THE SCIENCE OF HEALTH AND WELLNESS (0)
This course will focus on the scientific basis of health and wellness with a personal
application of the essential aspects of nutrition and food safety, physical fitness, stress
management, STD awareness, and avoidance of substance abuse. Completion of this
course satisfies the health course requirement for California Clear Teaching Credential.

SOCIAL SCIENCE COURSES


SS 204/N ......................... CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY (3)
194 

A brief overview and survey of the various aspects of anthropology: cultural, physical,
linguistic, religious, and social organization of peoples in the modern world.

SS 205/N ......................... INTRODUCTION TO AMERICAN GOVERNMENT (3)
A study of the organization and function of the legislative, judicial, and executive
branches of American government in their constitutional foundation, historical
development, social context, and international perspective. Satisfies the State of
California's teaching-credential requirement for instruction in the provisions and
principles of the United States Constitution.

SS 206 ............................. INTRODUCTION TO GEOGRAPHY (3)
Discussions of agrology, geology, cartography, demography. Considerations of
contemporary ecological problems. Political and economic geography. The overall
concentration is on human geography.

SS 210 ............................. STATISTICS FOR THE SOCIAL SCIENCES (3)
An introduction to quantitative statistics as applied to the social sciences, including
descriptive statistics, probability, and visual displays of data. This course provides a
basic understanding of statistics that assists the student in successfully producing,
analyzing, and interpreting data. Students will experience sampling, basic research
designs, describing distributions, correlation, regression, applications of normal
probability curve, confidence intervals, tests of significance, and analysis and
interpretation of data using SPSS with a focus on practical rather than theoretical
knowledge.

THEOLOGY COURSES

TH 201/N ......................... THEOLOGY I (3)
Introduction to the study of Theology and theological systems and approaches.
Theology Proper: The existence, personality, nature, attributes, and work of God, the
Trinity, the person and work of God the Father, election. Bibliology: the inspiration,
authority, canonicity of Scripture, the place of Scripture in revelation. Christology: the
person and work of Christ including his deity, humanity, virgin birth, death, resurrection,
and work of atonement. Pneumatology: the person, work, deity, and importance in the
lives of Christians today.

TH 202/N ......................... THEOLOGY II (3)
Anthropology: The creation, fall, and death of man, the image of God, man’s present
195 

situation, and eternal status. Hamartiology: the existence of sin and evil in creation, its
application to mankind, its defeat by the work of Christ. Soteriology: the application of
the atonement as received by man, the study of reconciliation, justification, propitiation,
and redemption in the life of the believer, grace, and sanctification. Eschatology:
definition and order of the unfulfilled events in the plan of God, the rapture, tribulation,
millennium, and eternal state.

TH 301 ............................. SURVEY OF BIBLE THEOLOGY (3)
A survey of theology specifically designed to give the student a foundation in all areas of
systematic theology. Included would be these areas: The doctrine of the scriptures, the
doctrine of God, Christ, and The Holy Spirit. Also, included in consideration will be the
doctrine of angels, the church, sin and salvation, and the last things and the doctrine of
man. Selected biblical references will be utilized in each area along with the various
theological system’s input into each subject. The application of biblical truth is built into
class assignments.

TH 310/N ......................... CONTEMPORARY ISSUES IN THEOLOGY (3)
Study of Bible doctrines such as God, Christ, the Holy Spirit, man, sin, salvation, and the
relationship of doctrine to the ministry context of a church in the 21st century.
Themes will be examined through a focus on New Testament literature.

TH 406 ............................. MAJOR BIBLE DOCTRINES (3)
Major doctrines of Scripture emphasizing theology proper, Christology, pneumatology,
angelology, anthropology, ecclesiology. (CAPSTONE)

YOUTH MINISTRY COURSES

YM 300 ............................ PHILOSOPHY OF YOUTH MINISTRY (3)
Beginning with the theological foundation of effective youth ministry, the purpose and
philosophical foundations that flow into a youth program are built. Emphasis is given to
sociological and structural aspects of youth ministry leadership. Emphasis is placed on
understanding youth culture and problems and their implications for ministry to youth
primarily in the church.

YM 308 ............................ PROGRAMMING FOR YOUTH MINISTRY (3)
Organizational and administrative functions of the local church as they relate to youth. A
biblical philosophy of ministry, ministry recruitment, team concerns, curriculum
development, planning, implementing, measuring, and maintaining programs for youth.
196 
YM 400 .......... ORGANIZATION/ADMINISTRATION FOR YOUTH MINISTRY (3)
The course will survey the elements of organization and administration necessary for the
efficient and effective supervision of youth ministries: leadership skills, negotiation and
conflict resolution skills, and biblical models for ministry. This will include an overview of
youth ministry management tools and the development of biblical principles of
leadership of a youth ministry in the church.
YM 481/482 ............................ DIRECTED RESEARCH (3)
This course is intended as an initial capstone academic experience to implement in a
professional ministry setting those skills which were acquired through the academic
experience. Focus is placed on preaching, teaching, administration, and personal
maintenance skills of youth ministry primarily in the local church setting.
YM 498 ............................ YOUTH MINISTRY INTERNSHIP (3)
This course is intended as an initial capstone academic experience to implement in a
professional ministry setting those skills which were acquired through the academic
experience. Focus is placed on preaching, teaching, administration, and personal
maintenance skills of youth ministry primarily in the local church setting.
YM 499 ............ YOUTH MINISTRY ACADEMIC INTERNSHIP (3)
This course is intended as a final capstone academic experience to implement in a
professional ministry setting those skills which were acquired through the academic
experience. Focus is placed on preaching, teaching, administration, and personal
maintenance skills of youth ministry primarily in the local church setting.