ABDR 1280 Cooperative Education - 
Autobody/Collision and Repair 
Technology/Technician 
Career-related activities encountered in the student's area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Prerequisite: 
Departmental Permit. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
ABDR 1281 Cooperative Education - 
Autobody/Collision and Repair 
Technology/Technician 
Career-related activities encountered in the student's area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Prerequisite: 
Departmental Permit. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
ABDR 1291 Special Topics in Auto/Automotive 
Body Repairer 
Topics address current events, skills, knowledge, and/or 
attitudes and behaviors pertinent to the technology or 
occupation and relevant to the professional development 
of the student. This course was designed to be repeated 
multiple times to improve student proficiency. 
  
Advanced Electronics and Safety Systems 
An introduction to current refinishing products, shop 
safety, and equipment used in the automotive 
refinishing industry. Emphasis on surface preparation, 
masking techniques, and refinishing of replacement 
parts. Lab required. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
ABDR 1307 Collision Repair Welding 
A study of collision repair welding and cutting 
procedures. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ABDR 1315 Vehicle Trim and Hardware 
A study of vehicle trim and glass service. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: Departmental Permit. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ABDR 1331 Basic Refinishing 
An introduction to current refinishing products, shop 
safety, and equipment used in the automotive refinishing 
industry. Emphasis on surface preparation, masking 
techniques, and refinishing of replacement parts. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: Departmental Permit. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
ABDR 1349 Automotive Plastic and Sheet Molded 
Compound Repair 
A comprehensive course in repair of non-metal 
composites. Lab required. Prerequisite: Departmental 
Permit. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ABDR 1455 Non-Structural Metal Repair 
Demonstrate sheet metal repair skills using mechanical 
and hydraulic equipment. Emphasis on attachment 
devices used to straighten and align exterior body panels. 
Lab required. Prerequisite: Departmental Permit. 4 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
ABDR 1458 Intermediate Refinishing 
Training in mixing and spraying of automotive topcoats. 
Introduction to partial panel refinishing techniques. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: ABDR 1331. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
ABDR 2255 Collision Repair Estimating 
An advanced course in collision estimating and 
development of a damage report utilizing estimating 
software. Lab required. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
ABDR 2280 Cooperative Education - 
Autobody/Collision and Repair 
Technology/Technician 
Career-related activities encountered in the student's area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Prerequisite: 
Departmental Permit. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
ABDR 2281 Cooperative Education - 
Autobody/Collision and Repair 
Technology/Technician 
Career-related activities encountered in the student's area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Prerequisite: 
Departmental Permit. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
ABDR 2347 Advanced Collision Repair Welding 
Skill development in the use of advanced welding and 
cutting processes. Emphasizes current welding 
procedures and specific repair requirements for 
203 
 
specialized metals. Lab required. Prerequisite/Concurrent 
Enrollment: ABDR 1307. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ABDR 2402 Auto Body Mechanical and Electrical 
Service 
A course in the repair, replacement, and/or service of 
collision damaged mechanical or electrical systems. 
Topics include drive train removal, reinstallation and 
service; cooling system service and repair; exhaust system 
service; and emission control systems. Additional topics 
include wire and connector repair, reading wiring 
diagrams, and troubleshooting. Lab required. 4 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
ABDR 2437 Structural Analysis and Damage Repair 
V 
Operation of equipment and the procedures involved in 
the repair of body structures. Special emphasis on 
conducting a thorough damage analysis as well as 
demonstrating proper pulling and anchoring techniques. 
Lab required. Prerequisite/Concurrent Enrollment: 
ABDR 2347. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
ABDR 2441 Major Collision Repair and Panel 
Replacement 
Instruction in preparation of vehicles for major repair 
processes. Covers interpreting information from damage 
reports, planning repair sequences, selecting appropriate 
tools, and organizing removed parts for reinstallation. Lab 
required. Prerequisite/Concurrent Enrollment: ABDR 
2347. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
ABDR 2449 Advanced Refinishing 
Application of multi-stage refinishing techniques. 
Advanced skill development solving refinishing problems. 
Application of multi-stage refinishing techniques with 
emphasis on formula mixing and special spraying 
techniques. Lab required. Prerequisite/Concurrent 
Enrollment: ABDR 1458. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
ABSC 3410 Applied Building Science 
A study of the integration of factors that cause a building 
to be a working system, including; engineering, 
architecture, materials, climate and environmental factors. 
The purpose of building science is to provide predictive 
capability to optimize the performance and sustainability 
of a building, understand or prevent building failures, and 
guide the design and use of new materials, techniques, 
and technologies. Lab required. Prerequisites: MATH 
1342 and CNBT 2344. 4 credit hours. 
 
ACCT 2301 Principles of Financial Accounting 
This course is an introduction to the fundamental 
concepts of financial accounting as prescribed by U.S. 
generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) as 
applied to transactions and events that affect business 
organizations. Students will examine the procedures and 
systems to accumulate, analyze, measure, and record 
financial transactions. Students will use recorded financial 
information to prepare a balance sheet, income statement, 
statement of cash flows, and statement of shareholders’ 
equity to communicate the business entity’s results of 
operations and financial position to users of financial 
information who are external to the company. Students 
will study the nature of assets, liabilities, and owners’ 
equity while learning to use reported financial information 
for purposes of making decisions about the company. 
Students will be exposed to International Financial 
Reporting Standards (IFRS). Lab required. Prerequisite: 
Meet TSI college-readiness standard for Mathematics; or 
equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
ACCT 2302 Principles of Managerial Accounting 
This course is an introduction to the fundamental 
concepts of managerial accounting appropriate for all 
organizations. Students will study information from the 
entity’s accounting system relevant to decisions made by 
internal managers, as distinguished from information 
relevant to users who are external to the company. The 
emphasis is on the identification and assignment of 
product costs, operational budgeting and planning, cost 
control, and management decision making. Topics 
include product costing methodologies, cost behavior, 
operational and capital budgeting, and performance 
evaluation. Lab required. Prerequisite: ACCT 2301. 3 
credit hours. (A) 
 
ACNT 1303 Introduction to Accounting I 
A study of analyzing, classifying, and recording business 
transactions in a manual and computerized environment. 
Emphasis on understanding the complete accounting 
cycle and preparing financial statements, bank 
reconciliations, and payroll. Lab required. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
ACNT 1311 Introduction to Computerized 
Accounting 
Introduction to utilizing the computer in maintaining 
accounting records with primary emphasis on a general 
ledger package. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
AERS 1105 The Air Force Today I 
Introduces students to the U.S. Air Force and the Air 
Force Reserve Officer Training Corps (AFROTC); 
includes Officership, professionalism, military customs 
and courtesies, and officer opportunities and benefits. 
AFROTC cadets must register for Leadership Laboratory 
as it complements this course with followership 
experience. 1 credit hour. (A) 
 
AERS 1106 The Air Force Today II 
Introduces students to the U.S. Air Force and the Air 
Force Reserve Officer Training Corps (AFROTC); 
includes Officership, professionalism, military customs 
 
 
204 
 
and courtesies, and officer opportunities and benefits. 
AFROTC cadets must register for Leadership Laboratory 
as it complements this course with followership 
experience. 1 credit hour. (A) 
 
AERS 2103 The Development of Air Power I 
Introduces students to the U.S. Air Force and the Air 
Force Reserve Officer Training Corps (AFROTC); 
includes Officership, professionalism, military customs 
and courtesies, and officer opportunities and benefits; 
AFROTC cadets must register for Leadership Laboratory 
as it complements this course with followership 
experience. 1 credit hour. (A) 
 
AERS 2104 The Development of Air Power II 
Introduces students to the U.S. Air Force and the Air 
Force Reserve Officer Training Corps (AFROTC); 
includes Officership, professionalism, military customs 
and courtesies, and officer opportunities and benefits; 
AFROTC cadets must register for Leadership Laboratory 
as it complements this course with followership 
experience. 1 credit hour. (A) 
 
AGCR 2305 Entomology 
Study of the morphology, physiology, and classification of 
the common insect orders and related arthropods with 
emphasis on species of economic or biological 
importance. Emphasis on integrated pest management 
concepts and proper use of pesticides. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
AGCR 2313 Soil and Water Conservation 
Management 
Study of physical and chemical soil deterioration and loss, 
water conservation, and principles for protection and 
maintenance of these resources. Topics include 
plant/water relationships, water conservation methods, 
basic terrace engineering principles, sediment loss, and 
land use plans. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
AGCR 2371 Introduction to Sustainable Agriculture 
Introduce the concept of sustainable agriculture, and 
examine the impact from social, economic, technological, 
and environmental perspectives. Integration of crop and 
livestock management, conservation practices, organic 
practices, and farming techniques to increase agricultural 
production, efficiency, and profitability. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
AGCR 2586 Internship – Crop Production 
A work-based learning experience that enables the 
student to apply specialized occupational theory, skills 
and concepts. A learning plan is developed by the college 
and the employer. Prerequisite: Consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 5 credit hours. (W) 
 
AGRI 1325 Marketing of Agricultural Products 
Essential marketing functions in the movement of 
agricultural commodities and products from producer to 
consumer. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
AGRI 1415 Horticulture 
Lecture: Structure, growth, and development of 
horticultural plants. Examination of environmental 
effects, basic principles of reproduction, production 
methods ranging from outdoor to controlled climates, 
nutrition, and pest management. Lab: Laboratory 
activities will reinforce the structure, growth, and 
development of horticultural plants. Examination of 
environmental effects, basic principles of reproduction, 
production methods ranging from outdoor to controlled 
climates, nutrition, and pest management. Lab required. 4 
credit hours. (A) 
 
AGRI 1419 Introductory Animal Science 
Scientific animal production and the importance of 
livestock and meat industries. Selection, reproduction, 
nutrition, management, and marketing of livestock. Lab 
required. 4 credit hours. (A) 
 
AGRI 2303 Agricultural Construction 
Safety procedures, selection, use, and maintenance of 
hand and power tools, metal cutting and welding; and 
construction materials and principles. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
AGRI 2317 Introduction to Agricultural Economics 
Fundamental economic principles and their application in 
the agricultural industry. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
ANTH 2301 Physical Anthropology 
The study of human origins and bio-cultural adaptations. 
Topics may include primatology, genetics, human 
variation, forensics, health, and ethics in the discipline. 
Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness standard for 
Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) . 
 
ANTH 2302 Introduction to Archeology 
The study of the human past through material remains. 
The course includes a discussion of methods and theories 
relevant to archeological inquiry. Topics may include the 
adaption of agriculture, response to environmental 
charge, the emergence of complex societies, and ethics in 
the discipline.  Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness 
standard for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit 
hours. (A) 
 
ANTH 2346 General Anthropology 
The study of human beings, their antecedents, related 
primates, and their cultural behavior and institutions. 
Introduces the major subfields: physical and cultural 
anthropology, archeology, linguistics, their applications, 
and ethics in the discipline. Prerequisite: Meet TSI 
205 
 
college-readiness standard for Reading and Writing; or 
equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
ANTH 2351 Cultural Anthropology 
The study of human cultures. Topics may include social 
organization, institutions, diversity, interactions between 
human groups, and ethics in the discipline. Prerequisite: 
Meet TSI college-readiness standard for Reading and 
Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
ANTH 2389 Academic Co-op Anthropology 
Integrates on-campus study with practical hands-on work 
experience in anthropology. In conjunction with class 
seminars, the student will set specific goals and objectives 
in the study of anthropology. Contact the Associate 
Dean/Director for more information. Prerequisites: 
Consent of Associate Dean/Director and meet TSI 
college-readiness standard for Reading and Writing; or 
equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
ANTH 2401 Physical Anthropology 
Lecture: The study of human origins and bio-cultural 
adaptations. Topics may include primatology, genetics, 
human variation, forensics, health, and ethics in the 
discipline. Lab: Includes demonstrations of the major 
principles of the lecture section. Additionally, an overview 
of human origins and cultural adaptations combining 
study of our nearest relatives, the chimpanzees, with the 
analysis of reproductions of fossil bones. Unit concerning 
forensic anthropology explains how crimes can be solved 
from analysis of skeletal material; students work with 
replicas of human bone. Opportunity to participate in 
field trip to zoo. Lab required. Prerequisite: Meet TSI 
college-readiness standard for Reading and Writing; or 
equivalent. 4 credit hours. (A) 
 
ARAB 1411 Beginning Arabic I 
This course, which is designed for students with little or 
no prior training in the language, focuses on developing 
the four basic skills of speaking, reading, writing and 
listening, as well as the study of selected aspects of Arabic 
civilization. Instruction is enhanced by the use of audio 
and video materials. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
ARAB 1412 Beginning Arabic II 
This course is a continuation of ARAB 1411. It continues 
the development of the four basic skills of speaking, 
reading, writing and listening, as well as the study of 
selected aspects of Arabic civilization. Instruction is 
enhanced by the use of audio and video materials. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: ARAB 1411 or consent of 
Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
ARCE 2352 Mechanical, Electrical and Plumbing 
(MEP) Systems 
Preparation of drawings for mechanical, electrical, and 
plumbing (MEP) systems with emphasis on applicable 
building and energy codes, product references, and 
specifications for construction. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
DFTG 1317. 3 credit hours. (W 
 
ARTC 1302 Digital Imaging I 
Digital imaging using raster image editing and/or image 
creation software: scanning, resolution, file formats, 
output devices, color systems, and image-acquisitions. 
Lab required. Prerequisite: ARTC 1325. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
ARTC 1305 Basic Graphic Design 
Graphic design with emphasis on the visual 
communication process. Topics include basic terminology 
and graphic design principles. Lab required. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
ARTC 1313 Digital Publishing I 
The fundamentals of using digital layout as a primary 
publishing tool and the basic concepts and terminology 
associated with typography and page layout. Lab included. 
Prerequisites: ARTC 1302, ARTC 1305 and ARTC 1325. 
3 credit hours. (W) 
ARTC 1317 Design Communication I 
Study of design development relating to graphic design 
terminology, tools and media, and layout and design 
concepts. Topics include integration of type, images and 
other design elements, and developing computer skills in 
industry standard computer programs. Lab required. 
Prerequisite/Concurrent Enrollment: ARTC 1327 and 
ARTC 1353. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ARTC 1325 Introduction to Computer Graphics 
A survey of design concepts, terminology, processes, and 
procedures. Topics include computer graphics hardware, 
digital images, digital publishing, vector-based graphics, 
and interactive multimedia. Lab required. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
ARTC 1327 Typography 
A study of letterforms and typographic concepts as 
elements of graphic communication. Emphasis on 
developing a current, practical typographic knowledge 
based on industry standards. Lab required. Prerequisites: 
ARTC 1305 and ARTC 1325. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ARTC 1349 Art Direction I 
Creation of projects in art direction for advertising 
graphic campaigns for products, services, or ideas. Topics 
include all campaign procedures from initial research and 
creative strategy to final execution and presentation of a 
comprehensive project. Lab required. Prerequisite: ARTC 
1302 and ARTC 1317. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ARTC 1353 Computer Illustration I 
Use of the tools and transformation options of an 
industry-standard vector drawing program to create 
 
 
206 
 
complex illustrations or drawings. Includes principles of 
layout and design and manipulation of text and graphics. 
Lab required. Prerequisite: ARTC 1325. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
ARTC 1359 Visual Design for New Media 
Visual design elements as they relate to new media. 
Emphasizes aesthetics and visual problem solving such as 
typographic issues, color management, hierarchy of 
information, image optimization, and effective layout. 
Lab required. Prerequisites: ARTC 1305, ARTC 1325, 
and ARTC 2371. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ARTC 1392 Special Topics in Design and Visual 
Communications 
Topics address recently identified current events, skills, 
knowledge, and/or attitudes and behaviors pertinent to 
the technology or occupation and relevant to the 
professional development of the student. This course was 
designed to be repeated multiple times to improve 
student proficiency. (W)  
 
Advanced Design and Visual Communication 
Principles and Techniques  
Advance study of design and visual communication 
topics. Develop student understanding of key industry 
concepts. Emphasis on improving student proficiency 
and knowledge of industry demanded skillsets. 
Students are expected to apply concepts and skillsets 
learned to industry professional standards. Course key 
topics may change to reflect industry demands and 
trends. This course was designed to be repeated 
multiple times to improve student proficiency. Lab 
required. Prerequisites: ARTC 1305, ARTC 1353, 
ARTC 1349, and ARTC 2347 or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. 
 
ARTC 2305 Digital Imaging II 
Principles of digital image processing and digital painting. 
Emphasis on raster-based imaging  and the creative 
aspects of electronic illustration for commercial or fine 
art applications. Lab included. Prerequisite: ARTC 1302. 
3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ARTC 2311 History of Communication Graphics 
Survey of the evolution of graphic arts in relation to the 
history of art. Includes formal, stylistic, social, political, 
economic, and historical aspects. Emphasis on art 
movements, schools of thought, individuals, and 
technology as they interrelate with graphic arts. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
ARTC 2335 Portfolio Development for Graphic 
Design 
Preparation of a portfolio comprised of completed 
graphic design projects. Evaluation and demonstration of 
portfolio presentation methods based on the student's 
specific area of study. Lab required. Prerequisites: ARTC 
2347 and consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
ARTC 2340 Computer Illustration II 
Advanced use of software applications and/or various 
media with emphasis on output procedures, the 
resolution of complex design issues, and concept 
development. Lab required. Prerequisite: ARTC 1353. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
ARTC 2347 Design Communication II 
An advanced study of the design process and art 
direction. Emphasis on form and content through the 
selection, creation, and integration of typographic, 
photographic, illustrative, and design elements. Lab 
required. Prerequisites: ARTC 1302 and ARTC 1327 and 
ARTC 1353 and ARTC 1317. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ARTC 2349 Art Direction II 
Mastery of advanced art direction projects with emphasis 
on selected topics in advertising campaigns. Includes 
written, oral, and visual skills. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
ARTC 1349. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ARTC 2371 User Experience I 
This is an introductory course focusing on the study and 
application of the user experience design process to 
develop software product concepts through user and 
industry research and analytics, generate ideas and solve 
problems through multi-level design iteration and 
prototyping, implement design strategy development that 
provides business solutions and meets business goals, and 
design professional presentations. Lab required. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
ARTC 2381 Cooperative Education - Commercial 
and Advertising Art 
Career-related activities encountered in the student's area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Contact the 
Associate Dean/Director of the program for further 
information. Prerequisite: Consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ARTS 1301 Art Appreciation 
A general introduction to the visual arts designed to 
create an appreciation of the vocabulary, media, 
techniques, and purposes of the creative process. 
Students will critically interpret and evaluate works of art 
within formal, cultural, and historical context. 
207 
 
Prerequisite: Meet TSI standard for INRW 0315; or 
equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
ARTS 1303 Art History I (Prehistoric to the 14th 
century) 
A chronological analysis of the historical and cultural 
contexts of the visual arts from prehistoric times to the 
14th century.  Prerequisite: Meet TSI standard for INRW 
0315; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
Note: Students should expect additional supply costs. 
 
ARTS 1304 Art History II (14th century to the 
present) 
A chronological analysis of the historical and cultural 
contexts of the visual arts from the 14th century to the 
present day. Prerequisite: Meet TSI standard for INRW 
0315; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
Note: Students should expect additional supply costs. 
 
ARTS 1311 Design I (2-dimensional) 
An introduction to the fundamental terminology, 
concepts, theory, and application of two-dimensional 
design. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (A) 
Note: Students should expect additional supply costs. 
 
ARTS 1312 Design II (3-dimensional) 
An introduction to the fundamental terminology, 
concepts, theory, and application of three-dimensional 
design. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (A) 
Note: Students should expect additional supply costs. 
 
ARTS 1313 Foundations of Art 
Introduction to the creative media designed to enhance 
artistic awareness and sensitivity through the creative and 
imaginative use of art materials and tools. Includes art 
history and culture through the exploration of a variety of 
art works with an emphasis on aesthetic judgment and 
growth. Additionally, the examination of the change in art 
creation based on the advancement of tools and materials 
pushing art production from optic technology in 
Renaissance painting to mechanical art to technology 
based art. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
ARTS 1316 Drawing I 
A foundation studio course exploring drawing with 
emphasis on descriptive, expressive and conceptual 
approaches. Students will learn to see and interpret a 
variety of subjects while using diverse materials and 
techniques. Course work will facilitate a dialogue in which 
students will engage in critical analysis and begin to 
develop their understanding of drawing as a discipline. 
Lab required. 3 credit hours. (A) 
Note: Students should expect additional supply costs. 
 
ARTS 1317 Drawing II 
A studio course exploring drawing with continued 
emphasis on descriptive, expressive and conceptual 
approaches. Students will further develop the ability to 
see and interpret a variety of subjects while using diverse 
materials and techniques. Course work will facilitate a 
dialogue in which students will employ critical analysis to 
broaden their understanding of drawing as a discipline. 
Lab required. Prerequisite: ARTS 1316. 3 credit hours. 
(A) 
Note: Students should expect additional supply costs. 
 
ARTS 2311 Design III 
Studio art course that is a theoretical and practical study 
of color and composition in art and design. The course 
consists of studio-based projects using the formal and 
conceptual aspects of color. The course also examines the 
functions of color in art from different historical and 
cultural perspectives. Lab required. Prerequisite: ARTS 
1311 or ARTS 1312. 3 credit hours. (A) 
Note: Students should expect additional supply costs. 
 
ARTS 2316 Painting I 
Studio art course that introduces the fundamental 
principles, materials, and techniques of painting. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: ARTS 1316. 3 credit hours. (A) 
Note: Students should expect additional supply costs. 
 
ARTS 2317 Painting II 
Studio art course that furthers the study of the principles, 
materials, and techniques of painting. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: ARTS 2316. 3 credit hours. (A) 
Note: Students should expect additional supply costs. 
 
ARTS 2323 Life Drawing 
Studio art course that introduces the analytic study of the 
human form and the figure's potential for compositional 
and expressive use in drawing. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
ARTS 1316. 3 credit hours. (A) 
Note: Students should expect additional supply costs. 
 
ARTS 2326 Sculpture 
A studio art course that introduces the materials, 
processes, and issues pertaining to the making of three-
dimensional objects and environments. The course 
explores the use of varied materials and techniques along 
with the formal and conceptual principles that form the 
basis of contemporary sculpture. Lab required. 3 credit 
hours. (A) 
Note: Students should expect additional supply costs. 
 
ARTS 2333 Printmaking I 
A studio art course that introduces the materials, 
processes, and concepts pertaining to traditional and 
contemporary printmaking. The course explores the use 
of varied tools and techniques along with the formal and 
conceptual principles to create editioned and unique 
 
 
208 
 
works. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (A) 
Note: Students should expect additional supply costs. 
 
ARTS 2341 Metals 
A studio art course that introduces metalsmithing using 
basic techniques in jewelry design and metal construction. 
The course provides instruction and practical fabrication 
experience as it relates to the design and production of 
small-scale functional and/or non-functional objects. Lab 
required. 3 credit hours. (A) 
Note: Students should expect additional supply costs. 
 
ARTS 2346 Ceramics I 
A studio art course that introduces basic building, 
throwing, and other techniques as it relates to the design 
and production of ceramic sculpture and pottery. Lab 
required. 3 credit hours. (A) 
Note: Students should expect additional supply costs. 
 
ARTS 2347 Ceramics II 
A studio art course that furthers the study of building, 
throwing, and other techniques as it relates to the design 
and production of ceramic sculpture and pottery. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: ARTS 2346. 3 credit hours. (A) 
Note: Students should expect additional supply costs. 
 
ARTS 2348 Digital Media 
Studio art course that introduces the potential of basic 
digital media manipulation and graphic creation. The 
course emphasizes still and time-based media. 
Additionally, focusing on fine art photography with 
creative applications. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (A) 
Note: Students should expect additional supply costs. 
 
ARTS 2356 Photography I 
A studio art course that introduces the technical and 
conceptual basics of photography as a creative medium. 
Lab required. 3 credit hours. (A) 
Note: Students should expect additional supply costs, including a 
35mm SLR camera, film, and photographic paper. 
 
ARTS 2357 Photography II 
A studio art course that furthers the study of the technical 
and conceptual basics of photography as a creative 
medium. Additionally, a darkroom photography course 
that will cover advanced cameras and darkroom 
techniques. Lab required. Prerequisite: ARTS 2356. 3 
credit hours. (A) 
Note: Students should expect additional supply costs. 
 
ARTS 2366 Watercolor 
Studio art course that introduces the fundamental 
principles, materials, and techniques of watercolor and 
other water-based media. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (A) 
Note: Students should expect additional supply costs. 
 
ARTS 2389 Academic Co-op Arts/Photography 
Integrates on-campus study with practical hands-on work 
experience in art/photography. In conjunction with class 
seminars, the student will set specific goals and objectives 
in the study of art. Contact the Associate Dean/Director 
for more information. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
ARTV 1303 Basic Animation 
Examination of animation concepts, principles, and 
storyboard for basic production. Emphasizes creating 
movement and expression utilizing traditionally or 
digitally generated image sequences. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: ARTC 1325 or ARTV 1351. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
ARTV 1341 3-D Animation I 
Intermediate level 3-D course introducing animation 
tools and techniques used to create movement. Emphasis 
on using the principles of animation. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: ARTV 1345 or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ARTV 1345 3-D Modeling and Rendering I 
Techniques of three-dimensional (3-D) modeling utilizing 
industry standard software. Includes the creation and 
modification of 3-D geometric shapes, use of a variety of 
rendering techniques, camera, light sources, texture, and 
surface mapping. Lab required. Prerequisite/Concurrent 
enrollment: ARTC 1325. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ARTV 1351 Digital Video 
Producing and editing video and sound for multimedia or 
web productions. Emphasizes capture, editing, and 
outputting of video using a digital video workstation. Lab 
required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ARTV 1371 Storyboard and Concept Development 
Storyboarding for film, video and animation. Visual 
concept development for linear and interactive media. 
Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ARTV 2320 Team Program Production I 
Students assume roles in a production team using 
techniques and equipment to create short-form 
production(s). Lab required. Prerequisites: FLMC 2334 
and FLMC 2336. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ARTV 2335 Portfolio Development for Animation 
A course in the development of a professional portfolio 
to showcase the student's skills in animation. Includes 
self-promotion, resumes, portfolio distribution, and 
209 
 
interview techniques. Lab required. Prerequisite: Consent 
of Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ARTV 2345 3-D Modeling and Rendering II 
A studio course focused on advanced 3-D modeling and 
rendering techniques using industry standard software, 
modeling techniques, camera settings, lighting, and 
surfacing to develop detailed environments. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: ARTV 1345. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ARTV 2351 3-D Animation II 
Advanced level 3-D course utilizing animation tools and 
techniques used to develop movement. Emphasis on 
advanced animation techniques. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: ARTV 1341. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ARTV 2371 Advanced Skill Development for 
Animation and Games 
An upper level course in the development of concepts 
and execution of assets for 2D/3D animation and games. 
The student's incoming skill level and abilities are 
reviewed and areas of improvement are targeted. Includes 
the integration of aesthetic and technical skills as 
introduced in various lower level courses. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: GAME 2325, or consent of Associate Dean. 
3 credit hours. (W) 
 
AUMT 1266 Practicum 1 - Automobile/Automotive 
Mechanics Technology/Technician 
Practical, general workplace training supported by an 
individualized learning plan developed by the employer, 
college, and student. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
Departmental Permit. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
AUMT 1305 Introduction to Automotive Technology 
An introduction to the automotive industry including 
automotive history, safety practices, shop equipment and 
tools, vehicle subsystems, service publications, 
professional responsibilities, and basic automotive 
maintenance. May be taught manufacturer specific. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: Departmental Permit. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
AUMT 1307 Automotive Electrical Systems 
An overview of automotive electrical systems including 
topics in operational theory, testing, diagnosis, and repair 
of, charging and starting systems, and electrical 
accessories. Emphasis on electrical principles, schematic 
diagrams, and service publications. May be taught 
manufacturer specific. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
Departmental Permit. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
AUMT 1310 Automotive Brake Systems 
Operation and repair of drum/disc type brake systems. 
Topics include brake theory, diagnosis, and repair of 
power, manual, anti-lock brake systems, and parking 
brakes. May be taught manufacturer specific. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: Departmental Permit. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
AUMT 1316 Automotive Suspension and Steering 
Systems 
Diagnosis and repair of automotive suspension and 
steering systems including electronically controlled 
systems. Includes component repair, alignment 
procedures and tire and wheel service. May be taught 
manufacturer specific. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
Departmental Permit. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
AUMT 1319 Automotive Engine Repair 
Fundamentals of engine operation, diagnosis and repair. 
Emphasis on identification, inspection, measurements, 
and disassembly, repair, and reassembly of the engine. 
May be taught manufacturer specific. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: Department Permit. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
AUMT 1345 Automotive Climate Control Systems 
Diagnosis and repair of manual/electronic climate control 
systems. Includes the refrigeration cycle and EPA 
guidelines for refrigerant handling. May be taught 
manufacturer specific. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
Department Permit. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
AUMT 1419 Automotive Engine Repair 
Fundamentals of engine operation, diagnosis and repair. 
Emphasis on identification, inspection, measurements, 
and disassembly, repair, and reassembly of the engine. 
May be taught manufacturer specific. Lab required. 
Prerequisite/Concurrent Enrollment: AUMT 1307. 4 
credit hours. (W) 
 
AUMT 2307 Hybrid and/or Battery Electric Vehicle 
(BEV) Systems Diagnostics 
An advanced study of hybrid and/or battery electric 
vehicles (BEV) and the unique characteristics of hybrid 
and/or BEV systems. Includes hybrid and/or BEV safety 
procedures, diagnosis, and repair of hybrid and/or BEV 
systems. May be taught manufacturer specific. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: Department Permit. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
AUMT 2310 Automotive Service Consultant 
Automotive service consulting skills and procedures. 
Includes vehicle identification, product knowledge, shop 
operations, warranty service contracts, communications, 
customer relations, internal relations, and sales skills. 
Emphasizes courtesy, professionalism, and 
communications. Lab required. Prerequisite: Department 
Permit. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
AUMT 2313 Automotive Drive Train and Axles 
A study of automotive clutches, clutch operation devices, 
manual transmissions/ transaxles, and differentials with 
emphasis on diagnosis and repair. May be taught 
 
 
210 
 
manufacturer specific. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
Department Permit. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
AUMT 2317 Automotive Engine Performance 
Analysis I 
Theory, operation, diagnosis of drivability concerns, and 
repair of ignition and fuel delivery systems. Use of current 
engine performance diagnostic equipment. May be taught 
manufacturer specific. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
Department Permit. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
AUMT 2321 Automotive Electrical Diagnosis and 
Repair 
Repair of automotive electrical subsystems, lighting, 
instrumentation, and accessories. Emphasis on accurate 
diagnosis and proper repair methods using various 
troubleshooting skills and techniques. May be taught 
manufacturer specific. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
Department Permit. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
AUMT 2325 Automatic Transmission and Transaxle 
A study of the operation, hydraulic circuits and electronic 
controls of modern automatic transmissions and 
automatic transaxles. Diagnosis, disassembly, and 
assembly procedures with emphasis on the use of special 
tools and repair techniques. May be taught manufacturer 
specific. Lab required. Prerequisite: Department Permit. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
AUMT 2334 Automotive Engine Performance 
Analysis II 
Diagnosis and repair of emission systems, computerized 
engine performance systems, and advanced ignition and 
fuel systems. Includes use of advanced engine 
performance diagnostic equipment. May be taught 
manufacturer specific. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
Department Permit. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
AUMT 2337 Automotive Electronics 
Study of electronic principles applied to microcomputers 
and communication systems. Includes digital 
fundamentals, and use of electronic test equipment. May 
be taught manufacturer specific. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: Department Permit. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
AUMT 2380 Cooperative Education I - 
Automobile/Automotive Mechanics 
Technology/Technician 
Career-related activities encountered in the student's area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Prerequisite: 
Departmental Permit. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
AUMT 2381 Cooperative Education II - 
Automobile/Automotive Mechanics 
Technology/Technician 
Practical, general workplace training supported by an 
individualized learning plan developed by the employer, 
college, and student. Includes a lecture component. 
Prerequisite: Departmental Permit. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
AUMT 2417 Automotive Engine Performance 
Analysis I 
Theory, operation, diagnosis of drivability concerns, and 
repair of ignition and fuel delivery systems. Use of current 
engine performance diagnostic equipment. May be taught 
manufacturer specific. Lab required. 
Prerequisite/Concurrent Enrollment: AUMT 2421. 4 
credit hours. (W) 
 
AUMT 2421 Automotive Electrical Diagnosis and 
Repair 
Repair of automotive electrical subsystems, lighting, 
instrumentation, and accessories. Emphasis on accurate 
diagnosis and proper repair methods using various 
troubleshooting skills and techniques. May be taught 
manufacturer specific. Lab required. 
Prerequisite/Concurrent Enrollment: AUMT 1307. 4 
credit hours. (W) 
 
AUMT 2425 Automotive Automatic Transmission 
and Transaxle 
A study of the operation, hydraulic circuits and electronic 
controls of modern automatic transmissions and 
automatic transaxles. Diagnosis, disassembly, and 
assembly procedures with emphasis on the use of special 
tools and repair techniques. May be taught manufacturer 
specific. Lab required. Prerequisite: AUMT 2421. 4 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
AUMT 2434 Automotive Engine Performance 
Analysis II 
Diagnosis and repair of emission systems, computerized 
engine performance systems, and advanced ignition and 
fuel systems. Includes use of advanced engine 
performance diagnostic equipment. May be taught 
manufacturer specific. Lab required. 
Prerequisite/Concurrent Enrollment: AUMT 2417. 4 
credit hours. (W) 
 
AUMT 2437 Automotive Electronics 
Study of electronic principles applied to microcomputers 
and communication systems. Includes digital 
fundamentals, and use of electronic test equipment. May 
211 
 
be taught manufacturer specific. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: AUMT 2421. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
BCIS 1305 Business Computer Applications 
Introduces and develops foundational skills in applying 
essential and emerging business productivity information 
technology tools. The focus of this course is on business 
productivity software applications, including word 
processing, spreadsheets, databases, presentation 
graphics, data analytics, and business-oriented utilization 
of the Internet. Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness 
standard for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit 
hours. (A) 
 
BIOL 1322 Nutrition and Diet Therapy 
This course introduces general nutritional concepts in 
health and disease and includes practical applications of 
that knowledge. Special emphasis is given to nutrients and 
nutritional processes including functions, food sources, 
digestion, absorption, and metabolism. Food safety, 
availability, and nutritional information including food 
labels, advertising, and nationally established guidelines 
are addressed. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
BIOL 1323 Nutrition and Diet Therapy II 
Applications of nutrition principles and techniques of 
nutrition care for healthy individuals and patients/clients 
at nutritional risk. Nutrition risk screening, 
interviewing/counseling methods, diet evaluation, basic 
diet calculations, and documentation. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
BIOL 1406 Biology for Science Majors I 
Lecture: Fundamental principles of living organisms will 
be studied, including physical and chemical properties of 
life, organization, function, evolutionary adaptation, and 
classification. Concepts of cytology, reproduction, 
genetics, and scientific reasoning are included. Lab: 
Laboratory activities will reinforce the fundamental 
principles of living organisms, including physical and 
chemical properties of life, organization, function, 
evolutionary adaptation, and classification. Study and 
examination of the concepts of cytology, reproduction, 
genetics, and scientific reasoning are included. Lab 
required. Prerequisites: TSI Math score of 910-949 with a 
diagnostic score of 5, and TSI college-readiness standard 
for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 4 credit hours. (A) 
 
BIOL 1407 Biology for Science Majors II 
Lecture: The diversity and classification of life will be 
studied, including animals, plants, protists, fungi, and 
prokaryotes. Special emphasis will be given to anatomy, 
physiology, ecology, and evolution of plants and animals. 
Lab: Laboratory activities will reinforce study of the 
diversity and classifications of life, including animals, 
plants, protists, fungi, and prokaryotes. Special emphasis 
will be given to anatomy, physiology, ecology, and 
evolution of plants and animals. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: BIOL 1406. 4 credit hours. (A) Note: This 
course includes dissection in lab. 
 
BIOL 1408 Biology for Non-Science Majors I 
Lecture: Provides a survey of biological principles with an 
emphasis on humans, including chemistry of life, cells, 
structure, function, and reproduction. Lab: Laboratory 
activities will reinforce a survey of biological principles 
with an emphasis on humans, including chemistry of life, 
cells, structure, function, and reproduction. Lab required. 
4 credit hours. (A) 
 
BIOL 1409 Biology for Non-Science Majors II 
Lecture: This course will provide a survey of biological 
principles with an emphasis on humans, including 
evolution, ecology, plant and animal diversity, and 
physiology. Lab: Laboratory activities will reinforce a 
survey of biological principles with an emphasis on 
humans, including evolution, ecology, plant and animal 
diversity, and physiology. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
BIOL 1408. 4 credit hours. (A) 
Note: This course includes dissection in lab. 
 
BIOL 1414 Introduction to Biotechnology I 
Overview of classical genetics, DNA structure, the flow 
of genetic information, DNA replication, gene 
transcription, protein translation. Principles of molecular 
biology and genetic engineering techniques, including 
restriction enzymes and their uses, major types of cloning 
vectors, construction of libraries, Southern and Northern 
blotting, hybridization, PCR, DNA typing. Applications 
of these techniques in human health and welfare, 
medicine, agriculture and the environment. Introduction 
to the human genome project, gene therapy, molecular 
diagnostics, forensics, creation and uses of transgenic 
plants and animal and animal cloning and of the ethical, 
legal, and social issues and scientific problems associated 
with these technologies. Relevant practical exercises in the 
above areas. Lab required. Prerequisites: TSI Math score 
of 910-949 with a diagnostic score of 5, and TSI college-
readiness standard for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 
4 credit hours. (A) 
 
BIOL 1415 Introduction to Biotechnology II 
Lecture to focus on an integrative approach to study 
biomolecules with an emphasis on protein structures, 
functions and uses in the modern bioscience laboratory. 
Students will investigate the mechanisms involved in the 
transfer of information from DNA sequences to proteins 
to biochemical functions. The course will integrate 
biological and chemical concepts with techniques that are 
used in research and industry. Critical thinking will be 
applied in laboratory exercises using inquiry-based 
approaches, troubleshooting and analyzing experimental 
data. Lab required. Prerequisite/Concurrent enrollment: 
 
 
212 
 
BIOL 1414. 4 credit hours. (A) There is an additional fee 
for this course. 
 
BIOL 2389 Academic Co-op Biology 
Integrates on-campus study with practical hands-on work 
experience in biology. In conjunction with class seminars, 
the student will set specific goals and objectives in the 
study of biology. Contact the Associate Dean/Director 
for more information. Prerequisite: BIOL 1406 or BIOL 
1408. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
BIOL 2401 Anatomy and Physiology I 
Lecture: Anatomy and Physiology I is the first part of a 
two course sequence. It is a study of the structure and 
function of the human body including cells, tissues and 
organs of the following systems: integumentary, skeletal, 
muscular, nervous and special senses. Emphasis is on 
interrelationships among systems and regulation of 
physiological functions involved in maintaining 
homeostasis. Lab: The lab provides a hands-on learning 
experience for exploration of human system components 
and basic physiology. Systems to be studied include 
integumentary, skeletal, muscular, nervous, and special 
senses. Lab required. Prerequisites: TSI Math score of 
910-949 with a diagnostic score of 5, and TSI college-
readiness standard for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 
Enrollment in this course is by permission only. Please 
meet with an academic advisor. BIOL 1406 is strongly 
recommended. 4 credit hours. (A) 
 
BIOL 2402 Anatomy and Physiology II 
Lecture: Anatomy and Physiology II is the second part of 
a two-course sequence. It is a study of the structure and 
function of the human body including the following 
systems: endocrine, cardiovascular, immune, lymphatic, 
respiratory, digestive (including nutrition), urinary 
(including fluid and electrolyte balance), and reproductive 
(including human development and genetics). Emphasis 
is on interrelationships among systems and regulation of 
physiological functions involved in maintaining 
homeostasis. Lab: The lab provides a hands-on learning 
experience for exploration of human system components 
and basic physiology. Systems to be studied include 
endocrine, cardiovascular, immune, lymphatic, 
respiratory, digestive (including nutrition), urinary 
(including fluid and electrolyte balance), and reproductive 
(including human development and genetics). Lab 
required. Prerequisite: Biology 2401 with a grade of “C” 
or better within the last five years. 4 credit hours. (A) 
 
BIOL 2404 Human Anatomy and Physiology Basic 
A one-semester survey of the structure and function of 
the human body, including discussion and study of cells, 
tissues, organs, and systems. Lab required. 4 credit hours. 
(A) 
 
BIOL 2406 Environmental Biology 
Lecture: Principles of environmental systems and ecology, 
including biogeochemical cycles, energy transformations, 
abiotic interactions, symbiotic relationships, natural 
resources and their management, lifestyle analysis, 
evolutionary trends, hazards and risks, and approaches to 
ecological research. Lab: Laboratory activities will 
reinforce principles of environmental systems and 
ecology, including biogeochemical cycles, energy 
transformations, abiotic interactions, symbiotic 
relationships, natural resources and their management, 
lifestyle analysis, evolutionary trends, hazards and risks, 
and approaches to ecological research. Lab required, 
including field trips. 4 credit hours. (A) 
 
BIOL 2416 Genetics 
Study of the principles of molecular and classical genetics, 
and the function and transmission of hereditary material. 
Special emphasis on molecular genetics and genetic 
engineering. Lab required. Prerequisite: BIOL 1406. 4 
credit hours. (A) 
 
BIOL 2420 Microbiology for Non-Science Majors 
Lecture: This course covers basic microbiology and 
immunology and is primarily directed at pre-nursing, pre-
allied health, and non-science majors. It provides an 
introduction to historical concepts of the nature of 
microorganisms, microbial diversity, the importance of 
microorganisms and acellular agents in the biosphere, and 
their roles in human and animal diseases. Major topics 
include bacterial structure as well as growth, physiology, 
genetics, and biochemistry of microorganisms. Emphasis 
is on medical microbiology, infectious diseases, and 
public health. Lab: This course covers basics of culture 
and identification of bacteria and microbial ecology. This 
course is primarily directed at pre-nursing and other pre-
allied health majors and covers basics of microbiology. 
Emphasis is on medical microbiology, infectious diseases, 
and public health. Lab required. Prerequisite: BIOL 2401 
with a grade of “C” or better within the last three years, 
and Prerequisite/Concurrent enrollment in BIOL 2402 
with a grade of “C” or better within the last three years. 4 
credit hours. (A) 
 
BIOL 2421 Microbiology for Science Majors 
Lecture: Principles of microbiology, including 
metabolism, structure, function, genetics, and phylogeny 
of microbes. The course will also examine the interactions 
of microbes with each other, hosts, and the environment. 
Lab: Laboratory activities will reinforce principles of 
microbiology, including metabolism, structure, function, 
genetics, and phylogeny of microbes. The course will also 
examine the interactions of microbes with each other, 
213 
 
hosts, and the environment. Lab required. Prerequisites: 
BIOL 1407 and CHEM 1411. 4 credit hours. (A) 
 
BIOM 1355 Medical Electronic Applications 
Presentation of sensors, transducers, and supporting 
circuits used in medical instrumentation devices. Lab 
required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
BIOM 2201 Safety in Health Care Facilities 
Study of codes, standards and management principles 
related to biomedical instrumentation. Emphasizes 
application of safety test equipment, preventive 
maintenance procedures, and documentation of work 
performed. Lab required. Prerequisite: HITT 1305. 2 
credit hours. (W) 
 
BIOM 2311 General Medical Equipment I 
Analysis of selected current paths from a larger 
schematic. Discussion of equipment and disassembly and 
reassembly of equipment. Lab required. Prerequisites: 
CETT 1307, CETT 1425, and HITT 1305. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
BIOM 2315 Physiological Instruments I 
Theory of operation, circuit analysis, and troubleshooting 
physiological instruments. Lab required. Prerequisites: 
BIOM 2311 and CETT 1409. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
BIOM 2319 Fundamentals of X-Ray and Medical 
Imaging Systems 
Radiation theory and safety hazards, fundamental circuits, 
and application of X-ray systems including circuit analysis 
and troubleshooting. Additionally, ultra sound systems 
and magnetic resonance systems. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: BIOM 2343. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
BIOM 2331 Biomedical Clinical Instrumentation 
A study of theory, application, and principles of operation 
of instruments commonly used in a medical laboratory. 
Lab required. Prerequisite: BIOM 2343. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
BIOM 2337 Respiratory Equipment Maintenance 
Principles of operation, theory, and maintenance of 
respiratory equipment. Lab required. Prerequisite: BIOM 
2343. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
BIOM 2343 General Medical Equipment II 
Theory and principles of operation of a variety of basic 
electro-mechanical equipment with emphasis on repair 
and service of actual medical equipment. Lab required. 
Prerequisites: BIOM 2311 and CETT 1409. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
BITC 1340 Quality Assurance for the Biosciences 
Quality assurance principles and applications. Includes 
quality control and Federal Drug Administration (FDA) 
regulations to the biotechnology, biopharmaceutical, and 
biomedical device industries. Additionally, BITC 1340 
Quality Assurance for the Biosciences is a course 
designed to introduce the student to quality principles as 
they apply to the biotechnology, biopharmaceutical, and 
the biomedical device industries. Theories and application 
of quality assurance and quality control will be presented 
and several different quality systems will be discussed 
such as cGMP, ISO9000, Six Sigma and Lean. This class 
will be focused on quality in the bioscience workplace and 
therefore will include many applied assignments, which 
include internet research in current regulations and 
discussion board participation. Prerequisite/Concurrent 
enrollment: BIOL 1415 or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
BITC 1350 Special Studies and Bioethical Issues of 
Biotechnology 
Current events, skills, attitudes, and behaviors pertinent 
to biotechnology and relevant to the professional 
development of the student. Includes exploration of 
ethical and legal behaviors in the context of the 
biotechnology industry. Prerequisites: BIOL 1414 and 
BIOL 1415 or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
BITC 2350 Bioinformatics 
Current topics in bioinformatics, proteomics, and 
computational biology. Includes methods for high-
throughput data collection, storing, and accessing 
biological data. Covers programs and algorithms used to 
analyze data. Prerequisite: BITC 2411 or consent of 
Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
BITC 2411 Biotechnology Laboratory 
Instrumentation 
Theory, applications, and safe operation of various 
biotechnology-related analytical instruments. Addresses 
separation and identification techniques including 
electrophoresis, spectrophotometry, and chromatography. 
Lab required. Prerequisites: BIOL 1414 and BIOL 1415 
or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 4 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
BITC 2431 Cell Culture Techniques 
Theory and applications of cell culture techniques. 
Laboratory emphasis on the principles and practices of 
applications such as initiation, cultivation, maintenance, 
and preservation of cell lines. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
BIOL 1406 or BIOL 1414 or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
BITC 2441 Molecular Biology Techniques 
In-depth coverage of the theory and laboratory 
techniques in molecular biology with an emphasis on 
gene expression and regulation, recombinant DNA, and 
nucleic acids. Lab required. Prerequisites: BIOL 1414 and 
 
 
214 
 
BIOL 1415 or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 4 
credit hours. (W) 
 
BITC 2486 Internship - Biology 
Technician/Biotechnology Laboratory Technician 
A work-based learning experience that enables the 
student to apply specialized occupational theory, skills 
and concepts. A learning plan is developed by the college 
and the employer. Contact the Associate Dean/Director 
for more information. Prerequisite: Completed 9 hours of 
biotechnology courses and consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. Major Requirement: Biotechnology. 4 
credit hours. (W) 
 
BMGT 1301 Supervision 
The role of the supervisor. Includes managerial functions 
as applied to leadership, counseling, motivation, and 
human relations skills. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
BMGT 1305 Communications in Management 
Basic theory and processes of communication skills 
necessary for the management of an organization's 
workforce. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
BMGT 1306 Facilities Management 
General management and supervision of public buildings, 
business and industrial facilities, and other complexes 
requiring supervision and control. Includes fire alarm 
maintenance, plant maintenance, occupational safety, 
OSHA rules and regulations, management of 
maintenance supervisors, and hazardous materials 
awareness. Prerequisite: CNBT 2342. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
BMGT 1307 Team Building 
Principles of building and sustaining teams in 
organizations. Includes team dynamics, process 
improvement, trust and collaboration, conflict resolution, 
and the role of the individual in the team. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
BMGT 1309 Information and Project Management 
Critical path methods for planning and controlling 
projects. Includes time/cost tradeoffs, resource 
utilization, stochastic considerations, task determination, 
time management, scheduling management, status 
reports, budget management, customer service, 
professional attitude, and project supervision. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
BMGT 1313 Principles of Purchasing 
The purchasing process as it relates to such topics as 
inventory control, price determination, vendor selection, 
supply chain management, negotiation techniques, and 
ethical issues in purchasing. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
BMGT 1327 Principles of Management 
Concepts, terminology, principles, theories, and issues in 
the field of management. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
BMGT 1341 Business Ethics 
Discussion of ethical issues, the development of a moral 
frame of reference, and the need for an awareness of 
social responsibility in management practices and 
business activities. Includes ethical corporate 
responsibility. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
BMGT 1344 Negotiations and Conflict Management 
Theories which aid in the diagnosis of interpersonal and 
intergroup conflict. The role of manager as negotiator, 
intermediary, and problem solver. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
BMGT 2303 Problem Solving and Decision Making 
Decision-making and problem-solving processes in 
organizations utilizing logical and creative problem 
solving techniques. Application of theory is provided by 
experiential activities using managerial decision tools. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
BMGT 2309 Leadership 
Leadership and its relationship to management. Prepares 
the student with leadership and communication skills 
needed to motivate and identify leadership styles. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
BMGT 2311 Change Management 
Knowledge, skills, and tools that enable a 
leader/organization to facilitate change in a participative 
style. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
BMGT 2341 Strategic Management 
Strategic management process, including analysis of how 
organizations develop and implement a strategy for 
achieving organizational objectives in a changing 
environment. Prerequisite: BMGT 1327. 
Prerequisite/Concurrent enrollment: BMGT 2311. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
BMGT 2382 Cooperative Education - Business 
Administration and Management, General 
Career-related activities encountered in the student's area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Contact the 
Associate Dean/Director for more information. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
215 
 
BNKG 1303 Principles of Bank Operation 
Overview of the fundamental banking functions and the 
role of regulation in the banking industry. Explanation of 
financial products and services to various markets. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
BNKG 1340 Money and Financial Markets 
Monetary policy and its related effects on financial 
intermediaries. Includes financial markets, regulatory 
functions, and structures. Addresses investment and 
funds management. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
BNKG 1345 Consumer Lending 
A study of the different types of consumer loans. Identify 
the federal regulations and state laws pertaining to 
collection and serving of a consumer loan and relate 
consumer credit to the lending process. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
BNKG 1347 Bank Marketing 
Principles of marketing as they relate to the banking 
industry. Special emphasis on deposit, credit, and 
payment related products. Pricing, promotion, product, 
and distribution strategies as used within the financial 
industry are included. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
BNKG 1349 Commercial Lending 
Overview of the commercial lending market and process 
with emphasis on credit analysis, evaluation, federal 
regulations, and state laws. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
BNKG 1356 Analyzing Financial Statements 
A study of the process of evaluating financial statements, 
cash flow, and ratio analysis of individuals and businesses. 
Emphasis on the relationship of comparative analysis and 
industry standards. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
BNKG 2380 Cooperative Education - Banking and 
Financial Support Services 
Career-related activities encountered in the student's area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Contact your 
Workforce Program Career Coach. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
BUSA 1313 Investments 
Theory and mechanics of business investment decisions 
and management of business financial assets. Topics 
include time value of money, cash flow, capital budgeting, 
sources of funds, break-even analysis, and investment 
decisions. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
BUSA 1315 Investments and Securities 
A study of relevant terminology and changes in the stock 
market as a result of economic and political events, and 
changes in interest rates and taxes. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
BUSG 1304 Financial Literacy 
A study of the financial principles when managing 
financial affairs. Includes topics such as budgeting, 
retirement, property ownership, savings, and investment 
planning. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
BUSG 1307 Entrepreneurship and Economic 
Development 
Overview of entrepreneurship as an economic 
development strategy. Includes community support 
systems for entrepreneurs. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
BUSG 1371 Business Plan for Funding 
How to develop a business plan for a small business start-
up or expansion that can be submitted to a financial 
institution or used for implementation. Emphasis on 
importance of the plan, components, format, and 
considerations. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
BUSG 2309 Small Business 
Management/Entrepreneurship 
Starting, operating, and growing a small business. 
Includes essential management skills, how to prepare a 
business plan, accounting, financial needs, staffing, 
marketing strategies, and legal issues. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
BUSG 2371 Entrepreneurship Experience 
Career-related activities associated with the operation of 
one’s own business. This course will allow the student to 
identify and implement the necessary knowledge and 
skills required to be a successful business owner. 
Prerequisite: Consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
BUSG 2380 Cooperative Education - 
Business/Commerce, General 
Career-related activities encountered in the student's area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Prerequisites: 
INSR 1305 and INSR 1345. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
BUSI 1301 Business Principles 
This course provides a survey of economic systems, 
forms of business ownership, and considerations for 
running a business. Students will learn various aspects of 
business, management, and leadership functions; 
organizational considerations; and decision-making 
processes. Financial topics are introduced, including 
accounting, money and banking, and securities markets. 
Also included are discussions of business challenges in 
the legal and regulatory environment, business ethics, 
 
 
216 
 
social responsibility, and international business. 
Emphasized is the dynamic role of business in everyday 
life. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
BUSI 1307 Personal Finance 
Personal financial issues including financial planning, 
insurance, budgeting, credit, home ownership, savings 
and tax problems. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
BUSI 2301 Business Law 
The course provides the student with foundational 
information about the U.S. legal system and dispute 
resolution, and their impact on business. The major 
content areas will include general principles of law, the 
relationship of business and the U.S. Constitution, state 
and federal legal systems, the relationship between law 
and ethics, contracts, sales, torts, agency law, intellectual 
property, and business law in the global context.  
Prerequisite: High school coursework in U.S. history and 
government; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
BUSI 2305 Business Statistics 
Descriptive and inferential statistical techniques for 
business and economic decision-making. Topics include 
the collection, description, analysis, and summarization of 
data; probability; discrete and continuous random 
variables; the binomial and normal distributions; sampling 
distributions; tests of hypotheses; estimation and 
confidence intervals; linear regression; and correlation 
analysis. Statistical software is used to analyze data 
throughout the course. (BUSI 2305 is included in the 
Business Field of Study.) Prerequisites: MATH 1324 or 
MATH 1314, and BCIS 1305. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
CDEC 1270 Introduction to Teaching ESL 
An overview of ESL education. Topics include awareness 
of cultural diversity, assessment strategies, teaching 
techniques, instructional activity development and 
historical / philosophical concepts of ESL education. Lab 
required. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
CDEC 1313 Curriculum Resources for Early 
Childhood Programs 
A study of the fundamentals developmentally appropriate 
curriculum design and implementation in early care and 
education programs for children birth through age eight. 
Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
CDEC 1317 Child Development Associate Training I 
Based on the requirements for the Child Development 
Associate credential (CDA). Topics include CDA 
overview, observation skills, and child growth and 
development. The four functional areas of study are 
creative, cognitive, physical, and communication. Lab 
required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
CDEC 1319 Child Guidance 
An exploration of guidance strategies for promoting pro-
social behaviors with individual and groups of children. 
Emphasis on positive guidance principles and techniques, 
family involvement, and cultural influences. Lab required. 
3 credit hours. (W) 
 
CDEC 1321 The Infant and Toddler 
A study of appropriate infant and toddler programs (birth 
to age 3), including an overview of development, quality 
routines, learning environments, materials and activities, 
and teaching/guidance techniques. Lab required. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
CDEC 1323 Observation and Assessment 
A study of observation skills, assessment techniques, and 
documentation of children's development. Lab required. 
3 credit hours. (W) 
 
CDEC 1358 Creative Arts for Early Childhood 
An exploration of principles, methods and materials for 
teaching music, movement, visual arts, and dramatic play 
through process-oriented experiences to support 
divergent thinking for children birth through age eight. 
Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
CDEC 1359 Children with Special Needs 
A survey of information regarding children with special 
needs including possible causes and characteristics of 
exceptionalities, intervention strategies, available 
resources, referral processes, the advocacy role, and 
legislative issues. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
CDEC 1385 Cooperative Education - Child 
Development 
Career-related activities encountered in the student's area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Contact the 
Associate Dean/Director for more information. 
Prerequisite: Consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
CDEC 2166 Practicum - Child Care 
Provider/Assistant 
Practical, general workplace training supported by an 
individualized learning plan developed by the employer, 
college, and student. Prerequisite: Consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
CDEC 2304 Child Abuse and Neglect 
Methods used in the identification of physical, emotional, 
and sexual abuse and neglect with an emphasis on 
developing skills for working with children and families. 
Includes methods of referral to public and private 
217 
 
agencies that deal with investigation and treatment. Lab 
required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
CDEC 2307 Math and Science for Early Childhood 
Exploration of principles, methods, and materials for 
teaching children math and science concepts and process 
skills through discovery and play. Lab required. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
CDEC 2322 Child Development Associate Training 
II 
A continuation of the study of the requirements for the 
Child Development Associate credential (CDA). The six 
functional areas of study include safe, healthy, learning 
environment, self, social, and guidance. Lab required. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
CDEC 2324 Child Development Associate Training 
III 
Continuation of the requirements for the Child 
Development Associate credential (CDA). The three 
functional areas of study include family, program 
management, and professionalism. Lab required. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
CDEC 2326 Administration of Programs for Children 
I 
Application of management procedures for early care and 
education programs. Includes planning, operating, 
supervising, and evaluating programs. Topics cover 
philosophy, types of programs, policies, fiscal 
management, regulations, staffing, evaluation, and 
communication. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
CDEC 2328 Administration of Programs for Children 
II 
An in-depth study of the skills and techniques in 
managing early care and education programs, including 
legal and ethical issues, personnel management, team 
building, leadership, conflict resolution, stress 
management, advocacy, professionalism, fiscal analysis, 
technical applications in programs and planning parent 
education / partnerships. Lab required. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
CDEC 2336 Administration of Programs for Children 
III 
An advanced study of the skills and techniques in 
administering early care education programs. Lab 
required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
CDEC 2340 Instructional Techniques for Children 
with Special Needs 
Exploration of development and implementation of 
curriculum for children with special needs. Lab required. 
3 credit hours. (W) 
 
CDEC 2371 Using Technology in the Classroom 
An overview of technology, media and digital information 
in education. This course includes a review of research on 
the impact, as well as methodology on effective use, of 
technology and media on children and teachers in the 
classroom and in curriculum planning and presentation. 
Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
CETT 1307 Fundamentals of Electronics 
Applies concepts of electricity, electronics, and digital 
fundamentals; supports programs requiring a general 
knowledge of electronics. Lab required. Prerequisite / 
Concurrent Enrollment: TECM 1343, or MATH 1316 or 
higher-level math. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
CETT 1409 DC-AC Circuits 
Fundamentals of DC circuits and AC circuits operation 
including Ohm's law, Kirchhoff's laws, networks, 
transformers, resonance, phasors, and capacitive and 
inductive circuit analysis techniques. Lab required. 
Prerequisites: CETT 1307 and ENTC 1171; TECM 1343, 
or MATH 1316 or higher-level math. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
CETT 1425 Digital Fundamentals 
An entry level course in digital electronics to include 
numbering systems, logic gates, Boolean algebra, and 
combinational logic. Lab required. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
CETT 1445 Microprocessor 
An introductory course in microprocessor software and 
hardware: architecture, timing sequence, operation, and 
programming. Discussion of appropriate software 
diagnostic language and tools. Lab required. Prerequisites: 
CETT 1425 and CETT 1307, or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
CETT 1457 Linear Integrated Circuits 
A study of the characteristics, operations and testing of 
linear integrated circuits. Applications include 
instrumentation and active filtering. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: CETT 1409 or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
CETT 2380 Cooperative Education-Computer 
Engineering Technology/Technician 
Career-related activities encountered in the student's area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Contact the 
 
 
218 
 
Associate Dean/Director for more information. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
CETT 2471 Emerging Topics in Engineering 
Technology 
Topics address identified emerging technology 
developments, skills, knowledge pertinent to the 
technology or occupation and relevant to the professional 
development of the student. Lab required. Prerequisites: 
CETT 1409 and CETT 1425, or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
CHEF 1301 Basic Food Preparation 
A study of the fundamental principles of food 
preparation and cookery to include Brigade System, 
cooking techniques, material handling, heat transfer, 
sanitation, safety, nutrition, and professionalism. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: Mandatory Culinary / Pastry Arts 
Orientation. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
CHEF 1302 Principles of Healthy Cuisine 
Introduction to the principles of planning, preparation, 
and presentation of nutritionally balanced meals. 
Alternative methods and ingredients will be used to 
achieve a healthier cooking style. Lab required. 
Prerequisites: CHEF 2331 with a grade of “C” or better 
and IFWA 1310. 3 credit hours. (W) 
Note: Culinary lab classes require extended periods of time standing 
in place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds), reaching, bending, 
and working around open flames and with cleaning chemicals. 
 
CHEF 1305 Sanitation and Safety 
A study of personal cleanliness; sanitary practices in food 
preparation; causes, investigation, control of illness 
caused by food contamination (Hazard Analysis Critical 
Control Points); and work place safety standards. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
CHEF 1310 Garde Manger 
A study of cold foods and garnishes. Emphasis on design, 
techniques, and display of fine foods. Lab required. 
Prerequisites: CHEF 2331 with a grade of “C” or better 
and CHEF 1305 with a grade of “C” or better. 
Prerequisite/Concurrent: CHEF 2302. 3 credit hours. (W) 
Note: Culinary lab classes require extended periods of time standing 
in place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds), reaching, bending, 
and working around open flames and with cleaning chemicals. 
 
CHEF 1314 A La Carte Cooking 
A course in a la carte or "cooking to order" concepts. 
Topics include menu and recipe interpretation and 
conversion, organization of work station, employment of 
appropriate cooking methods, plating, and saucing 
principles. Lab included. Prerequisites: RSTO 1325, 
CHEF 2302, CHEF 1310, and PSTR 1301 - all with a 
grade of “C” or better and either CHEF 1341 or CHEF 
1345. 3 credit hours. (W) 
Note: Culinary lab classes require extended periods of time standing 
in place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds), reaching, bending, 
and working around open flames and with cleaning chemicals. 
 
CHEF 1341 American Regional Cuisine 
A study of the development of regional cuisines in the 
United States with emphasis on the similarities in 
production and service systems. Application of skills to 
develop, organize, and acquire knowledge of recipe 
strategies and production systems. Professional chef 
uniform and kitchen tools required. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: CHEF 1305 with a grade of “C” or better. 
Prerequisite/Concurrent enrollment: CHEF 2331 with a 
grade of “C” or better. 3 credit hours. (W) 
Note: Culinary lab classes require extended periods of time standing 
in place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds), reaching, bending, 
and working around open flames and with cleaning chemicals. 
 
CHEF 1345 International Cuisine 
The study of classical cooking skills associated with the 
preparation and service of international and ethnic 
cuisine's. Topics include similarities between food 
production systems used in the United States and other 
regions of the world. Professional chef uniform and 
kitchen tools required. Lab required. Prerequisite / 
Concurrent enrollment: CHEF 2331 with a grade of “C” 
or better. 3 credit hours. (W) 
Note: Culinary lab classes require extended periods of time standing 
in place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds), reaching, bending, 
and working around open flames and with cleaning chemicals. 
 
CHEF 1364 Practicum (or Field Experience) - 
Culinary Arts/Chef Training 
Practical, general workplace training supported by an 
individualized learning plan developed by the employer, 
college, and student. Prerequisite: CHEF 2331. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
CHEF 2302 Saucier 
Instruction in the preparation of stocks, soups, classical 
sauces, contemporary sauces, accompaniments, and the 
pairing of sauces with a variety of foods. Lab included. 
Prerequisite: CHEF 1301 with a grade of “C” or better. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
Note: Culinary lab classes require extended periods of time standing 
in place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds), reaching, bending, 
and working around open flames and with cleaning chemicals. 
 
CHEF 2331 Advanced Food Preparation 
Advanced concepts of food preparation and presentation 
techniques. Identify and prepare breakfast meats, eggs, 
cereals, and batter products, discuss the applicability of 
convenience, value added, further processed or par 
cooked food items; and demonstrate food presentation 
techniques and writing standardized recipes. Professional 
chef uniform and kitchen tools required. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: CHEF 1301 with a grade of “C” or better. 3 
219 
 
credit hours. (W) 
Note: Culinary lab classes require extended periods of time standing 
in place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds), reaching, bending, 
and working around open flames and with cleaning chemicals. 
 
CHEF 2336 Charcuterie 
Advanced concepts in the construction of sausages, pates, 
and related force meat preparations. Lab required 
Prerequisites: CHEF 1301, CHEF 1305 and CHEF 2331. 
3 credit hours. (W) 
Note: Culinary lab classes require extended periods of time standing 
in place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds), reaching, bending, 
and working around open flames and with cleaning chemicals. 
 
CHEF 2380 Cooperative Education - Culinary 
Arts/Chef Training 
Career-related activities encountered in the student's area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Prerequisites: 
CHEF 1301, CHEF 2331, and CHEF 1305 - all with a 
grade of “C” or better. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
CHEM 1306 Introductory Chemistry: General, 
Organic and Biological 
Survey course introducing general, organic, and biological 
chemistry. Topics will include scientific calculations, 
chemical equations, atomic and molecular structure, states 
of matter, nuclear chemistry, elementary thermodynamics, 
acid-base chemistry, organic functional groups, and 
biomolecules. Designed for non-science and allied health 
students. Satisfies the chemistry requirement for Collin 
College’s RN-to-BSN Program. Prerequisite: TSI Math 
score of 910-949 with a diagnostic score of 5, and TSI 
college-readiness standard for Reading and Writing; or 
equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
CHEM 1405 Introduction to Chemistry I 
For non-science majors. Survey of chemistry including 
scientific calculations, chemical equations, theory of 
atoms and bonding, states of matter, nuclear chemistry, 
elementary thermodynamics, and acid-base chemistry. 
Lab and recitation required. Prerequisites: TSI Math score 
of 910-949 with a diagnostic score of 5, and TSI college-
readiness standard for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 
4 credit hours. (A) 
 
CHEM 1409 General Chemistry for Engineering 
Majors 
Lecture: Fundamental principles of chemistry for 
engineering; topics include measurements, fundamental 
properties of matter, states of matter, chemical reactions, 
acid-base concepts, chemical stoichiometry, periodicity of 
elemental properties, atomic structure, chemical bonding, 
molecular structure, solutions, properties of gases, phase-
diagrams, chemical thermodynamics, kinetics, 
introduction to chemical equilibrium, and an introduction 
to descriptive inorganic chemistry and organic chemistry. 
Lab: Basic laboratory experiments supporting theoretical 
principles presented in lecture; introduction of the 
scientific method, experimental design, chemical 
instrumentation, data collection and analysis, and 
preparation of laboratory reports. This is a co-requisite 
for CHEM 1409 lecture. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
MATH 1314 equivalent or higher level within the last 5 
years with a grade of "C" or better. 4 credit hours. (A) 
 
CHEM 1411 General Chemistry I 
Lecture: Fundamental principles of chemistry for majors 
in the sciences, health sciences, and engineering; topics 
include measurements, fundamental properties of matter, 
states of matter, chemical reactions, chemical 
stoichiometry, periodicity of elemental properties, atomic 
structure, chemical bonding, molecular structure, 
solutions, properties of gases, and an introduction to 
thermodynamics and descriptive chemistry. Lab: Basic 
laboratory experiments supporting theoretical principles 
presented in CHEM 1311; introduction of the scientific 
method, experimental design, data collection and analysis, 
and preparation of laboratory reports. High school 
chemistry is strongly recommended. Prerequisite: MATH 
1314 equivalent or higher level within the last 5 years with 
a grade of "C" or better, and meet TSI college-readiness 
standard for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 4 credit 
hours. (A) 
 
CHEM 1412 General Chemistry II 
Lecture: Chemical equilibrium; phase diagrams and 
spectrometry; acid-base concepts; thermodynamics; 
kinetics; electrochemistry; nuclear chemistry; an 
introduction to organic chemistry and descriptive 
inorganic chemistry. Lab: Basic laboratory experiments 
supporting theoretical principles presented in CHEM 
1312; introduction of the scientific method, experimental 
design, chemical instrumentation, data collection and 
analysis, and preparation of laboratory reports. 
Prerequisite: CHEM 1411 within the last five years with a 
grade of "C" or better. 4 credit hours. (A) 
 
CHEM 2389 Academic Co-op Chemistry 
Integrates on-campus study with practical hands-on work 
experience in chemistry. In conjunction with class 
seminars, the student will set specific goals and objectives 
in the study of chemistry. Contact the Associate 
Dean/Director for more information. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
CHEM 2423 Organic Chemistry I 
Lecture: Fundamental principles of organic chemistry will 
be studied, including the structure, bonding, properties, 
and reactivity of organic molecules; and properties and 
behavior of organic compounds and their derivatives. 
Emphasis is placed on organic synthesis and mechanisms. 
 
 
220 
 
Includes study of covalent and ionic bonding, 
nomenclature, stereochemistry, structure and reactivity, 
reaction mechanisms, functional groups, and synthesis of 
simple molecules. This course is intended for students in 
science or pre-professional programs. Lab: Laboratory 
activities will reinforce fundamental principles of organic 
chemistry, including the structure, bonding, properties, 
and reactivity of organic molecules; and properties and 
behavior of organic compounds and their derivatives. 
Emphasis is placed on organic synthesis and mechanisms. 
Includes study of covalent and ionic bonding, 
nomenclature, stereochemistry, structure and reactivity, 
reaction mechanisms, functional groups, and synthesis of 
simple molecules. Methods for the purification and 
identification of organic compounds will be examined. 
Lab and recitation required. Prerequisite: CHEM 1412 
within the last five years with a grade of "C" or better. 4 
credit hours. (A) 
 
CHEM 2425 Organic Chemistry II 
Lecture: Advanced principles of organic chemistry will be 
studied, including the structure, properties, and reactivity 
of aliphatic and aromatic organic molecules; and 
properties and behavior of organic compounds and their 
derivatives. Emphasis is placed on organic synthesis and 
mechanisms. Includes study of covalent and ionic 
bonding, nomenclature, stereochemistry, structure and 
reactivity, reaction mechanisms, functional groups, and 
synthesis of simple molecules. This course is intended for 
students in science or pre-professional programs. Lab: 
Laboratory activities reinforce advanced principles of 
organic chemistry, including the structure, properties, and 
reactivity of aliphatic and aromatic organic molecules; and 
properties and behavior of organic compounds and their 
derivatives. Emphasis is placed on organic synthesis and 
mechanisms. Includes study of covalent and ionic 
bonding, nomenclature, stereochemistry, structure and 
reactivity, reaction mechanisms, functional groups, and 
synthesis of simple molecules. Lab and recitation 
required. Prerequisite: CHEM 2423 within the last 5 years 
with a grade of "C" or better. 4 credit hours. (A) 
 
CHIN 1411 Beginning Chinese I 
Introduction to the basic skills of speaking, reading, 
writing, and listening with attention to selected aspects of 
Chinese culture; designed for students with little or no 
previous language training. Instruction is enhanced by the 
use of tapes, slides, and video cassettes. Lab required. 4 
credit hours. (A) 
 
CHIN 1412 Beginning Chinese II 
Continuation of CHIN 1411. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
CHIN 1411 or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 4 
credit hours. (A) 
 
CHIN 2311 Intermediate Chinese I 
Review and application of skills in listening 
comprehension, speaking, reading, and writing. 
Emphasizes conversation, vocabulary acquisition, reading, 
composition, and culture. Prerequisite: CHIN 1412 or 
consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
CHIN 2312 Intermediate Chinese II 
Continuation of CHIN 2311, emphasizing conversation 
and reading skills. Prerequisite: CHIN 2311 or consent of 
Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
CMGT 3305 Construction Estimating II 
This course introduces students to the skills and tools 
necessary to prepare formal bids for construction 
projects. It focuses on pricing, indirect costs, bid analysis 
and use of computer aided software. The goal of this 
course is to expand skills in new topics of estimating and 
to assist students in developing high confidence in the 
application of the estimating skills learned previously. The 
course addresses the bidding procedure from receipt of 
bid documents through work breakdown, work 
quantification, pricing and bid submittal for lump sum 
and unit price bids, and preparation of design/build 
proposals. Lab required. Prerequisite: CNBT 1346. 3 
credit hours. 
 
CMGT 3310 Building Information Modeling for 
Constructors 
This course focuses on the skills and information needed 
to effectively use an existing Building Information Model 
(BIM) in plan execution for a building construction 
project. This is a project-based course where students 
gain knowledge on the implementation of BIM based 
schedules, and estimates. Lab required. Prerequisites: 
CNBT 2310 and CNBT 2340. 3 credit hours. 
 
CMGT 3315 Construction Structural Systems 
This course presents the various structural systems used 
in the construction of buildings. Building types vary from 
single-family houses to high-rise buildings to multi-use 
facilities. Case studies are examined from a structural 
viewpoint, in which the rationale for the structural system 
is analyzed, and then a systematic construction process is 
followed from start to completion of the project. Lab 
required. Prerequisites: CNBT 2310 and CNBT 2340. 3 
credit hours. 
 
CMGT 3320 Construction Project Planning 
Development of parameter cost estimates for activities 
that relate to the construction of a building project; work 
packages sequenced, planned and leveled to develop a 
working project execution document; development of 
procedures to monitor actual field progress. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: CNBT 2344. 3 credit hours. 
 
CMGT 4305 Construction Materials and Testing and 
Inspections 
Construction materials testing and inspection procedures 
221 
 
in laboratory and field situations using standard testing 
equipment, methods, and field inspection techniques per 
ASTM and ACI standards. Laboratory reports, computer 
analysis, data collection and simulated field inspections 
are included. Focus is placed on acceptance testing for 
construction materials. Lab required. Prerequisite: CMGT 
3315. 3 credit hours. 
 
CMGT 4310 Construction Soils and Foundations 
The course gives an overview of the difference and 
correlation between soil mechanics and foundations 
engineering. Soil mechanics is the branch of engineering 
that involves the study of the properties of soils and their 
behaviors under stress and strain in idealized conditions. 
Foundation engineering is the application of the 
principles of soil mechanics in the planning, design and 
construction of foundations for buildings, highways, 
dams and so forth. This course presents a detailed look 
into soil properties and foundations design. Lab required. 
Prerequisites: CMGT 3305 and CMGT 3320. 3 credit 
hours. 
 
CMGT 4315 Construction Project Management 
This course explores major problems, tasks and 
techniques required to manage the technical program in 
each phase of the product life cycle. Organizational 
planning, decision-making, and internal external interface 
techniques for each phase of the project life cycle are 
addressed. Additional concepts such as: Earned Value 
Analysis (EVA), Critical Path Management (CPM), 
Project Requirements Analysis, and Schedule Task 
Analysis will be explored in depth. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: CNBT 2344. 3 credit hours. 
 
CMGT 4320 Construction Law and Ethics 
This course introduces students to basic understanding of 
contractual issues that are significant to construction 
managers. The course is designed to teach basic concepts 
of contract law and to recognize legal issues making 
decisions based on current industrial standards. The 
course also focuses on addressing ethics in the 
construction industry. Lab required. Prerequisites: CMGT 
4315 and PHIL 2306. 3 credit hours. 
 
CMGT 4325 Construction Leadership 
Development of competencies in various leadership and 
management practices that are useful in an array of 
situations; emphasis on organizational leadership and 
management development with specific attention to 
intragroup relationships and techniques for achieving 
group goals. Lab required. Prerequisite: CMGT 4315. 3 
credit hours. 
 
CMGT 4330 Construction Management Capstone 
Capstone projects course emphasizing a team approach 
to the analysis and solutions of Construction problems. 
Projects will be supplied by industry whenever possible. 
Emphasizes scheduling, design, working in teams. A final 
written report drawings and presentations will be 
provided to the customer. Lab required. Prerequisites: 
CMGT 4315, CMGT 4305, and CMGT 4310. 3 credit 
hours. 
 
CNBT 1280 Cooperative Education - Construction 
Engineering Technology/Technician 
Career-related activities encountered in the student’s area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Contact the 
Associate Dean/Director of the program for further 
information. Prerequisite: Program permit approval 
required. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
CNBT 1300 Residential and Light Commercial 
Construction Drawings 
Introduction to construction drawings with a focus on 
residential and light commercial construction. 
Additionally, this course will include an introduction to 
computerized prints and related software. Lab required. 3 
credit hours. (W 
 
CNBT 1311 Construction Materials and Methods I 
Introduction to construction materials and methods and 
their applications. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
CNBT 1315 Field Engineering I 
Surveying equipment, sketches, proper field note taking, 
methods of staking, layout of building site, and horizontal 
and vertical controls. Lab required. Prerequisite: CNBT 
1300 and OSHT 1305. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
CNBT 1318 Construction Tools and Techniques 
Comprehensive study of the selection and use of hand 
tools, portable power and stationary power tools and 
related construction equipment. Lab required. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
CNBT 1342 Building Codes and Inspections 
Building codes and standards applicable to building 
construction and inspection processes. Prerequisite: 
Departmental Permit. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
CNBT 1346 Construction Estimating I 
Fundamentals of estimating materials and labor costs in 
construction. Lab required. Prerequisites: CNBT 1300 
and CNBT 2304. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
CNBT 1359 Project Scheduling 
A study of conventional scheduling using critical-path-
method; precedence and arrow networks; bar charts; 
monthly reports; and fast track scheduling. Additionally, 
scheduling software for the construction industry will be 
 
 
222 
 
used. Lab required. Prerequisites: CNBT 1300 and CNBT 
2304. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
CNBT 1380 Cooperative Education - Construction 
Engineering Technology/Technician 
Career-related activities encountered in the student’s area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Contact the 
Associate Dean/Director for more information. 
Prerequisite: Consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
CNBT 2304 Construction Methods and Materials II 
Continuation of the study of the properties of building 
materials, methods and equipment for their integrated use 
in completing construction projects. Additionally, the 
course will address quality control in construction. Lab 
required. Prerequisites: CNBT 1311 and OSHT 1305. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
CNBT 2310 Commercial/Industrial Blueprint 
Reading 
Blueprint reading for commercial/industrial construction. 
Lab required. Prerequisite: CNBT 1300. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
CNBT 2340 Mechanical, Plumbing & Electrical 
Systems in Construction II (Commercial) 
Processes and methods used in design, selection of 
equipment, and installation of mechanical, plumbing, and 
electrical systems in commercial buildings. Includes 
heating and cooling systems, duct work, mechanical and 
electrical control systems, lighting requirements, and 
design of water supply and sanitary sewer systems. 
Additionally, the course addresses MEP blueprints, 
schedule coordination, and safety. Lab required. 
Prerequisites: CNBT 1300 and CNBT 1311. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
CNBT 2342 Construction Management I 
Management skills on the job site. Topics include written 
and oral communications, leadership and motivation, 
problem solving, and decision making. Additionally, this 
course includes customer and contractor relations and 
ethics in the construction industry. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
CNBT 2344 Construction Management II 
A management course in contract documents, safety, 
planning, scheduling, production control, law and labor 
issues. Topics include contracts, planning, cost and 
production peripheral documents, and cost and work 
analysis. Additional topics include customer service and 
quality control. Prerequisites: CNBT 1342, and CNBT 
1346. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
CNBT 2346 Construction Management III 
Advanced course work in safety procedures, project 
management, scheduling, material handling, layout, 
payment scheduling, and inspection. Additionally, this is a 
capstone course in which program learning outcomes will 
be demonstrated. Prerequisites: CNBT 2344 or consent  
of Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
CNBT 2380 Cooperative Education - Construction 
Engineering Technology/Technician 
Career-related activities encountered in the student’s area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Contact the 
Associate Dean/Director for more information. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
COMM 1307 Introduction to Mass Communication 
Survey of basic content and structural elements of mass 
media and their functions and influences on society. 
Additionally, a study of mass media in the United States 
with emphasis on newspapers, magazines, radio, film, 
publishing, the internet and television; history of mass 
media and the business models that support them; and 
the role and responsibility of mass media in modern 
society. Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness standard 
for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
COMM 1335 Introduction to Electronic Media 
An overview of the development, regulation, economics, 
social impact, and industry practices in electronic media. 
Additionally, an historical and critical comparison of the 
first two broadcast media as they have evolved, this 
course includes discussion of important historical issues 
that resonate with contemporary media concerns - 
including intellectual property and patent rights, aesthetics 
and production values, censorship and freedom of 
speech, broadcast ethics, ratings fallibility, public 
responsibility and emotional contagion. The course also 
discusses the development and necessary metamorphosis 
of each medium in response to contemporary events, 
social change, and the encroachment of new technology, 
new media and alternative delivery methods. Prerequisite: 
Meet TSI college-readiness standard for Reading and 
Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
COMM 2300 Media Literacy 
Criticism and analysis of the function, role, and 
responsibility of the mass media in modern society from 
the consumer perspective. Includes the ethical problems 
and issues facing each media format, with the effect of 
political, economic, and cultural factors on the operation 
223 
 
of the media. Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness 
standard for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit 
hours. (A) 
 
COMM 2330 Introduction to Public Relations 
Exploration of the history and development of public 
relations. Presentation of the theory behind and process 
of public relations, including the planning, 
implementation, and evaluation of PR campaigns. 
Additionally, exploration of current trends in the 
profession and overview of how the process is carried out 
in different public relations specializations. The student is 
recommended to complete either COMM 1307 or SPCH 
1311 prior to registering for this course, but not required. 
Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness standard for 
Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
COMM 2331 Radio / Television Announcing 
Principles of, and practice in, radio and TV announcing, 
including the study of voice (diction, pronunciation, and 
delivery) as it relates to mediated contexts and experience 
in news announcing, interviewing, and acting in 
commercial. Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness 
standard for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit 
hours. (A) 
 
COMM 2332 Radio/Television News 
The preparation and analysis of news styles for the 
electronic media. Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness 
standard for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit 
hours. (A) 
 
COMM 2339 Writing for Radio, Television, and Film 
Designed to train the student in all typical forms of 
broadcast and film writing, including news, commercial 
copy, critique and commentary, radio theatre, comedy 
and dramatic teleplay, and screenplay. Course provides 
both writing and production experiences. Prerequisite: 
Meet TSI college-readiness standard for Reading and 
Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
COMM 2366 Film Appreciation 
Survey and analyze cinema including history, film 
techniques, production procedures, selected motion 
pictures, and cinema’s impact on and reflection of society. 
Lab required. Prerequisite: ARTS 2348 or PHTC 1311 or 
consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (A) 
Note: Students may take either DRAM 2366 or COMM 2366, 
but not both. 
 
COMM 2389 Academic Co-op Communication 
For students with interest or major in mass 
communications, radio, TV, or film. Integrates on-
campus study with practical hands-on work experience in 
communication. In conjunction with class seminars, the 
student will set specific goals and objectives in the study 
of communication. Contact the Associate Dean/Director 
for more information. Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-
readiness standard for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 
3 credit hours. (A) 
 
COSC 1301 Introduction to Computing 
Overview of computer systems - hardware, operating 
systems, the Internet and application software including 
word processing, spreadsheets, presentation graphics, and 
databases. Current topics such as the effect of computers 
on society, and the history and use of computers in 
business, educational, and other interdisciplinary settings 
are also studied. This course is not intended to count 
toward a student's major field of study in business or 
computer science. Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-
readiness standard for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 
3 credit hours. (A) 
 
COSC 1315 Introduction to Computer Programming 
Introduction to computer programming for solving a 
variety of problems. This course is intended for non-
computer science and non-computer engineering majors. 
Emphasis on the fundamentals of design, development, 
testing, implementation, and documentation of computer 
programs. Includes problem solving with structured 
techniques and algorithms using pseudo code and/or 
graphical representations. Lab required. 3 credit hours. 
(A) 
 
COSC 1420 C Programming 
Introduces the fundamental concepts of structured 
programming in the C language. Topics include data 
types; control structures; functions, structures, arrays, 
pointers, pointer arithmetic, unions, and files; the 
mechanics of running, testing, and debugging programs; 
introduction to programming; and introduction to the 
historical and social context of computing. Additionally, 
this course assumes computer literacy. Prerequisite: 
MATH 1314 or equivalent academic preparation. 4 credit 
hours. (A) 
 
COSC 1436 Programming Fundamentals I 
This course introduces the fundamental concepts of 
structured programming, and provides a comprehensive 
introduction to programming for computer science and 
technology majors. Topics include software development 
methodology, data types, control structures, functions, 
arrays, and the mechanics of running, testing, and 
debugging. This course assumes computer literacy. (This 
course is included in the Field of Study Curriculum for 
Computer Science.) Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-
readiness standard for Mathematics; or equivalent. 4 
credit hours. (A) 
 
COSC 1437 Programming Fundamentals II 
This course focuses on the object-oriented programming 
paradigm, emphasizing the definition and use of classes 
along with fundamentals of object-oriented design. The 
 
 
224 
 
course includes basic analysis of algorithms, searching and 
sorting techniques, and an introduction to software 
engineering processes. Students will apply techniques for 
testing and debugging software. (This course is included 
in the Field of Study Curriculum for Computer Science.). 
Prerequisite: COSC 1436, COSC 1420, or consent of 
Associate Dean/Director. 4 credit hours. (A) 
 
COSC 2325 Computer Organization 
The organization of computer systems is introduced using 
assembly language. Topics include basic concepts of 
computer architecture and organization, memory 
hierarchy, data types, computer arithmetic, control 
structures, interrupt handling, instruction sets, 
performance metrics, and the mechanics of testing and 
debugging computer systems. Embedded systems and 
device interfacing are introduced. Additionally, this class 
is taught with Intel assembly language. Prerequisites: 
COSC 1436 or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 
credit hours. (A) 
 
COSC 2436 Programming Fundamentals III 
Further applications of programming techniques, 
introducing the fundamental concepts of data structures 
and algorithms. Topics include data structures (including 
stacks, queues, linked lists, hash tables, trees, and graphs), 
searching, sorting, recursion, and algorithmic analysis. 
Programs will be implemented in an appropriate object-
oriented language. (This course is included in the Field of 
Study Curriculum for Computer Science.) Prerequisite: 
COSC 1437 or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 4 
credit hours. (A) 
 
CPMT 1305 IT Essentials I: PC Hardware and 
Software 
Provides comprehensive overview of computer hardware 
and software and an introduction to advanced concepts 
addressed by CISCO certification. Lab required. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
CRIJ 1301 Introduction to Criminal Justice 
This course provides a historical and philosophical 
overview of the American criminal justice system, 
including the nature, extent, and impact of crime; criminal 
law; and justice agencies and processes. 3 credit hours. 
(A) 
 
CRIJ 1306 Court Systems and Practices 
This course is a study of the court system as it applies to 
the structures, procedures, practices and sources of law in 
American courts, using federal and Texas statutes and 
case law. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
CRIJ 1307 Crime in America 
American crime problems in historical perspective, social 
and public policy factors affecting crime, impact and 
crime trends, social characteristics of specific crimes, and 
prevention of crime. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
CRIJ 1310 Fundamentals of Criminal Law 
This course is the study of criminal law including 
application of definitions, statutory elements, defenses 
and penalties using Texas statutes, the Model Penal Code, 
and case law. The course also analyzes the philosophical 
and historical development of criminal law and criminal 
culpability. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
CRIJ 1313 Juvenile Justice System 
A study of the juvenile justice process to include 
specialized juvenile law, role of the juvenile law, role of 
the juvenile courts, role of police agencies, role of 
correctional agencies, and theories concerning 
delinquency. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
CRIJ 2313 Correctional Systems and Practices 
This course is a survey of institutional and non-
institutional corrections. Emphasis will be placed on the 
organization and operation of correctional systems; 
treatment and rehabilitation; populations served; 
Constitutional issues; and current and future issues. 3 
credit hours. (A) 
 
CRIJ 2314 Criminal Investigation 
Investigative theory; collection and preservation of 
evidence; sources of information; interview and 
interrogation; uses of forensic sciences; case and trial 
preparation. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
CRIJ 2323 Legal Aspects of Law Enforcement 
Police authority; responsibilities; constitutional 
constraints; laws of arrest, search, and seizure; and police 
liability. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
CRIJ 2328 Police Systems and Practices 
This course examines the establishment, role and 
function of police in a democratic society. It will focus on 
types of police agencies and their organizational structure, 
police-community interaction, police ethics, and use of 
authority. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
CRPT 1311 Roof Systems 
Principles of design and construction of a roof system 
incorporating gable, hip, valley and intersections. 
Emphasis given to safe work practices and the use and 
maintenance of tools and equipment. Lab required. 
Prerequisite/Concurrent Enrollment: CNBT 1318. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
CRPT 1315 Wall Systems 
Identification of components; construction of wall 
systems; safe work practices; and the use and 
maintenance of tools and equipment. Lab required. 
225 
 
Prerequisite/Concurrent Enrollment: CNBT 1318. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
CRPT 1323 Floor Systems 
An introduction to common floor systems. Includes 
component identification; construction of a floor system; 
safe work practices; and the use and maintenance of tools 
and equipment. Lab required. Prerequisite/Concurrent 
Enrollment: CNBT 1318. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
CRPT 1325 Forms and Foundations I 
Construction of basic form and foundation systems 
including related safety, tools, equipment, and building 
layout. Emphasis on safe work practices and the use and 
maintenance of tools and equipment. Lab required. 
Prerequisite/Concurrent Enrollment: CNBT 1318. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
CRPT 1341 Exterior Finish Systems 
Installation of exterior finish systems and components 
including the placement and installation of cornice, 
windows, doors, siding, and flashing. Emphasis on safe 
work practices and the use and maintenance of tools and 
equipment. Lab required. Prerequisite/Concurrent 
Enrollment: CRPT 1311 and CRPT 1325. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
CRPT 1345 Interior Finish Systems 
Installation of interior finish systems and components 
including the placement and installation of doors, trim, 
floor, wall, and ceiling finishes. Emphasis on safe work 
practices and use and maintenance of tools and 
equipment. Lab required. Prerequisites: CNBT 1315 and 
CRPT 1323. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
CRPT 1371 Advanced Carpentry Techniques 
A study of the physical construction skills used to build 
vertical, horizontal, and precast tilt-up concrete units and 
systems, as well as the personal leadership skills of the 
effective crew leader who manages the project controls 
and safety. Lab required. Prerequisites: CRPT 1311, 
CRPT 1315, CRPT 1323, and CRPT 1325. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
CSFA 1172 Pharmacology and Anesthesia 
Pharmacology and Anesthesia will provide the surgical 
assisting student with the fundamentals of basic 
pharmacology and clinical pharmacology related to the 
surgical patient. The course will also examine the basics 
of anesthesia methods and agents and the association 
with various surgical situations. Lab required. 1 credit 
hour. (W) 
 
CSFA 1173 Principles of Surgical Assisting Lab I 
A lab course that teaches fundamental skills: Placement of 
monitoring devices, review of bladder catheterization, 
surgical positioning, application of tourniquets, prepping 
and draping, operative instrumentation, visualization 
techniques, hemostasis, suturing and knot tying 
techniques, dressings and drainage systems, post-
operative pain control methods, and the use of special 
equipment. Lab required. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
CSFA 1175 Perioperative Microbiology and 
Bioscience 
Course covers three main components: fundamental 
concepts in microbiology and infection, major clinical 
syndromes corresponding to the clinical specialties, and 
additional information on bacteriology, virology, 
parasitology, mycology, and entomology, including related 
laboratory tests and antibiotics. Emphasis on surgical 
events related to wound healing and the integrity of the 
surgical wound. Also covered are different diagnostic 
tests and the relationship between those tests and the 
management of the surgical patient. In addition, issues 
surrounding the care and handling of surgical specimens, 
management of the critically ill patient, thermoregulatory 
devices, fluid balances and related issues and, finally, skin 
assessment are discussed in detail. Lab required. 1 credit 
hour. (W) 
 
CSFA 1176 Complications in Surgery 
Surgical complications, including hemorrhage, perforation 
of viscus or cavity, contamination, exposure, retraction, 
compression injuries, cardiac events, sudden hypoxia, 
sudden shock, interruption of surgical supervision, critical 
equipment failure and corrective measures are discussed, 
in addition to how to initiate the appropriate course of 
action to address these situations. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
CSFA 1371 Fundamentals and Surgical Safety 
Fundamentals and Surgical Safety will provide the surgical 
assisting student with basic fundamentals and the surgical 
assistant's role in the proper and safe positioning of the 
surgical patient, use of pneumatic devices, drapes and 
draping, proper skin preparation, instrumentation, 
exposure and visualization techniques, post-operative 
pain control, patient transport, and provide instruction of 
surgical monitoring devices. Fundamentals and Surgical 
Safety will also provide the surgical assisting student with 
information and appreciation of the importance of safety 
in the surgical setting. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
CSFA 2171 Role Definition, Ethical, Legal, and 
Moral Responsibilities 
Course addresses factors that will result in positive team 
relationships, the practice of professional ethics, and the 
parameters of one's specific role, including the 
identification of certain possible crises and problem areas, 
with an understanding as to how the Surgical Assistant 
should deal with each given situation. Different legal 
definitions and terminology are covered, and how to 
understand and identify Operating Room situations that 
could lead to ethical conflict. Students also gain an 
 
 
226 
 
understanding of appropriate (and legal) decision-making, 
as well as what establishes negligence, basic patient and 
caregiver rights, Operating Room incidents that could 
result in litigation, and problems peculiar to the Surgical 
Assistant's role. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
CSFA 2173 Principles of Surgical Assisting Lab II 
A lab course continuation that teaches fundamental skills: 
Placement of monitoring devices, review of bladder 
catheterization, surgical positioning, application of 
tourniquets, prepping and draping, operative 
instrumentation, visualization techniques, hemostasis, 
suturing and knot tying techniques, dressings and 
drainage systems, post-operative pain control methods, 
and the use of special equipment. Lab required. 1 credit 
hour. (W) 
 
CSFA 2371 Surgical Procedures 
Surgical Procedures will provide the surgical assisting 
student with an in-depth procedural analysis of most 
major surgeries performed in the operating room; 
delivering step-by-step surgical, anatomical, and 
physiological instruction in preparation for their clinical 
externship. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
CSFA 2372 Operative Anatomy and Pathophysiology 
I 
A systematic investigation of the structure and 
organization of the human body and the mechanism and 
manifestation of different human diseases. The basic 
science of pathology is concerned with the etiology and 
pathogenesis of disease. Essential information is provided 
for understanding the diagnosis of disease in the clinical 
setting. When studying anatomy, the emphasis must be 
based on regional anatomy with surgical anatomy as the 
critical component, as opposed to the entry-level 
approach of systemic anatomy. Surgical anatomy is the 
critical factor with an emphasis on advanced anatomical 
knowledge that is applied towards the surgical diagnosis 
and procedure. This course will thoroughly examine 
several major surgical specialties: General, Plastics, 
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ortho/Joints, Colorectal, 
Robotics, and Cardio/Thoracic/Vascular. This course has 
been specifically prepared for the surgical assisting 
Advanced Technical Certificate program. Lab required. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
CSFA 2373 Operative Anatomy and Pathophysiology 
II 
A continuation of the investigation of the structure and 
organization of the human body and the mechanism and 
manifestation of different human diseases. The basic 
science of pathology is concerned with the etiology and 
pathogenesis of disease. Essential information is provided 
for understanding the diagnosis of disease in the clinical 
setting. When studying anatomy, the emphasis must be 
based on regional anatomy with surgical anatomy as the 
critical component, as opposed to the entry-level 
approach of systemic anatomy. Surgical anatomy is the 
critical factor with an emphasis on advanced anatomical 
knowledge that is applied towards the surgical diagnosis 
and procedure. This course will thoroughly examine 
several major surgical specialties: General, Plastics, 
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ortho/Joints, Colorectal, 
Robotics, and Cardio/Thoracic/Vascular. This course has 
been specifically prepared for the surgical assisting 
Advanced Technical Certificate program. Lab required. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
CSFA 2472 Suturing, Knot Tying, Hemostasis, and 
Wound Healing 
Suturing, Knot Tying, Hemostasis, and Wound Healing is 
a comprehensive lab course designed to provide 
instruction of and participation in the various suturing 
and tying techniques including simple and complex 
stitches, interrupted and running stitches, two-handed, 
one-handed, and instrument knot tying techniques. The 
course will provide the surgical assisting student with the 
detailed principles of wound healing, the interaction of a 
complex cascade of cellular events that generates 
resurfacing, reconstitution, and restoration of the tensile 
strength of the surgical wound. The course will also 
provide an in-depth and interactive discussion of 
hemostatic methods: chemical/topical agents, sutures and 
ties, direct pressure, and physical agents. Lab required. 4 
credit hours. (W) 
 
CSFA 2473 Surgical Assisting Clinical I 
Surgical Assisting Clinical I is intended to provide training 
and clinical practice in basic surgical skills applicable to 
the surgical assisting student. A student enrolled in the 
course is assigned to qualified preceptors - surgeons who 
provide direct supervision and guidance during the 
clinical rotation. Each student in the course is required to 
complete 140 cases with 100 percent skill competency. To 
fulfill the role of the surgical assistant, the student must 
perform with proficiency in a minimum of 20 General 
Surgery cases with the remaining cases divided between 
two or more specialty areas, also with a minimum of 20 
cases in each. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
CSFA 2474 Surgical Assisting Clinical II 
Surgical Assisting Clinical II is intended to provide 
training and clinical practice in basic surgical skills 
applicable to the surgical assisting student. A student 
enrolled in the course is assigned to qualified preceptors - 
surgeons who provide direct supervision and guidance 
during the clinical rotation. Each student in the course is 
required to complete 140 cases with 100 percent skill 
competency. To fulfill the role of the surgical assistant, 
the student must perform with proficiency in a minimum 
of 20 General Surgery cases with the remaining cases 
227 
 
divided between two or more specialty areas, also with a 
minimum of 20 cases in each. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
CYBR 3310 Introduction to Cryptography 
This course introduces the inner workings of 
cryptographic primitives and how to correctly use them. 
Specifically, the course covers cryptographic algorithms, 
protocols and techniques. The algorithms illustrate the art 
of encryption and secure hashing. The cryptographic 
protocols will expose the students to the world of 
building trust in an untrusted environment. Cryptographic 
techniques used in key management and algorithm choice 
will be explored. Lab required. Prerequisites: ITSY 2341 
and Mathematics core complete. 3 credit hours. 
 
CYBR 3320 Digital and Device Forensics 
This course will help students understand the issues, 
techniques, and vulnerabilities of small scale (non-PC) 
digital device forensics. Emphasis will be placed on the 
forensically sound acquisition, preservation, analysis and 
presentation of small scale digital devices as evidence. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: ITSY 2343. 3 credit hours. 
 
CYBR 3330 Advanced Network Topologies and 
Protocols 
This course examines the advanced and novel areas of 
networks and protocols. Various networks will be 
examined with secure configurations, analysis, and 
response to threats. Lab required. Prerequisite: ITSY 
2343. 3 credit hours. 
 
CYBR 3340 Cyber Crime 
An examination of Cyber Crimes and other abuses arising 
in a cyber environment. Traditional and contemporary 
forms of cybercrime will be explored, including hacking, 
insider threat, cyberbullying, hacktivism, cyberterrorism 
and others. Students will learn how computers can be 
either the target or the tool for committing cybercrimes. 
In addition, sociological and psychological aspects 
associated with cybercrime will be examined. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: ITSY 2341. 3 credit hours. 
 
CYBR 3350 Cyber Privacy 
This course examines the diverse components of privacy 
and the effects the Internet has on privacy. Approaches 
for individual, organization, and government privacy as 
well as privacy laws will be examined. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: CYBR 3320. 3 credit hours. 
 
CYBR 3360 Mobile Technologies 
This course examines how mobile systems function to 
allow secure voice and data access. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: CYBR 3330. 3 credit hours. 
 
CYBR 4310 Penetration Testing 
This course provides students with methods of 
discovering ways of exploiting vulnerabilities to gain 
access to a system. Students will learn the methods, 
techniques, and tools to test the security of computer 
networks, infrastructure and applications. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: CYBR 3340. 3 credit hours. 
 
CYBR 4320 Cyber Defense Operations 
An examination of the concepts used in defending a 
network, and the basic tools and techniques that can be 
used to protect a network and communication assets 
from cyber threats. Lab required. Prerequisite: CYBR 
4310. 3 credit hours. 
 
CYBR 4330 Virtualization and Cloud Security 
An examination of how modern host virtualization is 
implemented, deployed, and used. Students will 
understand the interfaces between major components of 
virtualized systems, and the implications these interfaces 
have for security. Students will examine the technologies 
and services that enable cloud computing, different types 
of cloud computing models and the security and legal 
issues associated with cloud computing. Lab required. 
Prerequisites: CYBR 3320 and CYBR 3340. 3 credit 
hours. 
 
CYBR 4340 Information Assurance 
A study of common security architectures for the 
protection of information systems and data. An 
examination of the common standards related to 
information assurance. Application of architectures and 
standards within the rules, regulations for compliance. 
Lab required. Prerequisite: ITSY 2342 or ITSY 2330. 3 
credit hours. 
 
CYBR 4350 Senior Project 
This course is designed to integrate all previous 
coursework. Under the guidance of the professor, each 
student completes a practical exercise in a cybersecurity 
role. Lab required. Prerequisites: CYBR 4320 and CYBR 
4330. 3 credit hours. 
 
DANC 1110 Tap Dance 
Instruction in the fundamental techniques and concepts 
associated with Tap dance. May be repeated one time for 
additional degree credit. Lab required. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: Students may take DANC 1110, DANC 1128, DANC 
1151, DANC 2151 for a combined total of no more than 18 
credit hours. 
 
DANC 1112 Dance Practicum 
Practicum in dance related topics with emphasis on 
practical skills necessary for the field. May be repeated for 
credit once. Prerequisite: Consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 1 credit hour. (A) 
 
DANC 1128 Ballroom and Social Dance 
Introductory instruction in the fundamental techniques 
and concepts associated with Ballroom and Social Dance. 
 
 
228 
 
May be repeated one time for additional degree credit. 
Lab required. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: Students may take DANC 1110, DANC 1128, DANC 
1151, and DANC 2151 for a combined total of no more than 18 
credit hours. 
 
DANC 1151 Freshman Dance Performance 
Instruction in dance performance through experiential 
projects at the freshman level. May be repeated one time 
for additional degree credit. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
Audition. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: Students may take DANC 1110, DANC 1128, DANC 
1151, and DANC 2151 for a combined total of no more than 18 
credit hours. 
 
DANC 1201 Dance Composition - Improvisation 
This introductory course in improvisation will investigate 
spontaneous problem solving  as a means of generating 
movement for dance composition Students will be called 
upon to explore and respond to various forms of stimuli 
in a safe and supportive learning environment within solo 
and group work. Lab required. 2 credit hours. (A) 
 
DANC 1241 Beginning Ballet 
Instruction in the fundamental techniques and concepts 
associated with ballet. May be repeated one time for 
additional degree credit. Lab required. 2 credit hours. (A) 
Note: May be repeated one time for additional credit. 
 
DANC 1245 Beginning Modern Dance 
Instruction in the fundamental techniques and concepts 
associated with the concert form of modern dance. May 
be repeated one time for additional degree credit. Lab 
required. 2 credit hours. (A) 
Note: May be repeated one time for additional credit. 
 
DANC 1247 Beginning Jazz Dance 
Instruction in the fundamental techniques and concepts 
associated with jazz dance. May be repeated one time for 
additional degree credit. Lab required. 2 credit hours. (A) 
Note: May be repeated one time for additional credit. 
 
DANC 1301 Dance Composition - Choreography 
This course is an examination of the principles of 
movement generation, phrasing, choreographic structure, 
and manipulation. Integration of choreographic principles 
will foster the growth of personal artistic style. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: DANC 1201. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
DANC 1305 World Dance 
A survey of dances from different cultures, their histories, 
and their influences on contemporary dance and society. 
Cultural origins, significance, motivations and techniques 
will be explored experientially. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
DANC 2151 Sophomore Dance Performance 
Instruction in dance performance through experiential 
projects at the sophomore level. May be repeated for 
credit once. Lab required. Prerequisite: DANC 1151, 
Audition. 1 credit hour. (A) 
 
DANC 2241 Intermediate Ballet 
Instruction in the intermediate techniques and concepts 
associated with ballet. May be repeated one time for 
additional degree credit. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
DANC 1241 or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 2 
credit hours. (A 
Note: May be repeated one time for additional credit. 
 
DANC 2245 Intermediate Modern Dance 
Instruction in the intermediate techniques and concepts 
associated with the concert form of modern dance. May 
be repeated one time for additional degree credit. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: DANC 1245 or consent of 
Associate Dean/Director. 2 credit hours. (A) 
Note: May be repeated one time for additional credit. 
 
DANC 2247 Intermediate Jazz Dance 
Instruction in the intermediate techniques and concepts 
associated with jazz dance. May be repeated one time for 
additional degree credit. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
DANC 1247 or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 2 
credit hours. (A) 
Note: May be repeated one time for additional credit. 
 
DANC 2303 Dance Appreciation 
A general survey of dance forms designed to create an 
appreciation of the vocabulary, techniques, and purposes 
of the creative process. This course includes critical 
interpretation and evaluations of choreographic works 
and dance forms within cultural and historical contexts. 
Prerequisite: Meet TSI standard for INRW 0315; or 
equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
DANC 2389 Academic Co-op Dance 
Integrates on-campus study with practical hands-on work 
experience in dance. In conjunction with class seminars, 
the student will set specific goals and objectives in the 
study of dance. Contact the Associate Dean/Director for 
more information. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
DFTG 1302 Introduction to Technical Animation 
and Rendering 
Basic study of technical computer models and animation. 
Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
DFTG 1309 Basic Computer-Aided Drafting 
An introduction to computer-aided drafting. Emphasis is 
placed on setup; creating and modifying geometry; storing 
and retrieving predefined shapes; placing, rotating, and 
scaling objects, adding text and dimensions, using layers, 
229 
 
coordinating systems; and plot/print to scale. Lab 
required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
DFTG 1315 Architectural Blueprint Reading 
The fundamentals of blueprint reading for the 
construction industry. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
DFTG 1317 Architectural Drafting-Residential 
Architectural drafting procedures, practices, terms, and 
symbols. Preparation of detailed working drawings for 
residential structures. Emphasis on light frame 
construction methods. Lab required. Prerequisite: DFTG 
2328. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
DFTG 1330 Civil Drafting I 
Preparation of civil drawings including drafting methods 
and principles used in civil engineering. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: DFTG 1317. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
DFTG 1333 Mechanical Drafting 
Study of mechanical drawings using dimensioning and 
tolerances, sectioning techniques, orthographic 
projection, and pictorial drawings. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: DFTG 2319. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
DFTG 1372 SOLIDWORKS Essentials 
A study of mechanical drafting and design using 
SOLIDWORKS mechanical design automation software 
to build parametric models of parts and assemblies. The 
course teaches how to make drawings of those parts and 
assemblies through the use of dimensioning and 
tolerancing, sectioning techniques and orthographic 
projection. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
DFTG 2319 Intermediate Computer-Aided Drafting 
A continuation of practices and techniques used in basic 
computer-aided drafting including the development and 
use of prototype drawings, construction of pictorial 
drawings, extracting data and basics of 3D. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: DFTG 1309. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
DFTG 2328 Architectural Drafting-Commercial 
Architectural drafting procedures, practices, governing 
codes, terms and symbols, including the preparation of 
detailed working drawings for a commercial building, with 
emphasis on commercial construction methods. Lab 
required. Prerequisite/Concurrent Enrollment: DFTG 
1309. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
DFTG 2332 Advanced Computer-Aided Drafting 
Application of advanced CAD techniques. Lab required. 
Prerequisite/Concurrent Enrollment: DFTG 1372. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
DFTG 2338 Final Project - Advanced Drafting 
A drafting course in which students participate in a 
comprehensive project from conception to conclusion. 
Lab required. Prerequisites: DFTG 1317, DFTG 1333, 
and DFTG 2350. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
DFTG 2350 Geometric Dimensioning and 
Tolerancing 
Geometric dimensioning and tolerancing, according to 
standards, application of various geometric dimensions 
and tolerances to production drawings. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: DFTG 1309. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
DFTG 2373 Advanced SOLIDWORKS 
Study of advanced topics in SOLIDWORKS mechanical 
drafting and design. The course teaches how to build 
assemblies, to create professional drawing, and to use 
various SOLIDWORKS tools to manage information to 
facilitate the design process. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
DFTG 1372. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
DFTG 2381 Cooperative Education-Drafting and 
Design Technology/Technician, General 
Career-related activities encountered in the student's area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Contact the 
Associate Dean/Director for more information. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
DHYG 1201 Orofacial Anatomy, Histology and 
Embryology 
The histology and embryology of oral tissues, gross 
anatomy of the head and neck, tooth morphology, and 
individual tooth identification. Lab required. 
Prerequisites: BIOL 2401 and BIOL 2402; both with a 
grade of "C" or better. Major Requirement: AAS - Dental 
Hygiene. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
DHYG 1207 General and Dental Nutrition 
General nutrition and nutritional biochemistry 
emphasizing the effect nutrition has on oral health. 
Prerequisite: DHYG 1431 with a grade of C or better. 
Major Requirement: AAS - Dental Hygiene. 2 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
DHYG 1211 Periodontology 
Normal and diseased periodontium including the 
structural, functional, and environmental factors. 
Emphasis on etiology, pathology, treatment modalities, 
and therapeutic and preventive periodontics. 
Prerequisites: DHYG 1227 and DHYG 1261; both with a 
grade of "C" or better. Major Requirement: AAS - Dental 
Hygiene. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
DHYG 1215 Community Dentistry 
The principles and concepts of community public health 
and dental health education emphasizing community 
 
 
230 
 
assessment, educational planning, implementation, and 
evaluation including methods and materials used in 
teaching dental health education in various community 
settings. Lab required. Prerequisites: DHYG 1227, 
DHYG 1261 and ENGL 1301; all with a grade of C or 
better. Major Requirement: AAS - Dental Hygiene. 2 
credit hours. (W) 
 
DHYG 1219 Dental Materials 
Physical and chemical properties of dental materials 
including the application and manipulation of the various 
materials used in dentistry. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
DHYG 1431 with a grade of "C" or better. Major 
Requirement: AAS - Dental Hygiene. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
DHYG 1227 Preventive Dental Hygiene Care 
The role of the dental hygienist as a therapeutic oral 
health care provider with emphasis on concepts of disease 
management, health promotion, communication, and 
behavior modification. Lab required. Prerequisites: 
DHYG 1201 and DHYG 1431, both with a grade of "C" 
or better.  Major Requirement: AAS - Dental Hygiene. 2 
credit hours. (W) 
 
DHYG 1235 Pharmacology for the Dental Hygienist 
Classification of drugs and their uses, actions, 
interactions, side effects, contraindications with emphasis 
on dental applications. Prerequisite: DHYG 1431 with a 
grade of "C" or better. Major Requirement: AAS - Dental 
Hygiene. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
DHYG 1239 General and Oral Pathology 
Disturbances in human body development, diseases of 
the body, and disease prevention measures with emphasis 
on the oral cavity and associated structures. Lab required. 
Prerequisites: DHYG 1227 and DHYG 1261; both with a 
grade of “C” or better. Major Requirement: AAS - Dental 
Hygiene. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
DHYG 1261 Clinical I-Dental Hygienist 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Prerequisites: 
DHYG 1201 and DHYG 1431; both with a grade of "C" 
or better. Major Requirement: AAS - Dental Hygiene. 2 
credit hours. (W) 
 
DHYG 1304 Dental Radiology 
Fundamentals of oral radiography, including techniques, 
interpretation, quality assurance, and ethics. Lab required. 
Major Requirement: AAS - Dental Hygiene. Corequisite: 
DHYG 1201. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
DHYG 1431 Preclinical Dental Hygiene 
Foundational knowledge for performing clinical skills and 
management of medical emergencies for patients with 
emphasis on procedures and rationale for performing 
dental hygiene care. Introduction to ethical principles as 
they apply to dental hygiene care. Lab required. 
Prerequisites: BIOL 2401 and BIOL 2402; both with a 
grade of C or better. Major Requirement: AAS - Dental 
Hygiene. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
DHYG 2102 Applied Community Dentistry 
Application of the principles and concepts of community 
public health and dental health education emphasizing 
community assessment, educational planning, 
implementation, and evaluation including methods and 
materials used in teaching dental health education in 
various community settings. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
DHYG 1215 with a grade of "C" or better. Major 
Requirement: AAS - Dental Hygiene. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
DHYG 2153 Dental Hygiene Practice 
Emphasis on the laws governing the practice of dentistry 
and dental hygiene, moral standards, and the ethical 
standards established by the dental hygiene profession. 
Practice settings for the dental hygienist, office 
operations, preparation for employment and introduction 
to the dental team. Prerequisite: Admitted to the Dental 
Hygiene Program. Major Requirement: AAS - Dental 
Hygiene. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
DHYG 2201 Dental Hygiene Care I 
Dental hygiene care for the medically or dentally 
compromised patient including supplemental 
instrumentation techniques. Prerequisites: DHYG 1227 
and DHYG 1261; both with a grade of "C" or better. 
Corequisite: DHYG 2361. Major Requirement: AAS - 
Dental Hygiene. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
DHYG 2231 Dental Hygiene Care II 
A continuation of Dental Hygiene Care I. Dental hygiene 
care for the medically or dentally compromised patient 
including advanced instrumentation techniques. Lab 
required. Prerequisites: DHYG 2201 and DHYG 2361; 
both with a grade of "C' or better. Major Requirement: 
AAS - Dental Hygiene. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
DHYG 2361 Clinical II - Dental Hygienist 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Additionally, this 
course is a method of instruction providing detailed 
education, training and work-based experience and direct 
patient/client care, generally at a clinical site. Specific 
detailed learning objectives are developed for each course 
by the faculty. Onsite clinical instruction, supervision, 
evaluation, and placement are the responsibility of the 
college faculty. Clinical experiences are unpaid external 
learning experiences. Prerequisites: DHYG 1227 and 
DHYG 1261; both with a grade of "C" or better. 
231 
 
Corequisite: DHYG 2201. Major Requirement: AAS - 
Dental Hygiene. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
DHYG 2363 Clinical III-Dental Hygienist 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Prerequisites: 
DHYG 2201 and DHYG 2361; both with a grade of "C" 
or better. Corequisite: DHYG 2231. Major Requirement: 
AAS - Dental Hygiene. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
DMSO 1167 Practicum 1 - Diagnostic Medical 
Sonography/Sonographer and Ultrasound 
Technician 
Practical, general workplace training supported by an 
individualized learning plan developed by the employer, 
college, and student. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
DMSO 1201 Techniques of Medical Sonography 
Scanning techniques. Includes scan protocols and 
procedures within the laboratory setting utilizing live 
scanning and/or simulated experience. Lab required. 2 
credit hours. (W) 
 
DMSO 1202 Basic Ultrasound Physics 
Basic acoustical physics and acoustical waves in human 
tissue. Emphasis on ultrasound transmission in soft 
tissues, attenuation of sound energy, parameters affecting 
sound transmission, and resolution of sound beams. Lab 
required. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
DMSO 1210 Introduction to Sonography 
An introduction to the profession of sonography and the 
role of the sonographer. Emphasis on medical 
terminology, ethical/legal aspects, written and verbal 
communication, and professional issues relating to 
registry, accreditation, professional organizations and 
history of the profession. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
DMSO 1266 Practicum 1 - Diagnostic Medical 
Sonography/Sonographer and Ultrasound 
Technician 
Practical, general workplace training supported by an 
individualized learning plan developed by the employer, 
college, and student. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
DMSO 1366 Practicum 3 - Diagnostic Medical 
Sonography/Sonographer and Ultrasound 
Technician 
Practical, general workplace training supported by an 
individualized learning plan developed by the employer, 
college, and student. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
DMSO 1441 Abdominopelvic Sonography 
Normal anatomy and physiology of the abdominal and 
pelvic cavities as related to scanning techniques, 
transducer selection, and scanning protocols. Lab 
required. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
DMSO 1455 Sonographic Pathophysiology 
Pathology and pathophysiology of the abdominal 
structures visualized with ultrasound. Includes abdomen 
and pelvis. Lab required. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
DMSO 1466 Practicum 2 - Diagnostic Medical 
Sonography/Sonographer and Ultrasound 
Technician 
Practical, general workplace training supported by an 
individualized learning plan developed by the employer, 
college, and student. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
DMSO 2230 Advanced Ultrasound and Review 
Knowledge, skills, and professional values within a legal 
and ethical framework addressing emerging technologies 
and professional development. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
DMSO 2243 Advanced Ultrasound Physics 
Theory and application of ultrasound principles. Includes 
advances in ultrasound technology. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: DMSO 1202. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
DMSO 2342 Sonography of High Risk Obstetrics 
Maternal disease and fetal abnormalities. Includes 
scanning techniques, patient history and laboratory data, 
transducer selection, and scanning protocols. Lab 
required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
DMSO 2353 Sonography of Superficial Structures 
Detailed study of normal and pathological superficial 
structures as related to scanning techniques, patient 
history and laboratory data, transducer selection, and 
scanning protocols. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
DMSO 2405 Sonography of Obstetrics/Gynecology 
Detailed study of the pelvis and obstetrics/gynecology as 
related to scanning techniques, patient history and 
laboratory data, transducer selection, and scanning 
protocols. Lab required. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
DRAM 1120 Theatre Practicum I 
Practicum in theater open to all students with emphasis 
on technique and procedures with experience gained in 
play productions. Additionally, this course is a practicum 
in theatre with emphasis on performance techniques and 
procedures, including a performance role in a college 
production. Flexible enrollment. Prerequisite: Consent of 
Associate Dean/Director. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: Students may take DRAM 1120, DRAM 1121, 
DRAM 2120, and DRAM 2121 for a combined total of no 
more than 4 credit hours. 
 
DRAM 1121 Theatre Practicum II 
Practicum in theater open to all students with emphasis 
 
 
232 
 
on technique and procedures with experience gained in 
play productions. Additionally, this course is a practicum 
in theatre with emphasis on theatre techniques and 
procedures, including technical responsibilities in the 
production of a college play. Flexible enrollment. 
Prerequisite: Consent of Associate Dean/Director. 1 
credit hour. (A) 
Note: Students may take DRAM 1120, DRAM 1121, 
DRAM 2120, and DRAM 2121 for a combined total of no 
more than 4 credit hours. 
 
DRAM 1310 Theater Appreciation 
Survey of theater including its history, dramatic works, 
stage techniques, production procedures, and relation to 
other art forms. Participation in productions may be 
required. Prerequisite: Meet TSI standard for INRW 
0315; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
DRAM 1322 Stage Movement 
Principles, practices, and exercises in awareness, 
relaxation, freedom, flexibility, and expressiveness in the 
actor’s physical instrument. Lab required. 3 credit hours. 
(A) 
 
DRAM 1330 Stagecraft I 
Study and application of the methods and components of 
theatrical production which may include one or more of 
the following: theater, facilities, scenery construction and 
painting, properties, lighting, costume, makeup, sound, 
and theatrical management. Lab required. 3 credit hours. 
(A) 
 
DRAM 1341 Stage Makeup 
Design and execution of makeup for the stage performer. 
Includes discussion of makeup principles and practical 
experience of makeup application. Lab required. 3 credit  
hours. (A) 
 
DRAM 1342 Costume Technology 
Introduction to the process and application of the 
fundamental skills of costume production, modification, 
and maintenance. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
DRAM 1351 Acting I 
An introduction to the fundamental principles and tools 
of acting as used in auditions, rehearsals, and 
performances. This may include ensemble performing, 
character and script analysis, and basic theater 
terminology. This exploration will emphasize the 
development of the actor’s instrument: voice, body and 
imagination. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
DRAM 1352 Acting II 
Exploration and further training within the basic 
principles and tools of acting, including an emphasis on 
critical analysis of oneself and others. The tools include 
ensemble performing, character and script analysis, and 
basic theater terminology. This will continue the 
exploration of the development of the actor’s instrument: 
voice, body and imagination. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
DRAM 1351 or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 
credit hours. (A) 
 
DRAM 2120 Theatre Practicum III 
Practicum in theater open to all students with emphasis 
on technique and procedures with experience gained in 
play productions. Additionally, this course is a 
continuation of DRAM 1120, and is a practicum in 
theatre with emphasis on advanced performance 
techniques and procedures; as well as specialized training 
in practical skill areas related to performance. Flexible 
enrollment. Prerequisite: Consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: Students may take DRAM 1120, DRAM 1121, 
DRAM 2120, and DRAM 2121 for a combined total of no 
more than 4 credit hours. 
 
DRAM 2121 Theatre Practicum IV 
Practicum in theater open to all students with emphasis 
on technique and procedures with experience gained in 
play productions. Additionally, this course is a 
continuation of DRAM 1121, and is a practicum in 
theatre with emphasis on advanced theatre techniques 
and procedures; as well as specialized training in practical 
skill areas related to technical theatre areas and theatre 
technology. Flexible enrollment. Prerequisite: Consent of 
Associate Dean/Director. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: Students may take DRAM 1120, DRAM 1121, 
DRAM 2120, and DRAM 2121 for a combined total of no 
more than 4 credit hours. 
 
DRAM 2331 Stagecraft II 
Continued study and application of the methods and 
components of theatrical production which may include 
one or more of the following: theater facilities, scenery 
construction and painting, properties, lighting, costume, 
makeup, sound and theatrical management. Lab required. 
3 credit hours. (A) 
 
DRAM 2335 Theater Design 
Survey of principles and practices of theater design and 
its elements. The fundamentals of art and their 
application to major areas of theatrical design. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: DRAM 1330. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
DRAM 2336 Voice for the Actor 
Principles, practices, and exercises in awareness, 
relaxation, freedom, flexibility, and expressiveness in the 
actor’s vocal instrument. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
DRAM 2355 Script Analysis 
Examination of foundational skills for understanding the 
structure and content of play scripts for interpretation 
and conceptualization in theater productions by directors, 
233 
 
designers, actors, and technicians. Introduces students to 
significant plays in the history of dramatic literature in the 
playwright’s social and cultural context. 3 credit hours. 
(A) 
 
DRAM 2361 History of Theater I 
Study of the history of the theater from primitive times 
through the Renaissance.   Prerequisite: Meet TSI 
standard for INRW 0315; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. 
(A) 
 
DRAM 2362 History of Theater II 
Study of the history of the theater from the Renaissance 
through today. Prerequisite: Meet TSI requirement for 
INRW 0315; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
DRAM 2366 Film Appreciation 
Survey and analyze cinema including history, film 
techniques, production procedures, selected motion 
pictures, and cinema's impact on and reflection of society. 
Lab required. 3 credit hours. (A) 
Note: Students may take either DRAM 2366 or COMM 2366, 
but not both. 
 
DRAM 2389 Academic Co-op Drama 
Integrates on campus study with practical hands-on work 
experience in drama. In conjunction with class seminars, 
the student will set specific goals and objectives in the 
study of drama. Contact the Associate Dean/Director for 
more information. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
DSAE 1303 Introduction to Echocardiography 
Techniques 
An introduction to scanning techniques and procedures 
with hands-on experience in a lab setting. Emphasis is 
placed on the sonographic evaluation of the normal adult 
heart. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
DSAE 1340 Diagnostic Electrocardiography 
Cardiac testing including the techniques and 
interpretation of patient physical assessment. Covers 
electrocardiography, stress testing, Holter monitoring, 
vital signs, and cardiovascular pharmacology.  Lab 
required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
DSAE 2235 Advanced Echocardiography 
Advanced echocardiographic procedures. Topics include 
stress echo, related diagnostic imaging, and related 
noninvasive cardiac testing. Lab required. 2 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
DSAE 2303 Cardiovascular Concepts 
Anatomy, physiology, and pathophysiology of the 
cardiovascular system. Focuses on cardiac and vascular 
structural anatomy and relationships, electrical 
innervation, embryology, and hemodynamics of the heart 
and vascular system. Includes pathophysiology, etiology, 
pathology, signs, symptoms, risk factors, and treatment of 
cardiovascular diseases. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
DSAE 2304 Echocardiographic Evaluation of 
Pathology I 
Adult acquired cardiac pathologies. Topics include 
cardiovascular pathophysiology, quantitative 
measurements, and the application of 2-D, M-Mode, and 
Doppler. Recognition of the sonographic appearances of 
cardiovascular disease is stressed. Lab required. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
DSAE 2337 Echocardiographic Evaluation of 
Pathology II 
A continuation of Echocardiographic Evaluation of 
Pathology I with emphasis on cardiac disease. A 
discussion of quantitative measurements and application 
of 2-D, M-Mode, Doppler, and recognition of the 
sonographic appearances of cardiac disease is stressed. 
Lab required. Prerequisite: DSAE 2304. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
DSAE 2355 Echocardiography Professionalism and 
Registry Review 
Knowledge, skills and professional values within a legal 
and ethical context addressing emerging technologies and 
professional development as it relates to the field of 
echocardiography. Ergonomic techniques and equipment 
applications associated with technological advances in the 
field of echocardiography. Registry review techniques and 
registry preparedness. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
DSPE 1200 Introduction to Pediatric 
Echocardiography Techniques 
Introduction to pediatric echocardiography techniques 
and procedures. Emphasis is placed on the sonographic 
appearance of the normal neonatal and pediatric heart. 
Basic scan protocol to include 2D, M-mode, Doppler and 
standard measurements. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
DSVT 1300 Principles of Vascular Technology 
Introduction to non-invasive vascular technology 
modalities. Includes 2D imaging, Doppler, 
plethysmography, and segmental pressures. Emphasis on 
performing basic venous and arterial imaging and non-
imaging exams. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
DSVT 2200 Vascular Technology Applications 
Non-invasive vascular technology. Includes 2-D imaging, 
Doppler, plethysmography, and segmental pressures. 
Emphasizes protocols for performing basic venous and 
arterial imaging and non-imaging exams. Lab required.  
Prerequisite: DSVT 1300 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
ECON 1301 Introduction to Economics 
A survey of microeconomic and macroeconomic 
principles of non-business majors. Microeconomic topics 
 
 
234 
 
will include supply and demand, consumer behavior, price 
and output decisions by firms under various market 
structures, factor markets, market failures, international 
trade, and exchange rates. Macroeconomic topics will 
include national income, unemployment, inflation, 
business cycles, aggregate supply and demand, monetary 
and fiscal policy, and economic growth. 3 credit hours. 
(A) 
 
ECON 2301 Principles of Macroeconomics 
An analysis of the economy as a whole including 
measurement and determination of Aggregate Demand 
and Aggregate Supply, national income, inflation, and 
unemployment. Other topics include international trade, 
economic growth, business cycles, and fiscal policy and 
monetary policy. Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness 
standard for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit 
hours. (A) 
 
ECON 2302 Principles of Microeconomics 
Analysis of the behavior of individual economic agents, 
including consumer behavior and demand, producer 
behavior and supply, price and output decisions by firms 
under various market structures, factor markets, market 
failures, and international trade. Prerequisite: Meet TSI 
college-readiness standard for Reading and Writing; or 
equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
ECON 2389 Academic Co-op Economics 
Integrates on-campus study with practical hands-on work 
experience in economics. In conjunction with class 
seminars, the student will set specific goals and objectives 
in the study of economics. Contact the Associate 
Dean/Director for more information. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
ECRD 1211 Electrocardiography 
Fundamentals of cardiovascular anatomy and physiology. 
Includes basic electrocardiography procedures, 
interpretation of basic dysrhythmias, and appropriate 
treatment modalities. Lab required. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
EDUC 1100 Learning Framework 
A study of the research and theory in the psychology of 
learning, cognition, and motivation, factors that impact 
learning, and application of learning strategies. 
Theoretical models of strategic learning, cognition, and 
motivation serve as the conceptual basis for the 
introduction of college-level student academic strategies. 
Students use assessment instruments (e.g. learning 
inventories) to help them identify their own strengths and 
weaknesses as strategic learners. Students are ultimately 
expected to integrate and apply the learning skills 
discussed across their own academic programs and 
become effective and efficient learners. Students 
developing these skills should be able to continually draw 
from the theoretical models they have learned. Lab 
required. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: Students may only take one of the following: EDUC 1100, 
EDUC 1300. 
 
EDUC 1300 Learning Framework 
A study of the: research and theory in the psychology of 
learning, cognition, and motivation; factors that impact 
learning, and application of learning strategies. 
Theoretical models of strategic learning, cognition, and 
motivation serve as the conceptual basis for the 
introduction of college-level student academic strategies. 
Students use assessment instruments (e.g., learning 
inventories) to help them identify their own strengths and 
weaknesses as strategic learners. Students are ultimately 
expected to integrate and apply the learning skills 
discussed across their own academic programs and 
become effective and efficient learners. Students 
developing these skills should be able to continually draw 
from the theoretical models they have learned. 3 credit 
hours. (A) 
Note: Students may only take one of the following: EDUC 1100, 
EDUC 1300. 
 
EDUC 1301 Introduction to the Teaching Profession 
An enriched, integrated pre-service course and content 
experience that provides active recruitment and 
institutional support of students interested in a teaching 
career, especially in high need fields. The course provides 
students with opportunities to participate in early field 
observations at all levels of P-12 schools with varied and 
diverse student populations and provides students with 
support from college and school faculty, preferably in 
small cohort groups, for the purpose of introduction to 
and analysis of the culture of schooling and classrooms. 
Course content should be aligned as applicable with State 
Board for Educator Certification Pedagogy and 
Professional Responsibilities standards; and the course 
must include a minimum of 16 contact hours of field 
experience in P-12 classrooms. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
Meet TSI standard for INRW 0315; or equivalent. 3 
credit hours. (A) 
 
EDUC 2301 Introduction to Special Populations 
An enriched, integrated pre-service course and content 
experience that provides an overview of schooling and 
classrooms from the perspectives of language, gender, 
socioeconomic status, ethnic and academic diversity, and 
equity with an emphasis on factors that facilitate learning. 
The course provides students with opportunities to 
participate in early field observations of P-12 special 
populations and should be aligned as applicable with State 
Board for Educator Certification Pedagogy and 
Professional Responsibilities standards. Must include a 
minimum of 16 contact hours of field experience in P-12 
235 
 
classrooms with special populations. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: EDUC 1301. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
EECT 1348 Digital Signal Processing (DSP) 
A study of the architecture and applications of digital 
signal processors (DSP) including mathematical signal 
processing techniques. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
EECT 2337 Wireless Telephony Systems 
Principles of wireless/cellular telephony systems to 
include call processing, hand-off, site analysis, antenna 
radiation patterns, commonly used test/maintenance 
equipment, and access protocol. Lab required. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
EECT 2380 Cooperative Education - Electrical, 
Electronic and Communications Engineering 
Technology Technician 
Career-related activities encountered in the student’s area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Contact the 
Associate Dean/Director for more information. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
EECT 2439 Communications Circuits 
A study of communications systems with emphasis on 
amplitude modulation, frequency modulation, phase 
modulation, and digital pulse modulation. Discussion of 
several types of modulators, demodulators, receivers, 
transmitters, and transceivers. Lab required. Prerequisites: 
CETT 1425 and CETT 2471. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
ELMT 1301 Programmable Logic Controllers 
An introduction to programmable logic controllers as 
used in industrial environments including basic concepts, 
programming, applications, troubleshooting of ladder 
logic, and interfacing of equipment. Lab required. 
Prerequisites: CETT 1409, CETT 1425, and ELMT 1305. 
3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ELMT 1305 Basic Fluid Power 
Basic fluid power course covering pneumatic and 
hydraulic systems, fluid power symbols, operating theory, 
components, and basic electrical and manual controls. 
Lab required. Prerequisite: TECM 1343, or MATH 1316 
or higher-level math. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ELMT 2339 Advanced Programmable Logic 
Controllers 
Advanced applications of programmable logic controllers 
as used in industrial environments including concepts of 
programming, industrial applications, troubleshooting 
ladder logic, and interfacing to equipment. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: ELMT 1301. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ELMT 2480 Cooperative Education - 
Electromechanical Technology 
Career-related activities encountered in the student's area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Contact the 
Associate Dean/Director for more information. 
Prerequisite: Consent of Associate Dean/Director. 4 
credit hours. (W) 
 
ELPT 1311 Basic Electrical Theory 
Basic theory and practice of electrical circuits. Includes 
calculations as applied to alternating and direct current. 
Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ELPT 1321 Introduction to Electrical Safety and 
Tools 
Safety rules and regulations. Includes the selection, 
inspection, use, and maintenance of common tools for 
electricians. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ELPT 1325 National Electrical Code I 
An introductory study of the National Electrical Code 
(NEC) for those employed in fields requiring knowledge 
of the Code. Emphasis on wiring design, protection, 
methods, and materials; equipment for general use; and 
basic calculations. Prerequisites/Concurrent Enrollment: 
ELPT 1311 and ELPT 1321. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ELPT 1329 Residential Wiring 
Wiring methods for single family and multi-family 
dwellings. Includes load calculations, service entrance 
sizing, proper grounding techniques, and associated safety 
procedures. Lab required. Prerequisites/Concurrent 
Enrollment: ELPT 1311 and ELPT 1321. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
ELPT 1341 Motor Control 
Operating principles of solid-state and conventional 
controls along with their practical applications. Includes 
braking, jogging, plugging, safety interlocks, wiring, and 
schematic diagram interpretations. Lab required. 
Prerequisite/Concurrent Enrollment: ELPT 1357. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
ELPT 1345 Commercial Wiring 
Commercial wiring methods. Includes overcurrent 
protection, raceway panel board installation, proper 
grounding techniques, and associated safety procedures. 
 
 
236 
 
Lab required. Prerequisites/Concurrent Enrollment: 
ELPT 1311 and ELPT 1321. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ELPT 1357 Industrial Wiring 
Wiring methods used for industrial installations. Includes 
motor circuits, raceway and bus way installations, proper 
grounding techniques, and associated safety procedures. 
Lab required. Prerequisite: ELPT 1345. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
ELPT 1371 Electrical Fundamentals 
Introduction to basic principles of electricity and electrical 
systems. Topics include electrical calculations, electrical 
measurements, and electrical safety procedures. Note: 
This course is designed for non-electrical majors. Lab 
required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ELPT 2305 Motors and Transformers 
Operation of single- and three-phase motors and 
transformers. Includes transformer banking, power factor 
correction, and protective devices. Lab required. 
Prerequisite/Concurrent Enrollment: ELPT 1357. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
ELPT 2325 National Electrical Code II 
In-depth coverage of the National Electrical Code (NEC) 
for those employed in fields requiring knowledge of the 
Code. Emphasis on wiring protection and methods, 
special conditions, and advanced calculations. 
Prerequisite: ELPT 1325. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
EMSP 1160 Clinical-Emergency Medical Technician 
(EMT Paramedic)-Basic 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Prerequisite: 
Consent of Associate Dean/Director. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
EMSP 1161 Clinical-Emergency Medical Technician 
(EMT Paramedic)-Advanced I 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Prerequisite: 
Consent of Associate Dean/Director. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
EMSP 1162 Clinical-Emergency Medical Technician 
(EMT Paramedic)-Advanced II 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Prerequisite: 
Consent of Associate Dean/Director. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
EMSP 1338 Introduction to Advanced Practice 
Fundamental elements associated with emergency medical 
services to include preparatory practices, 
pathophysiology, medication administration, and related 
topics. Lab required. Prerequisites: EMSP 1160 and 
EMSP 1371 and EMSP 1501, and a Texas EMT-Basic 
certification. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
EMSP 1355 Trauma Management  
Knowledge and skills in the assessment and management 
of patients with traumatic injuries. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: Consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
EMSP 1356 Patient Assessment and Airway 
Management 
Knowledge and skills required to perform patient 
assessment, airway management, and artificial ventilation. 
Lab required. Prerequisite: Consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
EMSP 1371 Introduction to Emergency Medical 
Technician (EMT) 
Introduction to Emergency Medical Services including: 
history, organization and function, legal aspects, and 
ethics. Overview of human anatomy and physiology, 
patient assessment, airway control, and infection control 
techniques. Prerequisite: Consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. Corequisites: EMSP 1160 and EMSP 
1501. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
EMSP 1501 Emergency Medical Technician 
Preparation for certification as an Emergency Medical 
Technician (EMT). Lab required. Prerequisite: Consent of 
Associate Dean/Director. Corequisite: EMSP 1160. 5 
credit hours. (W) 
 
EMSP 2143 Assessment Based Management 
A summative experience covering comprehensive, 
assessment-based patient care management for the 
paramedic level. Additionally, it includes specific care 
when dealing with pediatric, adult, geriatric, and special 
needs patients. Prerequisite: Consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
EMSP 2160 Clinical-Emergency Medical (EMT 
Paramedic)-Advanced III 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
EMSP 2206 Emergency Pharmacology 
A study of drug classifications, actions, therapeutic uses, 
adverse effects, routes of administration, and calculation 
of dosages. Lab required. Prerequisite: Consent of 
Associate Dean/Director. 2 credit hours. (W) 
237 
 
 
EMSP 2267 Practicum-Emergency Medical (EMT 
Paramedic) 
Practical, general workplace training supported by an 
individualized learning plan developed by the employer, 
college, and student. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
EMSP 2305 EMS Operations 
Knowledge and skills to safely manage multi-casualty 
incidents and rescue situations; utilize air medical 
resources; identify hazardous materials and other 
specialized incidents. Prerequisite: Consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
EMSP 2330 Special Populations 
Knowledge and skills necessary to assess and manage ill 
or injured patients in diverse populations to include 
neonatology, pediatrics, geriatrics, and other related 
topics. Lab required. Prerequisite: Consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
EMSP 2534 Medical Emergencies 
Knowledge and skills in the assessment and management 
of patients with medical emergencies, including medical 
overview, neurology, gastroenterology, immunology, 
pulmonology, urology, hematology, endocrinology, 
toxicology, and other related topics. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: Consent of Associate Dean/Director. 5 
credit hours. (W) 
 
EMSP 2544 Cardiology 
Assessment and management of patients with cardiac 
emergencies. Includes single and multi-lead ECG 
interpretation. Lab required. Prerequisite: Consent of 
Associate Dean/Director. 5 credit hours. (W) 
 
ENGL 1301 Composition I 
Intensive study of and practice in writing processes, from 
invention and researching to drafting, revising, and 
editing, both individually and collaboratively. Emphasis 
on effective rhetorical choices, including audience, 
purpose, arrangement, and style. Focus on writing the 
academic essay as a vehicle for learning, communicating, 
and critical analysis. Lab required. Prerequisite: Meet TSI 
college-readiness standard for Reading and Writing; or 
equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
ENGL 1302 Composition II 
Intensive study of and practice in the strategies and 
techniques for developing research-based expository and 
persuasive texts. Emphasis on effective and ethical 
rhetorical inquiry, including primary and secondary 
research methods; critical reading of verbal, visual, and 
multimedia texts; systematic evaluation, synthesis, and 
documentation of information sources; and critical 
thinking about evidence and conclusions. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: ENGL 1301. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
ENGL 2307 Creative Writing I 
Practical experience in the techniques of imaginative 
writing. May include fiction, non-fiction, poetry, 
screenwriting, or drama. Additionally, this course does 
not satisfy the college requirements for a sophomore 
literature course. Prerequisite: ENGL 1302. 3 credit 
hours. (A) 
 
ENGL 2311 Technical and Business Writing 
Intensive study of and practice in professional settings. 
Focus on the types of documents necessary to make 
decisions and take action on the job, such as proposals, 
reports, instructions, policies and procedures, e-mail 
messages, letters, and descriptions of products and 
services. Practice individual and collaborative processes 
involved in the creation of ethical and efficient 
documents. Prerequisite: ENGL 1301. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
ENGL 2322 British Literature I 
A survey of the development of British literature from 
the Anglo-Saxon period to the Eighteenth Century. 
Students will study works of prose, poetry, drama, and 
fiction in relation to their historical, linguistic, and cultural 
contexts. Texts will be selected from a diverse group of 
authors and traditions. Prerequisite: ENGL 1302 or 
ENGL 2311. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
ENGL 2323 British Literature II 
A survey of the development of British literature from 
the Romantic period to the present. Students will study 
works of prose, poetry, drama, and fiction in relation to 
their historical and cultural contexts. Texts will be 
selected from a diverse group of authors and traditions. 
Prerequisite: ENGL 1302 or ENGL 2311. 3 credit hours. 
(A) 
 
ENGL 2327 American Literature I 
A survey of American literature from the period of 
exploration and settlement through the Civil War. 
Students will study works of prose, poetry, drama, and 
fiction in relation to their historical and cultural contexts. 
Texts will be selected from among a diverse group of 
authors for what they reflect and reveal about the 
evolving American experience and character. Prerequisite: 
ENGL 1302 or ENGL 2311. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
ENGL 2328 American Literature II 
A survey of American literature from the Civil War to the 
present. Students will study works of prose, poetry, 
drama, and fiction in relation to their historical and 
cultural contexts. Texts will be selected from among a 
diverse group of authors for what they reflect and reveal 
about the evolving American experience and character. 
 
 
238 
 
Prerequisite: ENGL 1302 or ENGL 2311. 3 credit hours. 
(A) 
 
ENGL 2332 World Literature I 
A survey of world literature from the ancient world 
through the sixteenth century. Students will study works 
of prose, poetry, drama, and fiction in relation to their 
historical and cultural contexts. Texts will be selected 
from a diverse group of authors and traditions. 
Prerequisite: ENGL 1302 or ENGL 2311. 3 credit hours. 
(A) 
 
ENGL 2333 World Literature II 
A survey of world literature from the seventeenth century 
to the present. Students will study works of prose, poetry, 
drama, and fiction in relation to their historical and 
cultural contexts. Texts will be selected from a diverse 
group of authors and traditions. Prerequisite: ENGL 
1302 or ENGL 2311. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
ENGL 2341 Forms of Literature: Short Story, Novel, 
Poetry, and Drama 
The study of one or more literary genres including, but 
not limited to, poetry, fiction, drama, and film. 
Prerequisite: ENGL 1302 or ENGL 2311. 3 credit hours. 
(A) 
 
ENGL 2389 Academic Co-op English 
Integrates on-campus study with practical hands-on work 
experience in English. In conjunction with class seminars, 
the student will set specific goals and objectives in the 
study of English. Contact the Associate Dean/Director 
for more information. Prerequisites: Consent of Associate 
Dean/Director and meet TSI college-readiness standard 
for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
ENGR 1201 Introduction to Engineering 
An introduction to the engineering profession with 
emphasis on technical communication and team-based 
engineering design. Prerequisite: MATH 1314 or 
equivalent academic preparation. 2 credit hours. (A) 
 
ENGR 1304 Engineering Graphics 
Introduction to computer-aided drafting using CAD 
software and sketching to generate two- and three- 
dimensional drawings based on the conventions of 
engineering graphical communication; topics include 
spatial relationships, multi-view projections and 
sectioning, dimensioning, graphical presentation of data, 
and fundamentals of computer graphics. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: MATH 1314 or equivalent academic 
preparation. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
ENGR 2105 Electrical Circuits I Laboratory 
Laboratory experiments supporting theoretical principles 
presented in ENGR 2305 involving DC and AC circuit 
theory, network theorems, time, and frequency domain 
circuit analysis. Introduction to principles and operation 
of basic laboratory equipment; laboratory report 
preparation. Prerequisites: MATH 2414 and PHYS 2426. 
Prerequisite/Concurrent enrollment: MATH 2320. 
Corequisite: ENGR 2305. 1 credit hour. (A) 
 
ENGR 2301 Engineering Mechanics - Statics 
Basic theory of engineering mechanics, using calculus, 
involving the description of forces, moments, and 
couples acting on stationary engineering structures; 
equilibrium in two and three dimensions; free-body 
diagrams; friction; centroids; centers of gravity; and 
moments of inertia. Lab required. Prerequisites: MATH 
2414 and PHYS 2425. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
ENGR 2302 Engineering Mechanics - Dynamics 
Basic theory of engineering mechanics, using calculus, 
involving the motion of particles, rigid bodies, and 
systems of particles; Newton's Laws; work and energy 
relationships; principles of impulse and momentum; 
application of kinetics and kinematics to the solution of 
engineering problems. Lab required. Prerequisite: ENGR  
2301. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
ENGR 2305 Electrical Circuits I 
Principles of electrical circuits and systems. Basic circuit 
elements (resistance, inductance, mutual inductance, 
capacitance, independent and dependent controlled 
voltage, and current sources). Topology of electrical 
networks; Kirchhoff’s laws; node and mesh analysis; DC 
circuit analysis; operational amplifiers; transient and 
sinusoidal steady-state analysis; AC circuit analysis; first- 
and second-order circuits; Bode plots; and use of 
computer simulation software to solve circuit problems. 
Lab required. Prerequisites: MATH 2414 and PHYS 
2426. Prerequisite/Concurrent Enrollment: MATH 2320. 
3 credit hours. (A) 
 
ENGR 2332 Mechanics of Materials 
Stresses, deformations, stress-strain relationships, 
torsions, beams, shafts, columns, elastic deflections in 
beams, combined loading, and combined stresses. 
Additionally, behavior phenomena such as fracture, 
fatigue, and creep are introduced. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: ENGR 2301. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
ENTC 1171 Introduction to Engineering Technology 
Topics address introduction to Electronic Engineering 
Technology, Robotics, Automation and Biomedical 
Equipment Technology industries and career pathways. 1 
credit hour. (W) 
 
ENVR 1401 Environmental Science I 
Lecture: A survey of the forces, including humans, that 
shape our physical and biologic environment, and how 
they affect life on Earth. Introduction to the science and 
policy of global and regional environmental issues, 
239 
 
including pollution, climate change, and sustainability of 
land, water, and energy resources. Lab: Activities will 
cover methods used to collect and analyze environmental 
data. Lab required. Prerequisites: TSI Math score of 910-
949 with a diagnostic score of 5, and TSI college-
readiness standard for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 
4 credit hours. (A) 
Note: Students may take either ENVR 1401 or GEOL 1305 
but not both. 
 
ENVR 1402 Environmental Science II 
Continued interdisciplinary study of both natural (biology, 
chemistry, geology) and social (economics, politics, ethics) 
sciences as they apply to the environment. Focus on 
energy issues, global warming, ozone loss, land use, 
conservation and management, deforestation, 
biodiversity, the history of environmental law and 
regulation and local environmental problems. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: ENVR 1401. 4 credit hours. (A) 
 
ESLC 0305 ESL Listening/Speaking, Intermediate 
Develops listening and speaking skills in speakers of 
languages other than English and prepares them to 
function in educational, vocational and/or personal 
English-speaking contexts. Additionally, emphasis on 
developing non-native speakers' intermediate listening 
and speaking skills to facilitate natural communication. 
Oral skills are developed through individual presentations 
and interactions in dyads and in small and large groups. 
Aural skills are developed through classroom interaction, 
outside assignments, and video and audio clips designed 
to enhance non-native speakers' skills in understanding 
both formal and informal speech styles of English. Focus 
is given to students' spoken grammar, pronunciation, 
vocabulary, and exposure to U.S. culture. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: ESL New Student Assessment for ESLC 
0305. 3 credit hours. (D) 
Note: ESLC 0305, ESLC 0310, ESLC 0325, and ESLX 
0305 may be taken for a combined total of no more than 9 credit 
hours. 
 
ESLC 0310 ESL Listening/Speaking, Advanced 
Develops listening and speaking skills in speakers of 
languages other than English and prepares them to 
function in educational, vocational and/or personal 
English-speaking contexts. Emphasis on developing non-
native speakers’ advanced oral communication and 
listening competencies. Students practice natural 
communication regarding abstract concepts in classroom 
activities by working in dyads and in small and large 
groups. Formal speaking skills are focused upon through 
delivery of individual short oral presentations. Students 
participate in advanced level listening activities through 
interaction both in and out of the classroom and the use 
of video and audio media. Focus is given to students’ 
spoken grammar, pronunciation, vocabulary, and 
exposure to U.S. culture. Lab required. Prerequisite: ESL 
New Student Assessment for ESLC 0310; or successful 
completion of ESLC 0305. 3 credit hours. (D) 
Note: ESLC 0305, ESLC 0310, ESLC 0325, and ESLX 
0305 may be taken for a combined total of no more than 9 credit 
hours. 
 
ESLC 0325 ESL Listening/Speaking Transitioning 
Develops listening and speaking skills in speakers of 
languages other than English and prepares them to 
function in coursework. Emphasis on developing non-
native speakers’ advanced oral communication and 
listening competencies. Students practice natural 
communication regarding academic concepts in 
classroom activities by working in dyads and in small and 
large groups. Formal speaking skills are focused upon 
through delivery of individual researched presentations 
and debates. Students participate in advanced level 
listening activities through interaction both in and out of 
the classroom and the use of video and audio media. 
Focus is given to students’ pronunciation, vocabulary, 
and research as well as successful transitioning to SPCH 
1311. Lab required. Prerequisite: ESL New Student 
Assessment for ESLC 0325; or successful completion of 
ESLC 0310. 3 credit hours. (D) 
Note: ESLC 0305, ESLC 0310, ESLC 0325, and ESLX 
0305 may be taken for a combined total of no more than 9 credit 
hours. 
 
ESLG 0305 ESL Grammar Intermediate 
Instruction for non-native speakers focuses on verb 
tenses, subject-verb agreement, word order, parts of 
speech, and modal auxiliaries. Course content supports 
ESLW 0305 objectives for grammar usage. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: ESL New Student Assessment for ESLG 
0305. 3 credit hours. (D) 
 
ESLG 0310 ESL Grammar Advanced 
Instruction for non-native speakers focuses on clause 
structure (independent and dependent), gerunds and 
infinitives, review of verb tenses, subject-verb agreement, 
and nouns and articles. Course content supports ESLW 
0310 objectives for grammar usage. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: ESL New Student Assessment for ESLG 
0310; or successful completion of ESLG 0305. 3 credit 
hours. (D) 
 
ESLG 0325 ESL Grammar Transitioning 
Instruction for non-native speakers focuses on a variety 
of clause and phrase structures: noun clauses, adjective 
clauses, adjective phrases, adverb clauses, adverbial 
phrases, and conditionals. Course content supports 
ESLW0325 objectives for grammar usage as well as 
successful transition into ENGL 1301. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: ESL New Student Assessment for ESLG 
 
 
240 
 
0325; or successful completion of ESLG 0310. 3 credit 
hours. (D) 
 
ESLR 0305 ESL Reading Intermediate 
Focuses on teaching students with intermediate level 
speaking and listening skills to identify topics, main ideas, 
and supporting details in simplified academic and literary 
texts. Lab required. Prerequisite: ESL New Student 
Assessment for ESLR 0305. Corequisite: ESLW 0305. 3 
credit hours. (D) 
Note: ESLR 0305, ESLR 0310, ESLR 0325, and ESLX 
0310 may be taken for a combined total of no more than 9 credit 
hours. 
 
ESLR 0310 ESL Reading Advanced 
Focuses on teaching vocabulary from the Academic 
Word List, word families, context clues, topics, main 
ideas, supporting details, transitions, and organizational 
patterns for improving comprehension of abridged and 
unabridged academic and literary texts. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: ESL New Student Assessment for ESLR 
0310; or successful completion of ESLR 0305 and ESLW 
0305. Corequisite: ESLW 0310. 3 credit hours. (D) 
Note: ESLR 0305, ESLR 0310, ESLR 0325, and ESLX 
0310 may be taken for a combined total of no more than 9 credit 
hours. 
 
ESLR 0325 ESL Reading Transitioning 
Focuses on teaching non-native speakers of English with 
high intermediate reading skills to comprehend cultural 
allusions, connotation of vocabulary, implied main ideas, 
facts and opinions, inferences and conclusions, author’s 
purpose, tone, point of view, and graphic aids in 
unabridged academic texts, accelerating reading rates and 
comprehension to transition to academic coursework. 
Lab required. Prerequisite: ESL New Student Assessment 
for ESLR 0325; or successful completion of ESLR 0310 
and ESLW 0310. Corequisite: ESLW 0325. 3 credit hours. 
(D) 
Note: ESLR 0305, ESLR 0310, ESLR 0325, and ESLX 
0310 may be taken for a combined total of no more than 9 credit 
hours. 
 
ESLW 0305 ESL Writing Intermediate 
Focuses on sentence-level writing and paragraph-
development (culminating in short multi-paragraph 
writing). Introduces students to pre-academic, academic, 
and experiential writing. Trains students to develop and 
organize ideas in a variety of rhetorical modes. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: ESL New Student Assessment for 
ESLW 0305. Corequisite: ESLR 0305. 3 credit hours. (D) 
 
ESLW 0310 ESL Writing Advanced 
Focuses on teaching sentence variety and academic essay 
writing in various rhetorical modes. Introduces concepts 
of summarizing articles with supported opinions, 
paraphrasing, and documentation. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: ESL New Student Assessment for ESLW 
0310; or successful completion of ESLR 0305 and ESLW 
0305. Corequisite: ESLR 0310. 3 credit hours. (D) 
 
ESLW 0325 ESL Writing Transitioning 
Trains students to write academically acceptable papers in 
various rhetorical modes with a primary emphasis on 
argumentation. Focuses on mechanics of writing, 
common problems that ESL writers encounter, research, 
and documentation allowing students to successfully 
transition to ENGL 1301. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
ESL New Student Assessment for ESLW 0325; or 
successful completion of ESLR 0310 and ESLW 0310. 
Corequisite: ESLR 0325. 3 credit hours. (D) 
 
ESLX 0305 ESL Pronunciation 
Emphasis on aspects of spoken English, including stress 
and intonation, individual phonemes, and awareness of 
connected and reduced speech. Addresses pronunciation 
problems of specific language groups. Attention to 
productive and receptive skills is facilitated through 
classroom activities, student work in dyads and small and 
large groups. Lab required. Prerequisite: ESL New 
Student Assessment for ESLX 0305. 3 credit hours. (D) 
Note: ESLC 0305, ESLC 0310, ESLC 0325, and ESLX 
0305 may be taken for a combined total of no more than 9 credit 
hours. 
 
ESLX 0310 ESL Vocabulary and Idioms 
Instruction in idiomatic American English for second 
language learners. Increases familiarity with idiomatic 
English to facilitate comprehension and production of 
idioms in spoken and written discourse. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: ESL New Student Assessment for ESLR 
0310; or successful completion of ESLR 0305. 3 credit 
hours. (D) 
Note: ESLR 0305, ESLR 0310, ESLR 0325, and ESLX 
0310 may be taken for a combined total of no more than 9 credit 
hours. 
 
ESLX 0325 Test-Taking and Study Skills for Non-
Native English Speakers 
Prepares non-native English-speaking students for 
success by providing instruction and practice in test-
taking techniques as well as exposing them to the 
expectations and realities of college academic coursework. 
Topics include information processing, memory 
retention, strategic learning, self-regulation, goal setting, 
motivation, educational planning, and learning styles. 
Techniques of study such as organization, time-
management, listening/speaking/reading/writing in a 
lecture or classroom setting, note-taking, research skills, 
and test preparation will be covered. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: ESL New Student Assessment for ESLX 
241 
 
0325; or successful completion of ESLR 0310 and ESLW 
0310. 3 credit hours. (D) 
 
FIRS 1301 Firefighter Certification I 
One in a series of courses in basic preparation for a new 
firefighter. Should be taken in conjunction with 
Firefighter Certification II, III, IV, V, VI, and VII to 
satisfy the Texas Commission on Fire Protection (TCFP) 
curriculum for Basic Structural Fire Suppression, Course 
#100. Lab required. Prerequisite: Admission to the 
Program. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
FIRS 1313 Firefighter Certification III 
One in a series of courses in basic preparation for a new 
firefighter. Should be taken in conjunction with 
Firefighter Certification I, II, IV, V, VI, and VII to satisfy 
the Texas Commission on Fire Protection (TCFP) 
curriculum for Basic Structural Fire Suppression, Course 
#100. Prerequisites: FIRS 1407. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
FIRS 1319 Firefighter Certification IV 
One is a series of courses in basic preparation for a new 
firefighter. Should be taken in conjunction with 
Firefighter Certification I, II, III, V, VI, and VII to satisfy 
the Texas Commission on Fire Protection (TCFP) 
curriculum for Basic Structural Fire Suppression, Course 
#100. Lab required. Prerequisite: FIRS 1313. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
FIRS 1323 Firefighter Certification V 
One is a series of courses in basic preparation for a new 
firefighter. Should be taken in conjunction with 
Firefighter Certification I, II, III, IV, VI, and VII to 
satisfy the Texas Commission on Fire Protection (TCFP) 
curriculum for Basic Structural Fire Suppression, Course 
#100. Lab required. Prerequisite: FIRS 1319. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
FIRS 1329 Firefighter Certification VI 
One in a series of courses in basic preparation for a new 
firefighter. Should be taken in conjunction with 
Firefighter Certification I, II, III, IV, V, and VII to satisfy 
the Texas Commission on Fire Protection (TCFP) 
curriculum for Basic Structural Fire Suppression, Course 
#100. Lab required. Prerequisite: FIRS 1323. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
FIRS 1407 Firefighter Certification II 
One in a series of courses in basic preparation for a new 
firefighter. Should be taken in conjunction with 
Firefighter Certification I, III, IV, V, VI, and VII to 
satisfy the Texas Commission on Fire Protection (TCFP) 
curriculum for Basic Structural Fire Suppression, Course 
#100. Lab required. Prerequisite: FIRS 1301, or consent 
of Associate Dean/Director. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
FIRS 1433 Firefighter Certification VII 
One in a series of courses in basic preparation for a new 
firefighter. Should be taken in conjunction with 
Firefighter Certification I, II, III, IV, V, and VI to satisfy 
the Texas Commission on Fire Protection (TCFP) 
curriculum for Basic Structural Fire Suppression, Course 
#100. Lab required. Prerequisite: FIRS 1329. 4 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
FIRS 1491 Special Topics in Fire 
Science/Firefighting 
Topics address recently identified current events, skills, 
knowledge, and/or attitudes and behaviors pertinent to 
the technology or occupation and relevant to the 
professional development of the student. This course was 
designed to be repeated multiple times to improve 
student proficiency. 4 credit hours. (W)  
 
Rope Rescue  
Fundamental skills required for safe and efficient 
rescue utilizing rope and specialized rescue equipment. 
Topics, skills and knowledge meet applicable Rescue 
Technician Professional Qualifications in accordance 
with National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 
1006. 
 
FIRS 2344 Driver/Operator-Pumper 
Meets curriculum requirements of the Texas Commission 
on Fire Protection (TCFP) for Driver/Operator-Pumper. 
3 credit hours. (W) 
 
FIRT 1301 Fundamentals of Fire Protection 
Orientation to the fire service, career opportunities, and 
related fields. This course meets Fire and Emergency 
Services Higher Education (FESHE) Model Curriculum 
core requirements. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
FIRT 1315 Hazardous Materials I 
The chemical characteristics and behavior of various 
materials. Storage, transportation, handling hazardous 
emergency situations, and the methods of hazard 
mitigation. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
FIRT 1327 Building Construction in the Fire Service 
Components of building construction that relate to life 
safety. Includes relationship of construction elements and 
building design impacting fire spread in structures. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
FIRT 1338 Fire Protection Systems 
Design and operation of fire detection and alarm systems, 
heat and smoke control systems, special protection and 
sprinkler systems, water supply for fire protection, and 
portable fire extinguishers. This course meets Fire and 
 
 
242 
 
Emergency Services Higher Education (FESHE) Model 
Curriculum core requirements. Must be a certified 
firefighter to enroll in this course. Prerequisite: Consent 
of Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
FIRT 1349 Fire Administration II 
In-depth study of fire service management as pertaining 
to budgetary requirements, administration, organization 
of divisions within the fire service, and the relationships 
between the fire service and outside agencies. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
FIRT 1391 Special Topics in Fire Protection and 
Safety Technology/Technician 
Topics address recently identified current events, skills, 
knowledge, and/or attitudes and behaviors pertinent to 
the technology or occupation and relevant to the 
professional development of the student. This course was 
designed to be repeated multiple times to improve 
student proficiency. 3 credit hours. (W)  
 
Haz-Mat Technical Response  
Advanced skills for safe and effective mitigation of 
hazardous material and other complex incidents. 
Topics address all types of transportation and fixed 
facility emergencies consistent with National Fire 
Protection Association (NFPA) 1072. Prerequisite: 
Proof of Basic Firefighter certification or Hazardous 
Materials Awareness and Operations level certification 
from the Texas Commission on Fire Protection. 
 
FIRT 1392 Special Topics in Fire Services 
Administration 
Topics address recently identified current events, skills, 
knowledge, and/or attitudes and behaviors pertinent to 
the technology or occupation and relevant to the 
professional development of the student. This course was 
designed to be repeated multiple times to improve 
student proficiency. 3 credit hours. (W)  
 
Officer Leadership  
Course focused on fire executive management with 
emphasis on budgeting, human resources, emergency 
service delivery, planning, current events, and risk 
management in accordance with National Fire 
Protection Association (NFPA) 1021. Prerequisite: 
FIRT 1443 or proof of Fire Officer II certification 
from the Texas Commission on Fire Protection. 
 
FIRT 1442 Fire Officer I 
Meets the curriculum requirements of the Texas 
Commission on Fire Protection (TCFP) for Fire Officer I 
certification. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
FIRT 1443 Fire Officer II 
Meets the curriculum requirements of the Texas 
Commission on Fire Protection (TCFP) for Fire Officer 
II certification. Prerequisites: FIRT 1442 and FIRT 2305, 
or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 4 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
FIRT 2305 Fire Instructor I 
Preparation of fire and emergency services personnel to 
deliver instruction from a prepared lesson plan. Includes 
the use of instructional aids and evaluation instruments to 
meet the curriculum requirements of the Texas 
Commission on Fire Protection (TCFP) for Fire 
Instructor I certification. Prerequisite: Student must show 
proof of Basic Firefighter Certification from the Texas 
Commission on Fire Protection (TCFP), or consent of 
Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
FIRT 2307 Fire Instructor II 
Development of individual lesson plans for a specific 
topic including learning objectives, instructional aids, and 
evaluation instruments. Includes techniques for 
supervision and coordination of activities of other 
instructors to meet the curriculum requirements of the 
Texas Commission on Fire Protection (TCFP) for Fire 
Instructor II certification. Prerequisite: FIRT 2305 or 
consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
FIRT 2309 Firefighting Strategies and Tactics I 
Analysis of the nature of fire problems and selection of 
initial strategies and tactics including an in-depth study of 
efficient and effective use of staffing and equipment to 
mitigate the emergency. Must be a certified firefighter to 
enroll in this course. Prerequisite: Consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
FIRT 2351 Company Fire Officer 
A capstone course covering fire ground operations and 
supervisory practices. Includes performance evaluation of 
incident commander, safety officer, public information 
officer, and shift supervisor duties. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
FITT 1370 Sports Tourism 
An examination of sport tourism in Collin County and its 
economic and social impact on the community and 
beyond. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
FITT 1371 Principles of Promoting and Selling Sport 
and Recreation 
A survey of the selling process, advertising, consumer 
behavior, market research, strategic planning of sport or 
recreation as a consumer product. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
FITT 1373 Legal and Ethical Issues in Sport and 
Recreation Management 
Examination of legal and ethical concepts related to sport 
and recreation management. Topics will include athletic 
participation and eligibility, public facility use issues, 
constitutional due process, and contracts and tort law as 
applied to participants and spectators. Concepts, models, 
243 
 
and techniques to use in managing ethical dilemmas will 
be explored. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
FITT 1380 Cooperative Education - Health and 
Physical Education, General 
Career-related activities encountered in the student’s area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement between the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Prerequisite: 
Consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
FITT 2371 Leadership in Sport and Recreation 
Principles of Leadership. The role of administration and 
leadership in the objectives, organization, and procedures 
of sport and recreational organizations. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
FLMC 1301 History of Animation Techniques 
A historical perspective of two-dimensional (2-D) and 
three-dimensional (3-D) animation. This class teaches 
students traditional forms of animation including cell, 
stop-motion and zoetropes. Students will also learn the 
history and evolution of the animation art form. Students 
will produce original animations utilizing traditional 
techniques as projects. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
FLMC 1331 Video Graphics and Visual Effects I 
A course in the applications of computers for video 
production. Design of computer graphic workstations 
and development of a rationale for selecting software, 
hardware, and peripherals. Lab required. Prerequisites: 
ARTC 1325 and ARTV 1371, or ARTV 1351. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
FLMC 2330 Audio Post Production 
Skill development utilizing the technology, creative 
application and requirements for producing audio 
soundtracks for film and video. Lab required. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
FLMC 2331 Video Graphics and Visual Effects II 
Advanced concepts of designing vector and raster 
graphics, executing rendering techniques, designing and 
producing three dimensional (3-D) materials, and 
selecting hardware, software, and peripherals for video 
production. Lab required. Prerequisite: FLMC 1331. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
FLMC 2333 Cinematography 
Advanced concepts of theoretical elements and practical 
applications of the cinematic craft. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: RTVB 1325. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
FLMC 2334 Directing for Film or Video 
Analysis of directing styles to formulate a personal 
directing style. Includes directing a film or video 
production. Lab required. Prerequisite: ARTV 1351. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
FLMC 2336 Production Development - Producing 
In-depth study of the sequential steps of supervision in all 
phases of film or video production and distribution, 
including resource acquisition and allocation. Lab 
required. Prerequisites: RTVB 1329 and ARTV 1351. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
FLMC 2380 Cooperative Education - 
Cinematography and Film/Video Production 
Career-related activities encountered in the student's area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Contact the 
Associate Dean/Director for more information. 
Prerequisites: ARTV 2320 and FLMC 2333. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
FREN 1411 Beginning French I 
Fundamental skills in listening comprehension, speaking, 
reading, and writing. Includes basic vocabulary, 
grammatical structures, and culture. Lab required. 4 credit 
hours. (A) 
 
FREN 1412 Beginning French II 
Continuation of FREN 1411. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
FREN 1411 or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 4 
credit hours. (A) 
 
FREN 2311 Intermediate French I 
Continued development of the four basic language skills 
with increased attention to reading and writing. 
Instruction enhanced by slides, tapes, and other audio-
visual aids. Prerequisite: FREN 1412 or consent of 
Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
FREN 2312 Intermediate French II 
Continuation of FREN 2311. Prerequisite: FREN 2311 
or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. 
(A) 
 
GAME 1303 Introduction to Game Design and 
Development 
Introduction to electronic game development and game 
development careers. Includes examination of history and 
philosophy of games, the game production process, 
employee factors for success in the field, and current 
issues and practices in the game development industry. 
 
 
244 
 
Lab required. Prerequisite: ARTV 1345 or consent of 
Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
GAME 2309 Video Game Art II 
A study of industry-used, game-art techniques and its 
applications of game art assets. Utilizes tools and 
advanced techniques in the creation of assets for a game 
engine. Lab required. Prerequisite: ARTV 2345 or 
consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
GAME 2325 3-D Animation II - Character Set-Up 
Character animation for application interfaces. 
Prerequisite: ARTV 1341. Lab required. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
GAME 2336 Lighting, Shading and Texture 
Advanced application of lighting, shading, and texture 
techniques to increase system performance for digital 
games and simulation models. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
ARTV 2345 or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
GAME 2341 Game Scripting 
Scripting languages with emphasis on game concepts and 
simulations. Lab required. Prerequisite: GAME 1303 or 
consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
GAME 2359 Game and Simulation Group Project 
Creation of a game and/or simulation project utilizing a 
team approach. Includes the integration of design, art, 
audio, programming, and quality assurance. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: GAME 1303. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
GAME 2386 Internship-Animation, Interactive 
Technology, Video Graphics and Special Effects 
A work-based learning experience that enables the 
student to apply specialized occupational theory, skills 
and concepts. A learning plan is developed by the college 
and the employer. Prerequisite: ARTV 1341. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
GEOG 1301 Physical Geography 
This course introduces students to the processes that 
drive Earth’s physical systems. Students will explore the 
relationships among these physical systems, with 
emphasis on weather and climate, water, ecosystems, 
geologic processes and landform development, and 
human interactions with the physical environment. 
Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness standard for 
Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
GEOG 1302 Human Geography 
This course introduces students to fundamental concepts, 
skills, and practices of human geography. Place, space, 
and scale serve as a framework for understanding patterns 
of human experience. Topics for discussion may include 
globalization, population and migration, culture, 
diffusion, political and economic systems, language, 
religion, gender, and ethnicity. Prerequisite: Meet TSI 
college-readiness standard for Reading and Writing; or 
equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
GEOG 1303 World Regional Geography 
This course is an introduction to the world’s major 
regions seen through their defining physical, social, 
cultural, political, and economic features. These regions 
are examined in terms of their physical and human 
characteristics and their interactions. The course 
emphasizes relations among regions on issues such as 
trade, economic development, conflict, and the role of 
regions in the globalization process. Prerequisite: Meet 
TSI college-readiness standard for Reading and Writing; 
or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
GEOL 1305 Environmental Science - Natural 
Disasters 
A survey of the forces, including humans, that shape our 
physical and biologic environment, and how they affect 
life on Earth. Introduction to the science and policy of 
global and regional environmental issues, including 
pollution, climate change, and sustainability of land, 
water, and energy resources. Prerequisite: Meet TSI 
standard for MATH 0405, and TSI college-readiness 
standard for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit 
hours. (A) 
Note: Students may take either ENVR 1401 or GEOL 1305 
but not both. 
 
GEOL 1401 Earth Sciences for Non Science Majors I 
Lecture: Survey of geology, meteorology, oceanography, 
and astronomy. Lab: Activities will cover methods used 
to collect and analyze data in geology, meteorology, 
oceanography, and astronomy. Lab required. 
Prerequisites: TSI Math score of 910-949 with a 
diagnostic score of 5, and TSI college-readiness standard 
for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 4 credit hours. (A) 
 
GEOL 1402 Earth Sciences for Non Science Majors 
II 
Lecture: Extension of the study of geology, astronomy, 
meteorology and oceanography, focusing on natural 
resources, hazards and climate variability. Lab: Activities 
will focus on methods used to collect and analyze data 
related to natural resources, hazards and climate 
variability. Lab required. Prerequisite: GEOL 1401 or 
GEOL 1403. 4 credit hours. (A) 
 
GEOL 1403 Physical Geology 
Lecture: Introduction to the study of the materials and 
processes that have modified and shaped the surface and 
interior of Earth over time. These processes are described 
by theories based on experimental data and geologic data 
gathered from field observations. Lab: Laboratory 
activities will cover methods used to collect and analyze 
245 
 
earth science data. Lab required. Prerequisites: TSI Math 
score of 910-949 with a diagnostic score of 5, and TSI 
college-readiness standard for Reading and Writing; or 
equivalent. 4 credit hours. (A) 
 
GEOL 1404 Historical Geology 
Lecture: A comprehensive survey of the history of life 
and major events in the physical development of Earth as 
interpreted from rocks and fossils. Lab: Laboratory 
activities will introduce methods used by scientists to 
interpret the history of life and major events in the 
physical development of Earth from rocks and fossils. 
Lab required. Prerequisite: GEOL 1403. 4 credit hours. 
(A) 
 
GEOL 1445 Oceanography 
A study of the various aspects of the ocean, including 
origins of the ocean, earth's ocean, plate tectonics, ocean 
sediments, the chemistry of seawater, oceans and climate, 
currents, waves, tides, coastal features, oceanic 
ecosystems, protection of coastal areas, and resources of 
the oceans. Lab required. Prerequisites: TSI Math score of 
910-949 with a diagnostic score of 5, and TSI college-
readiness standard for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 
4 credit hours. (A) 
 
GEOL 1447 Introduction to Meteorology 
An examination of the Earth's atmosphere, global 
climate, and associated environmental factors. Includes 
lab exercises in weather tracking on Weather-Net 
computer system. Lab required. Prerequisite: TSI Math 
score of 910-949 with a diagnostic score of 5, and TSI 
college-readiness standard for Reading and Writing; or 
equivalent. 4 credit hours. (A) 
 
GEOL 2389 Academic Co-op Geology 
Integrates on-campus study with practical hands-on work 
experience in geology. In conjunction with class seminars, 
the student will set specific goals and objectives in the 
study of geology. Contact the Associate Dean/Director 
for more information. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
GERM 1411 Beginning German I 
Introduction to the basic skills of speaking, reading, 
writing, and listening; designed for students with little or 
no previous language training. Includes attention to 
selected aspects of German civilization. Instruction 
enhanced by the use of tapes, slides, and video cassettes. 
Lab required. 4 credit hours. (A) 
 
GERM 1412 Beginning German II 
Continuation of GERM 1411 with an emphasis on the 
reading of elementary texts. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
GERM 1411 or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 4 
credit hours. (A) 
 
GERM 2311 Intermediate German I 
Continued development of the four basic language skills 
with increased attention to reading and writing. 
Instruction enhanced by tapes, slides, and other audio-
visual aids. Prerequisite: GERM 1412 or consent of 
Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
GERM 2312 Intermediate German II 
Continuation of GERM 2311. Prerequisite: GERM 2311 
or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. 
(A) 
 
GERS 1160 Clinical - Gerontology 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
GERS 1301 Introduction to Gerontology 
Overview of the social, psychological, and biological 
changes that accompany aging. Focuses on the 
implications of these changes for the individual, as well as 
for the larger society. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
GERS 1304 Activity Directing I 
The role of the director in providing activity services. 
Includes study of history, regulations, communications, 
advocacy, ethics, service delivery, and volunteer 
management. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
GERS 1307 Activity Directing II 
The role of the director in providing activity services. 
Includes assessment, care planning, documentation 
process, and evaluation of client needs. Also addresses 
program design and resources/funding. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: GERS 1304. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
GERS 1343 Psychology of Adult Development and 
Aging 
Study of the cognitive aspects of adult development and 
aging. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
GERS 2160 Clinical - Gerontology 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
GERS 2161 Clinical - Gerontology 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
 
 
246 
 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
GERS 2332 Advanced Activity Director 
An advanced course for activity professionals focusing on 
management skills for activity programs for older adults. 
Includes a system for developing activity programs, 
administrative practices, and communication techniques 
for the activity professional. Lab required. 2 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
GISC 1411 Introduction to Geographic Information 
Systems (GIS) 
Introduction to basic concepts of vector GIS using 
several industry specific software programs. It also 
includes nomenclature of cartography and geography. 
Additionally, students will learn to display map data, 
change symbology, classify features and rasters, use 
dynamic labeling, join and relate tables, define 
projections, dissolve features, clip layers, create a 
geodatabase, and build a GIS model. Lab required. 4 
credit hours. (W) 
 
GISC 2172 Geospatial Information Science (GIS) 
Portfolio Development 
The goal of a professional GIS portfolio is to showcase 
your skills as a GIS professional. In this course, you will 
develop a professional GIS portfolio of your best work as 
completed in your other GIS courses. Lab required. 1 
credit hour. (W) 
 
GISC 2231 Advanced Problems in Geographic 
Information Systems (GIS) 
Seminar/Capstone course designed for the final semester 
of a degree or certificate in Geographic Information 
Systems (GIS). Projects will include individual and group 
studies of GIS applications using the skills acquired in 
previous courses. The student will produce a professional 
project and present the results to a panel consisting of 
peers, instructors, or practicing GIS professionals. Lab 
required. Prerequisites: GISC 2402 and GISC 2420. 2 
credit hours. (W) 
 
GISC 2250 Scripting for Geographic Information 
Systems (GIS) 
Using scripting languages to automate tasks in 
Geographic Information Systems (GIS) environments. 
Introduces scripting and model building techniques used 
to enhance and customize GIS applications. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: GISC 1411. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
GISC 2281 Cooperative Education-Cartography/GIS 
Career-related activities encountered in the student's area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Prerequisite: 
GISC 2420. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
GISC 2311 Geographic Information Systems (GIS) 
Applications 
Application of GIS technology to real workplace 
applications from public and private sectors. Completion 
of Global Positioning Systems (GPS) fieldwork required 
for lab exercises. Lab required. Prerequisite: GISC 1411. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
GISC 2335 Programming for Geographic 
Information Systems (GIS) 
Focuses on the use of programming languages to 
customize and expand the capability of GIS applications. 
Instruction will include object-oriented and component 
programming. Students will also design their own 
Graphical User Interface (GUI). Lab required. 
Prerequisites: GISC 2420 and ITSE 1359. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
GISC 2359 Web-Served Geographic Information 
Systems (GIS) 
Delivery of geographic data via the Internet. Includes 
composition of the map features distributed and 
introduction on the use of markup languages to 
customize web-based Geographic Information Systems 
(GIS). Lab required. Prerequisite: GISC 1411. 
Prerequisite/Concurrent Enrollment: GISC 2420. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
GISC 2402 Geographic Information Systems (GIS) 
Design with Raster Analysis 
Raster/remote sensing principles, technologies, and 
applications. Emphasizes processing raster imagery into 
useful information to be used in a GIS. Includes 
georeferencing and image classification. Student final 
project will be demonstrating raster and remote sensing 
techniques. Lab required. Prerequisite/Concurrent 
Enrollment: GISC 1411. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
GISC 2420 Intermediate Geographic Information 
Systems (GIS) 
This course focuses on the study of spatial data structures 
and the display, manipulation, and analysis of geographic 
information. Students will study the technical aspects 
involved in spatial data handling, analysis, and modeling. 
Instruction will include theories and procedures 
associated with the implementation and management of 
GIS projects. A variety of GIS software packages will be 
used in the laboratory. Lab required. Prerequisite: GISC 
1411. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
GISC 2459 Web-Served Geographic Information 
Systems (GIS) 
Delivery of geographic data via the Internet. Includes 
composition of the map features distributed and 
247 
 
introduction on the use of markup languages to 
customize web-based Geographic Information Systems 
(GIS). Lab required. Prerequisite: GISC 1411. 
Prerequisite/Concurrent Enrollment: GISC 2420. 4 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
GOVT 2107 Federal and Texas Constitutions 
A study of the United States and state constitutions with 
special emphasis on Texas. Prerequisites: By permission 
only, and meet TSI college-readiness standard for 
Reading and Writing; or equivalent.  Enrollment limited 
to students who have already completed a minimum of 
six (6) credit hours of GOVT courses but have not 
satisfied the statutory requirement for study of the federal 
and state constitutions. Ensures compliance with TEC 
51.301. 1 credit hour. (A) 
 
GOVT 2304 Introduction to Political Science 
Introductory survey of the discipline of political science 
focusing on the scope and methods of the field, and the 
substantive topics in the discipline including the 
theoretical foundations of politics, political interaction, 
political institutions and how political systems function. 
Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness standard for 
Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
GOVT 2305 Federal Government (Federal 
constitution and topics) 
Origin and development of the U.S. Constitution, 
structure and powers of the national government 
including the legislative, executive, and judicial branches, 
federalism, political participation, the national election 
process, public policy, civil liberties and civil rights. 
Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness standard for 
Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
GOVT 2306 Texas Government (Texas constitution 
and topics) 
Origin and development of the Texas Constitution, 
structure and powers of the state and local government, 
federalism and inter-governmental relations, political 
participation, the election process, public policy and the 
political culture of Texas. Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-
readiness standard for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 
3 credit hours. (A) 
 
GOVT 2311 Mexican-American Politics 
This course explores the impact of Mexican-Americans 
on U.S. politics and political institutions and public 
policy. Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness standard 
for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
GOVT 2389 Academic Co-op Government 
Integrates on-campus study with practical hands-on work 
experience in government. In conjunction with class 
seminars, the student will set specific goals and objectives 
in the study of government. Contact the Associate 
Dean/Director for more information. Prerequisites: 
Consent of Associate Dean/Director, and meet TSI 
college-readiness standard for Writing; or equivalent. 3 
credit hours. (A) 
 
HALT 2308 Greenhouse Management 
Fundamentals of greenhouse construction and operation. 
Topics include architectural styles, construction materials, 
environmental systems and controls, growing media, 
fertilizers, post-harvest handling, marketing, and business 
management. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
HALT 2402 Greenhouse Crop Production 
Production of crops within the greenhouse environment. 
Topics include growing techniques, environmental 
control, crop rotation, scheduling, preparation for sale, 
and marketing. Lab required. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
HALT 2421 Small Farming 
Instruction in small farming techniques with emphasis on 
horticulture science including comprehensive and 
profitable guidelines. Topics include herbs, fruit, nut, and 
vegetable crops. Lab required. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
HAMG 1313 Front Office Management 
Functions of front office operations as they relate to 
customer service. Includes a study of front office 
interactions with other departments in the lodging 
operation. Prerequisite / Concurrent Enrollment: HAMG 
1321. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
HAMG 1317 Recreational Services 
The study of the recreation and entertainment industry. 
Emphasizes sporting and entertainment venues, tourism 
attractions, and other public and private sector special 
events. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
HAMG 1321 Introduction to Hospitality Industry 
An exploration of the elements and career opportunities 
within the multiple segments of the hospitality industry. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
HAMG 1324 Hospitality Human Resources 
Management 
Principles and procedures of human resource 
management in the hospitality industry. Prerequisite / 
Concurrent Enrollment: HAMG 1321. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
HAMG 1340 Hospitality Legal Issues 
A course in legal and regulatory requirements that impact 
the hospitality industry. Topics include Occupational 
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), labor 
 
 
248 
 
regulations, tax laws, tip reporting, franchise regulations, 
and product liability laws. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
HAMG 1366 Practicum (or Field Experience) - 
Hospitality Administration/Management, General 
Practical, general workplace training supported by an 
individualized learning plan developed by the employer, 
college, and student. Prerequisite / Concurrent 
Enrollment: HAMG 2301. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
HAMG 2301 Principles of Food and Beverage 
Operations 
An overview of food and beverage management in 
various hospitality environments. Emphasizes cost 
controls from procurement to marketing and sales. 
Prerequisite / Concurrent Enrollment: HAMG 1321. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
Note: Culinary lab classes require extended periods of time standing 
in place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds), reaching, bending, 
and working around open flames and with cleaning chemicals. 
 
HAMG 2305 Hospitality Management and 
Leadership 
An overview of management and leadership in the 
hospitality industry with an emphasis on management 
philosophy, policy formation, communications, 
motivation, and team building. Prerequisites: HAMG 
1324, HAMG 1340, HAMG 2301, HAMG 2307 and 
TRVM 2301; or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
HAMG 2307 Hospitality Marketing and Sales 
Identification of the core principles of marketing and 
sales and their impact on the hospitality industry. 
Prerequisite / Concurrent Enrollment: HAMG 1321. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
HAMG 2332 Hospitality Financial Management 
Methods and application of financial management within 
the hospitality industry. Primary emphasis on sales 
accountability, internal controls, and report analysis. 
Prerequisite / Concurrent Enrollment: HAMG 1321. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
HAMG 2337 Hospitality Facilities Management 
Identification of hospitality building systems and facilities; 
to include sustainability and risk management. 
Prerequisite / Concurrent Enrollment: HAMG 1321. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
HAMG 2380 Cooperative Education-Hospitality 
Administration/Management, General 
Career-related activities encountered in the student's area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Contact the 
Associate Dean/Director for more information. 
Prerequisites: CHEF 1305, HAMG 1313, HAMG 1324, 
HAMG 1340, HAMG 2337, RSTO 1325 and TRVM 
2301; or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
HART 1303 Air Conditioning Control Principles 
A basic study of HVAC and refrigeration controls; 
troubleshooting of control components; emphasis on use 
of wiring diagrams to analyze high and low voltage 
circuits; a review of Ohm's law as applied to air 
conditioning controls and circuits. Lab required. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
HART 1371 HVAC Fundamentals 
Introduction to the principles and equipment that makes 
up an HVAC system. Basic installation, maintenance, and 
troubleshooting will be covered. 
Note: This course is designed for non-HVAC majors. Lab 
required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
HART 1401 Basic Electricity for HVAC 
Principles of electricity as required by HVAC, including 
proper use of test equipment, electrical circuits, and 
component theory and operation. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: Departmental Permit. Corequisite: HART 
1407. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
HART 1407 Refrigeration Principles 
An introduction to the refrigeration cycle, heat transfer 
theory, temperature/pressure relationship, refrigerant 
handling, refrigeration components, and safety. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: Departmental Permit. Corequisite: 
HART 1401. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
HART 1441 Residential Air Conditioning 
A study of components, applications, and installation of 
mechanical air conditioning systems including operating 
conditions, troubleshooting, repair, and charging of air 
conditioning systems. Lab required. Prerequisites: HART 
1401 and HART 1407, and Departmental Permit. 
Corequisite: HART 1445. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
HART 1445 Gas and Electric Heating 
Study of the procedures and principles used in servicing 
heating systems including gas fired furnaces and electric 
heating systems. Lab required. Prerequisites: HART 1401 
and HART 1407, and Departmental Permit. Corequisite: 
HART 1441. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
HART 2334 Advanced A/C Controls 
Theory and application of electrical control devices, 
electromechanical controls, and/or pneumatic controls. 
249 
 
Lab required. Prerequisites: HART 2431 and HART 
2438. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
HART 2341 Commercial Air Conditioning 
A study of components, applications, and installation of 
air conditioning systems with capacities of 25 tons or less. 
Additionally, course of study will include: Commercial 
split systems, rooftop units, fan features and analysis and 
more. Lab required. Prerequisites: HART 2349 and 
HART 2345. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
HART 2342 Commercial Refrigeration 
Theory and practical application in the maintenance of 
commercial refrigeration; medium, and low temperature 
applications and ice machines. Lab required. 
Prerequisites: HART 1407 and HART 2431. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
HART 2343 Industrial Air Conditioning 
A study of components, accessories, applications, and 
installation of air conditioning systems above 25 tons 
capacity. Lab required. Prerequisites: HART 2341 and 
HART 2342. Corequisite: HART 2334. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
HART 2345 Residential Air Conditioning Systems 
Design 
Study of the properties of air and results of cooling, 
heating, humidifying or dehumidifying; heat gain and heat 
loss calculations including equipment selection and 
balancing the air system. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
HART 2438. Corequisite: HART 2349. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
HART 2349 Heat Pumps 
A study of heat pumps, heat pump control circuits, 
defrost controls, auxiliary heat, air flow, and other topics 
related to heat pump systems. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
HART 2431. Corequisite: HART 2345. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
HART 2358 Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing 
HVAC Systems 
A study in the process of checking and adjusting all the 
building environmental systems to produce the design 
objectives. Emphasis on efficiency and energy savings. 
Lab required. Prerequisites: HART 2345, HART 2343, 
and HART 2334. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
HART 2431 Advanced Electricity for HVAC 
Advanced electrical instruction and skill building in 
installation and servicing of air conditioning and 
refrigeration equipment including detailed instruction in 
motors and power distribution motors, motor controls, 
and application of solid state devices. Lab required. 
Prerequisites: HART 1441 and HART 1445. Corequisite: 
HART 2438. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
HART 2438 Air Conditioning Installation and 
Startup 
A study of air conditioning system installation, refrigerant 
piping, condensate disposal, and air cleaning equipment 
with emphasis on startup and performance testing. Lab 
required. Prerequisites: HART 1441 and 1445. 
Corequisite: HART 2431. 4 credit hours. (W 
 
HIST 1301 United States History I 
A survey of the social, political, economic, cultural, and 
intellectual history of the United States from the pre-
Columbian era to the Civil War/Reconstruction period. 
United States History I includes the study of pre-
Columbian, colonial, revolutionary, early national, slavery 
and sectionalism, and the Civil War/Reconstruction eras. 
Themes that may be addressed in United States History I 
include: American settlement and diversity, American 
culture, religion, civil and human rights, technological 
change, economic change, immigration and migration, 
and creation of the federal government. Prerequisite: 
Meet TSI college-readiness standard for Reading and 
Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
HIST 1302 United States History II 
A survey of the social, political, economic, cultural, and 
intellectual history of the United States from the Civil 
War/Reconstruction era to the present. United States 
History II examines industrialization, immigration, world 
wars, the Great Depression, Cold War and post-Cold War 
eras. Themes that may be addressed in United States 
History II include: American culture, religion, civil and 
human rights, technological change, economic change, 
immigration and migration, urbanization and 
suburbanization, the expansion of the federal 
government, and the study of U.S. foreign policy. 
Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness standard for 
Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
HIST 2301 Texas History 
A survey of the political, social, economic, cultural, and 
intellectual history of Texas from pre-Columbian era to 
the present. Themes that may be addressed in Texas 
History include: Spanish colonization and Spanish Texas; 
Mexican Texas; the Republic of Texas; statehood and 
secession; oil, industrialization, and urbanization; civil 
rights; and modern Texas. Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-
readiness standard for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 
3 credit hours. (A) 
 
HIST 2311 Western Civilization I 
A survey of the social, political, economic, cultural, 
religious, and intellectual history of Europe and the 
Mediterranean world from human origins to the 17th 
century. Themes that should be addressed in Western 
 
 
250 
 
Civilization I include cultural legacies of Mesopotamia, 
Egypt, Greece, Rome, Byzantium, Islamic civilizations, 
and Europe through the Middle Ages, Renaissance, and 
Reformations.  Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness 
standard for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit 
hours. (A) 
 
HIST 2312 Western Civilization II 
A survey of the social, political, economic, cultural, 
religious, and intellectual history of Europe and the 
Mediterranean world from the 17th century to the 
modern era. Themes that should be addressed in Western 
Civilization II include absolutism and constitutionalism, 
growth of nation states, the Enlightenment, revolutions, 
classical liberalism, industrialization, imperialism, global 
conflict, the Cold War, and globalism. Prerequisite: Meet 
TSI college-readiness standard for Reading and Writing; 
or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
HIST 2321 World Civilizations I 
A survey of the social, political, economic, cultural, 
religious, and intellectual history of the world from the 
emergence of human cultures through the 15th century. 
The course examines major cultural regions of the world 
in Africa, the Americas, Asia, Europe, and Oceania and 
their global interactions over time. Themes include the 
emergence of early societies, the rise of civilizations, the 
development of political and legal systems, religion and 
philosophy, economic systems and trans-regional 
networks of exchange. The course emphasizes the 
development , interaction and impact of global exchange. 
Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness standard for 
Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
HIST 2322 World Civilizations II 
A survey of the social, political, economic, cultural, 
religious, and intellectual history of the world from the 
15th century to the present. The course examines major 
cultural regions of the world in Africa, the Americas, 
Asia, Europe, and Oceania and their global interactions 
over time. Themes include maritime exploration and 
transoceanic empires, nation/state formation and 
industrialization, imperialism, global conflicts and 
resolutions, and global economic integration. The course 
emphasizes the development, interaction and impact of 
global exchange. Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness 
standard for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit 
hours. (A) 
 
HIST 2327 Mexican-American History I 
This course is a survey of the political, economic, social 
and cultural history of Mexicans in North America from 
the pre-Colombian Era through 1850, with emphasis on 
the Mexican-American War with the United States. 
Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness standard for 
Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
HIST 2328 Mexican-American History II 
This course is a survey of the political, economic, social 
and cultural history of Mexicans in North America from 
1850 to present, with emphasis on the Mexican-American 
cultural identity and the Civil Rights Movement in the 
United States. Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness 
standard for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit 
hours. (A) 
 
HIST 2381 African American History I 
A survey of the social, political, economic, cultural, and 
intellectual history of people of African descent in the 
formation and development of the United States to the 
Civil War/Reconstruction period. African American 
History I includes the study of African origins and legacy, 
transAtlantic slave trade, and the experiences of African 
Americans during Colonial, Revolutionary, Early 
National, Antebellum, and the Civil War/Reconstruction 
Eras. This course will enable students to understand 
African American history as an integral part of U.S. 
history. Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness standard 
for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
HIST 2382 African American History II 
A survey of the social, political, economic, cultural, and 
intellectual history of people of African descent in the 
United States from the Civil War/Reconstruction period 
to the present. African American History II examines 
segregation, disenfranchisement, civil rights, migrations, 
industrialization, world wars, the Harlem Renaissance and 
the conditions of African Americans in the Great 
Depression, Cold War and post-Cold War eras. This 
course will enable students to understand African 
American history as an integral part of U.S. history. 
Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness standard for 
Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
HIST 2389 Academic Co-op History 
Integrates on-campus study with practical hands-on work 
experience in history. In conjunction with class seminars, 
the student will set specific goals and objectives in the 
study of history. Contact the Associate Dean/Director 
for more information. Prerequisite: Consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
HITT 1301 Health Data Content and Structure 
Introduction to systems and processes for collecting, 
maintaining, and disseminating primary and secondary 
health related information including content of health 
record, documentation requirements, registries, indices, 
licensing, regulatory agencies, forms, and screens. Lab 
251 
 
required. Prerequisite/ Concurrent Enrollment: HITT 
1305. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
HITT 1303 Medical Terminology II 
A continuation of the study of medical terms through 
work origin and structure, abbreviations and symbols, 
surgical and diagnostic procedures, and medical 
specialties. Lab required. Prerequisite: HITT 1305. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
HITT 1305 Medical Terminology I 
Study of medical terms through word origin and 
structure. Introduction to abbreviations and symbols, 
surgical and diagnostic procedures, and medical 
specialties. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
HITT 1311 Health Information Systems 
Introduction to health IT standards, health-related data 
structures, software applications and enterprise 
architecture in health care and public health. Lab 
required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
HITT 1345 Health Care Delivery Systems 
Examination of delivery systems including organization, 
financing, accreditation, licensure, and regulatory 
agencies. This course covers alternative health care 
delivery systems. Lab required.  3 credit hours. (W) 
 
HITT 1353 Legal and Ethical Aspects of Health 
Information 
Concepts of privacy, security, confidentiality, ethics, 
health care legislation, and regulations relating to the 
maintenance and use of health information. Prerequisite: 
HITT 1305. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
HITT 2272 Portfolio Development 
Preparation and enhancement of portfolio to meet 
professional standards, development of presentation 
skills, and improvement of job-seeking techniques. Lab 
required. Prerequisites: ITSE 2309 and MATH 1342. 2 
credit hours. (W) 
 
HITT 2328 Introduction to Public Health 
A survey of how health care and public health services are 
organized and delivered in the U.S. Covers public policy, 
relevant organizations and their interrelationships, 
professional roles, legal and regulatory issues, and 
payment systems. Includes health reform initiatives in the 
U.S. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
HITT 2339 Health Information Organization and 
Supervision 
Principles of organization and supervision of human, 
financial, and physical resources. Lab required. Major 
Requirement: AAS-Health Information Management. 
Prerequisites: HITT 1301, HITT 1305. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
HITT 2346 Advanced Medical Coding 
Advanced concepts of ICD and CPT coding rules, 
conventions, and guidelines in complex case studies. 
Investigation of government regulations and changes in 
health care reporting. Lab required. Prerequisites: BIOL 
2404, HITT 1305, and HITT 2435. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
HITT 2361 Clinical II-Health Information/Medical 
Records Technology 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Students should take 
this course in their final semester. Prerequisites: Consent 
of Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
HITT 2430 Pathophysiology and Pharmacology 
Study of the pathology and general health management of 
diseases and injuries across the life span. Topics include 
etiology, symptoms, and the physical and psychological 
reactions to diseases and injuries. A study of drug 
classifications, actions, therapeutic uses, adverse effects, 
routes of administration, and calculation of dosages. Lab 
required. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
HITT 2435 Coding and Reimbursement 
Methodologies 
Advanced coding techniques with emphasis on case 
studies, health records, and federal regulations regarding 
prospective payment systems and methods of 
reimbursement. The student is recommended to complete 
BIOL 2404 prior to registering for this course, but not 
required. Lab required. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
HITT 2443 Quality Assessment and Performance 
Improvement 
Study of quality standards and methodologies in the 
health information management environment. Topics 
include licensing, accreditation, compilation and 
presentation of data in statistical formats, quality 
management and performance improvement functions, 
utilization management, risk management, and medical 
staff data quality issues. Approaches to assessing patient 
safety issues and implementation of quality management 
and reporting through electronic systems. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: HITT 1301, and meet TSI college-readiness 
standard for Mathematics; or equivalent. 4 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
HPRS 1102 Wellness and Health Promotion 
An overview of wellness theory and its application 
throughout the life span. Focus is on attitude 
 
 
252 
 
development, impact of cultural beliefs, and 
communication of wellness. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
HPRS 1160 Clinical - Health Services/Allied 
Health/Health Sciences, General 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
HPRS 1201 Introduction to Health Professions 
An overview of roles of various members of the health 
care system, educational requirements, and issues 
affecting the delivery of health care. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
HPRS 1204 Basic Health Profession Skills 
A study of the concepts that serve as the foundation for 
health profession courses, including client care and safety 
issues, basic client monitoring, and health documentation 
methods. Lab required. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
HPRS 1206 Essentials of Medical Terminology 
A study of medical terminology, word origin, structure, 
and application. Lab required. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
HPRS 1272 Microbiology for Health Professions 
An introduction to the nature of microorganisms, 
microbial diversity, the importance of microorganisms 
and acellular agents in the biosphere, and the role 
microorganisms have in disease. Emphasis is on medical 
microbiology and infectious diseases. Lab required. 
Prerequisites: BIOL 2401 and BIOL 2402; both with a 
grade of “C” or better. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
HPRS 1303 End of Life Issues 
Discussion of grief, loss, and end of life issues. Prepares 
caregivers to function in settings where communication 
skills are utilized to provide psychosocial support to 
persons and their families. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
HPRS 1310 Introduction to Pharmacology 
A study of drug classifications, actions, therapeutic uses, 
adverse effects, and routes of administration. Does NOT 
include dosage calculations. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
HPRS 1370 Central Sterile Processing II 
This course explores two subsections of the IAHCSMM 
Certification program: A) Inventory Control-prepares the 
student with organizational skills needed to control, track 
and distribute inventory through the use of different 
techniques in inventory control and distribution, as well 
as the use of bar codes and radio frequency identification 
to track inventories. B) Sterile Storage and Distribution-
introduces the basic procedures of packaging processes 
through a comparison of reusable and disposable 
packaging materials, basic package closure methods, and 
factors, which affect shelf-life and stock rotation. Lab 
required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
HPRS 1470 Central Sterile Processing I 
This course will teach subsections of the IAHCSMM 
Certification program related to: A) Introduction to 
Central Service-an introduction to the central service role, 
surgical supplies, basic and specialty surgical instruments, 
and packaging and sterilization. B) Infection Control and 
Occupational Safety-related to the principles and practice 
of infection control and OSHA guidelines along with 
common safety and hazards protocols. C) Regulations 
and Standards-teaches the difference between the 
regulations and voluntary and regulatory standards, the 
role and responsibilities of federal agencies that impact 
Central Services, and the important aspects of the 
regulations and standards they administer. Lab required. 4 
credit hours. (W) 
 
HPRS 1471 Central Sterile Processing III 
An exploration of the subsections of the IAHCSMM 
Certification program: A) Instrument and Instrument 
Identification-identifying surgical instruments by name 
and purpose, examination of the process by which 
surgical instruments are manufactured and prepared for 
the sterilization process. B) Endoscopic Instruments-
proper care, handling and processing of endoscopic 
instruments. C) Decontamination-describe how reusable 
equipment, instruments, and supplies are cleaned and 
decontaminated by means of manual or mechanical 
cleaning processes and chemical disinfection and the 
proper use of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) and 
Standard Precautions. D) Preparation and Handling-
relates to basic principles of various packaging materials 
and closure methods used for sterilization preparation as 
they relate to the Association of Advancement of Medical 
Instrument (AAMI) standards. E) Sterilization-relates 
sterilization procedures and theory including high and low 
temperature sterilization, sterilization equipment, types of 
sterilizers, various cycles, quality assurance concepts, 
documentation, standards, policies and procedures. Lab 
required. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
HPRS 1561 Clinical-Health Services/Allied 
Health/Health Sciences, General 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. This course is an 
exploration of teamwork and the application of practical 
principles in the role of Central Sterile Processing Tech 
through "hands on" experience. 5 credit hours. (W) 
 
HPRS 2232 Health Care Communications 
Methods of communication with clients, client support 
253 
 
groups, healthcare professionals, and external agencies. 2 
credit hours. (W) 
 
HPRS 2300 Pharmacology for Health Professions 
A study of drug classifications, actions, therapeutic uses, 
adverse effects, routes of administration, and calculation 
of dosages. Prerequisites: SRGT 1271 and SRGT 1409. 
Corequisites: SRGT 1441 and SRGT 1461. Major 
Requirement: AAS -Surgical Technology. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
HPRS 2301 Pathophysiology 
Study of the pathology and general health management of 
diseases and injuries across the life span. Topics include 
etiology, symptoms, and the physical and psychological 
reactions to diseases and injuries. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
HPRS 2310 Basic Health Profession Skills II 
Builds on previously acquired knowledge and skills 
relevant to the professional development of the student. 
Lecture and simulated laboratory experiences prepare the 
student to perform patient care utilizing critical thinking 
and advanced clinical skills. Lab required. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
HPRS 2321 Medical Law and Ethics for Health 
Professionals 
Principles, procedures, and regulations governing the legal 
and ethical relationships among physicians, patients, and 
health care professionals. Includes current ethical issues 
related to the various healthcare professions and patient 
confidentiality. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
HRPO 1302 Human Resources Training and 
Development 
An overview of human resources training and 
development as related to organizational mission and 
goals. Additionally, this course will examine the role of 
human resource development in maintaining an 
organization’s competitive position in today’s 
environment. Assessment techniques will be identified to 
assist the manager in determining the general training 
needs of the organization and the specific needs of the 
employees. An introduction of practices to help managers 
successfully transfer training to the workplace to improve 
organizational efficiency and effectiveness. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
HRPO 1306 Basic Mediator Training 
Topics include history of mediation, Alternative Dispute 
Resolution legislation in Texas, conflict resolution theory, 
mediation theory and practice, mediation process and 
techniques, self-awareness and ethics. When scheduled 
for 40 or more hours, can be used to meet the standards 
for basic mediation training in Texas as established by the 
Texas Mediation Trainer Roundtable. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
HRPO 1311 Human Relations 
A practical application of the principles and concepts of 
the behavioral sciences to interpersonal relationships in 
the business and industrial environment. Additionally, this 
course is designed to assist employees and employers in 
understanding and utilizing human relations concepts as 
they apply to the business environment. Concepts 
covered include such areas as morale, personal efficiency, 
leadership, personality, motivation, and communication. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
HRPO 1371 Human Resources Intercultural 
Management 
Explores different aspects of intercultural management, 
including teams, leadership, Human Resource 
Management, marketing and negotiations. Cross-cultural 
comparisons of management and communications 
processes. Emphasizes cultural, ethnic, geographic 
distinctions and antecedents that affect individual, group, 
and organizational behavior. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
HRPO 2301 Human Resources Management 
Behavioral and legal approaches to the management of 
human resources in organizations. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
HRPO 2303 Employment Practices 
A study of employment issues including techniques for 
human resource forecasting, selection, and placement 
including interview techniques, pre-employment testing 
and other predictors. Topics include recruitment 
methods, the selection process, Equal Employment 
Opportunity (EEO), EEO recordkeeping, and 
Affirmative Action Plans. Prerequisite: Departmental 
Permit. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
HRPO 2304 Employee Relations 
An examination of policies, practices, and issues required 
to build strong employee relations. Topics include 
communications, employee conduct rules, performance 
appraisal methods, Title VII, Family Medical Leave Act, 
Fair Labor Standards Act, and Americans with 
Disabilities Act updates. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
HRPO 2305 Human Resources Information Systems 
An introduction to Human Resource information 
Systems (HRIS). Additionally, this course is designed to 
provide an introduction to the use of technology in the 
administration of human resource systems, and how new 
technologies can contribute significantly to the efficiency 
in the management of the company’s human capital. 
 
 
254 
 
Prerequisite/Concurrent Enrollment: BCIS 1305. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
HRPO 2306 Benefits and Compensation 
An overview of employee compensation systems. Topics 
include compensation systems, direct and indirect 
compensation, internal and external determination of 
compensation, benefits administration, managing and 
evaluating for effectiveness, legal and regulatory issues, 
pay equity, job analysis affecting job compensation and 
competencies. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
HRPO 2307 Organizational Behavior 
The analysis and application of organizational theory, 
group dynamics, motivation theory, leadership concepts, 
and the integration of interdisciplinary concepts from the 
behavioral sciences. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
HUMA 1301 Introduction to Humanities I 
This stand-alone course is an interdisciplinary survey of 
cultures focusing on the philosophical and aesthetic 
factors in human values with an emphasis on the 
historical development of the individual and society and 
the need to create. Additionally, this course provides a 
broad overview of cultural traditions and the variety of 
aesthetic and intellectual works through which they 
express their values and aspirations. Prerequisite: Meet 
TSI college-readiness standard for Reading and Writing; 
or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
HUMA 1302 Introduction to Humanities II 
This stand-alone course is an interdisciplinary survey of 
cultures focusing on the philosophical and aesthetic 
factors in human values with an emphasis on the 
historical development of the individual and society and 
the need to create. Additionally, this course specifically 
pursues a concentrated exploration of particular cultural 
traditions or persistent cultural concepts or practices 
through critical engagement with selected aesthetic and 
intellectual works. Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-
readiness standard for Reading and Writing, or equivalent. 
3 credit hours. (A) 
 
HUMA 2323 World Cultures 
This course is a general study of diverse world cultures. 
Topics include cultural practices, social structures, 
religions, arts, and languages. Prerequisite: Meet TSI 
college-readiness standard for Reading and Writing, or 
equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
IBUS 1341 Global Supply Chain Management 
International purchasing or sourcing. Includes the 
advantages and the barriers of purchasing internationally, 
global sourcing, procurement technology, and purchasing 
processes. Emphasizes issues of contract administration, 
location, and evaluation of foreign suppliers, total cost 
approach, exchange fluctuations, customs procedures, 
and related topics. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
IBUS 1354 International Marketing Management 
Analysis of international marketing strategies using 
market trends, costs, forecasting, pricing, sourcing, and 
distribution factors. Development of an international 
marketing plan. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
IBUS 2332 Global Business Simulation 
A simulation of a global environment. Students will 
engage in business practice and theory. The simulation 
may include researching foreign business cultures and 
importing and exporting products. Emphasizes 
participation in all business decisions related to running a 
simulated company. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
IBUS 2341 Intercultural Management 
Cross-cultural comparisons of management and 
communications processes. Emphasizes cultural ethnic 
geographic distinctions and antecedents that affect 
individual, group, and organizational behavior. May 
include sociocultural demographics, economics, 
technology, legal issues, negotiations, and processes of 
decision making in the international cultural environment. 
3 credit hours. (W) 
 
IFWA 1310 Nutrition and Menu Planning 
Application of principles of nutrition in planning menus 
for the food service industry. This includes various types 
of commercial, industrial and institutional food service 
entities. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
IFWA 1319 Meat Identifying and Processing 
A study of the identification and characteristics of 
wholesale and retail cuts of meat; hotel, restaurant, and 
institutional cuts of meat; U.S.D.A quality grades; quality 
control; and the Federal Meat Inspection Regulation. Lab 
required. Prerequisites: CHEF 1301, CHEF 1305, and 
CHEF 2331. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
IMED 1316 Web Design I 
Instruction in web design and related graphic design 
including mark-up languages, and browser issues. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: ARTC 1302 and ARTC 1325, or 
consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
IMED 1341 Interface Design 
Interface design process relative to a project’s content 
and delivery system. Emphasis on Aesthetic usability. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: ITSE 1311 or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
IMED 2311 Portfolio Development 
Preparation and enhancement of portfolio to meet 
professional standards, development of presentation 
skills, and job-seeking techniques. Lab required. 
255 
 
Prerequisites: UXUI 1371 and consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
IMED 2315 Web Design II 
Mark-up language and advanced layout techniques for 
creating web pages. Emphasis on identifying the target 
audience and producing web sites, according to World 
Wide Web Consortium (W3C) standards and legal issues. 
Lab required. Prerequisite: IMED 1316. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
INDS 1301 Basic Elements of Design 
A study of basic design concepts with projects in shape, 
line, value, texture, pattern, spatial illusion, and form. Lab 
required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
INDS 1315 Materials, Methods and Estimating 
A study of materials, methods of construction and 
installation, and estimating for interior design 
applications. Lab required. Prerequisite: INDS 1319 and 
INDS 2313. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
INDS 1319 Technical Drawing for Interior Designers 
An introduction to reading and preparing technical 
construction drawings for interior design, including plans, 
elevations, details, schedules, dimensions and lettering. 
Lab required. Prerequisite: INDS 1372. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
INDS 1345 Commercial Design I 
A study of design principles applied to furniture layout 
and space planning for commercial interiors. Lab 
required. Prerequisites: INDS 1319 and INDS 2313. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
INDS 1349 Fundamentals of Space Planning 
The study of residential and light commercial spaces, 
including programming, codes, standards, space planning, 
drawings and presentations. Lab required. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
INDS 1352 History of Interiors II 
A multi-cultural historical survey of design in architecture, 
interiors, furnishings, and decorative elements from the 
post-Renaissance period to present time. Lab required. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
INDS 1372 Computer-Aided Drafting for Interior 
Designers 
An introduction to computer-aided drafting. Emphasis is 
placed on setup; general knowledge of CAD software; 
reading basic blueprint; creating and modifying geometry; 
storing and retrieving predefined shapes; placing, rotating, 
and scaling objects, adding text and dimensions, using 
layers, coordinating systems; and plot/print to scale; 
interior furniture layouts. Lab required. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
INDS 2310 Kitchen and Bath Design 
Principles of kitchen and bath design. Emphasizes 
programming, space planning, and universal design. 
Includes innovative products and finishes. Lab required. 
Prerequisites: INDS 1301, INDS 1349, and INDS 1372. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
INDS 2313 Residential Design I 
The study of residential spaces, including the 
identification of client needs, programming, standards, 
space planning, drawings, and presentations. Lab 
required. Prerequisites: INDS 1301, INDS 1349 and 
INDS 1372. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
INDS 2317 Rendering Techniques 
A study of rendering techniques for formal interior design 
presentation, using a variety of media. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: INDS 1319. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
INDS 2325 Professional Practices for Interior 
Designers 
A study of business practices and procedures for interior 
designers, including professional ethics, project 
management, marketing, and legal issues. Lab required. 
Prerequisites: INDS 1315 and INDS 1345. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
INDS 2330 Interior Design Building Systems 
An overview of building materials, mechanical systems, 
and construction techniques as applied to interior design. 
Discussion of codes, project sequencing and the 
interpretation of detailed working drawings. Lab required. 
Prerequisites: INDS 1315 and INDS 1345. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
INDS 2331 Commercial Design II 
Advanced concepts of specialized commercial interior 
design projects, including hospitality, corporate, retail, 
health care, institutional or other specialized commercial 
design projects. Lab required. Prerequisite: INDS 1345. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
INDS 2335 Residential Design II 
A comprehensive study of complex residential interior 
design problems, including advanced space planning, 
documentation, specifications, budgets, and presentation 
renderings. Lab required. Prerequisites: INDS 1319, 
INDS 2310, and INDS 2313. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
INDS 2337 Portfolio Presentation 
A course in the preparation and presentation of a 
comprehensive interior design portfolio, including resume 
preparation, employment interview skills, and goal setting. 
 
 
256 
 
Lab required. Prerequisites: INDS 2317 and INDS 2325. 
3 credit hours. (W) 
 
INDS 2380 Cooperative Education - Interior Design 
Career-related activities encountered in the student’s area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Contact the 
Associate Dean/Director for more information. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
INEW 2330 Comprehensive Software Project: 
Planning and Design 
A comprehensive application of skills learned in previous 
courses in a simulated workplace. Covers the 
development, testing, and documenting of a complete 
software and/or hardware solution. This course may be 
used as a capstone course for a certificate or degree. 
Prerequisite: Consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
INEW 2334 Advanced Web Programming 
Web programming using industry-standard languages and 
data stores. Lab required. Prerequisite: ITSE 2302 or 
consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
INEW 2340 Object-Oriented Design 
A study of large system analysis and design concepts from 
the object-oriented perspective. Includes determining 
required objects and their interfaces. Also covers 
relationships between objects. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
COSC 1437 or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
INRW 0315 Integrated Reading/Writing II 
Integration of critical reading and academic writing skills. 
Successful completion of this course fulfills TSI 
requirements for reading and/or writing. Additionally, 
this is a performance-based course designed to develop 
students' critical reading and academic writing skills. The 
focus of the course will be on applying critical reading 
skills for organizing, analyzing, and retaining material and 
developing written work appropriate to the audience, 
purpose, situation, and length of the assignment. The 
course integrates preparation in basic academic reading 
skills with basic skills in writing a variety of academic 
essays. Prerequisite: INRW 0405 or meet TSI standard 
for INRW 0315; or equivalent. If you do not meet 
placement requirements, check with the instructor to 
request consent. 3 credit hours. (D) 
 
INRW 0405 Integrated Reading/Writing I 
Integration of critical reading and academic writing skills. 
Seeks to improve students' academic reading and writing 
skills through extensive integrated instruction 
emphasizing skills and techniques related to vocabulary, 
grammar, comprehension, paragraph elements, essay 
structure, and critical analysis that apply to both reading 
and writing. Students will demonstrate comprehension of 
varied texts through written responses, progressing from 
advanced paragraphs to short essays. The required lab 
component will target students' individual skills. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: Meet TSI standard for INRW 
0405; or equivalent. 4 credit hours. (D) 
 
INSR 1301 Commercial Insurance 
Introduction to business loss exposures and the operation 
of the insurance policies available for these exposures 
including property, business income, crime, marine, auto, 
and other government programs. May prepare students to 
take the licensing exam sponsored by the Texas 
Department of Insurance. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
INSR 1305 Personal Insurance 
Introduction to personal loss exposures and personal 
insurance policies for handling these exposures including 
auto, homeowners, life, health, marine, and various 
government insurance programs. May prepare students to 
take the licensing exam sponsored by the Texas 
Department of Insurance. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
INSR 1345 Commercial Liability Risk Management 
and Insurance 
Analysis of the major sources of liability loss exposures 
and examination of the insurance coverage designed to 
meet those exposures. Commercial liability risk 
management premises and operations, products and 
contractual and protective liability, employer liability, and 
surety bonds. Examination of tort and agency law as they 
relate to loss exposures involving third party claimants. 
May prepare students to take the licensing exam 
sponsored by the Chartered Property/Casualty 
Underwriters. Prerequisite: INSR 1301. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
INSR 1351 Essentials of Risk Management 
Risk management decision-making process with emphasis 
on identification and analysis of loss exposures and 
development of alternative techniques for the treatment 
of each exposure. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
INSR 1353 Insurance Operations 
Examination of insurance marketing, underwriting, and 
reinsurance. Topics include rate making, claims adjusting, 
loss control activities, and other functions and activities. 
May prepare students to take the licensing exam 
sponsored by the Chartered Property/Casualty 
Underwriters. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
INSR 1355 The Legal Environment of Insurance 
Examine related business laws to insurance situations. 
May prepare students to take the licensing exam 
257 
 
sponsored by the Chartered Property/Casualty 
Underwriters. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
INSR 1374 Personal Lines Insurance Underwriting 
A study of the underwriting process with an emphasis on 
the expected financial risk to an insurance organization. 
Prerequisite: INSR 1305. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
INSR 1375 Insurance Data Analytics 
Exploration of data analytics and how it applies to the 
insurance industry. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
INSR 1391 Special Topics in Insurance 
Topics address recently identified current events, skills, 
knowledge, and/or attitudes and behaviors pertinent to 
the technology or occupation and relevant to the 
professional development of the student. This course was 
designed to be repeated multiple times to improve 
student proficiency.  
 
Topics in Insurance Management  
Application of knowledge attained from Insurance 
courses towards a comprehensive project that 
identifies an area of improvement or opportunity for 
the Insurance Industry at large. Prerequisites: INSR 
1305 and INSR 1345. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
INSR 2311 Workers Compensation and Medical 
Aspects of Claims 
The history and rationale for the workers compensation 
system and the rapidly changing regulatory environment. 
Topics include the importance of adequate medical 
knowledge in adjusting claims. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
INSR 2319 Liability Insurance Claims Adjusting 
In-depth study of liability loss adjusting with heavy 
emphasis on the legal and medical knowledge needed and 
special skills required to negotiate successfully in a third 
party claim environment. May prepare students to take 
the Associate in Claims (AIC) licensing exam. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
INSR 2340 Multiline Insurance Sales and Marketing 
Prospecting and presentation, types of coverage, 
identifying client needs, terminology, and analyzing 
homeowners’ coverage. Includes information related to 
sales transitions, analyzing automobile and specialized 
coverage, tax implications, loss ratios and agent 
responsibilities. Prerequisite: INSR 1374. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
INTC 1307 Instrumentation Test Equipment 
Theory and application of instrumentation test 
equipment. Emphasizes accuracy, limitations of 
instruments, and calibration techniques. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: CETT 1409 or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
INTC 1357 AC/DC Motor Control 
A study of electric motors and motor control devices 
common to a modern industrial environment. A 
presentation of motor characteristics with emphasis on 
starting, speed control, and stopping systems. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: CETT 1409. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
INTC 2359 Distributed Control Systems 
Theory and application of distributed control systems. 
Includes hardware, firmware, software, configuration, 
communications, and networking systems required to 
implement a distributed control strategy. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: ELMT 1301. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITAL 1411 Beginning Italian I 
Introduction to the basic skills of speaking, reading, 
writing, and listening. Intended for students with little or 
no previous training in Italian. Lab required. 4 credit 
hours. (A) 
 
ITAL 1412 Beginning Italian II 
Continuation of ITAL 1411. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
ITAL 1411 or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 4 
credit hours. (A) 
 
ITCC 1314 CCNA 1: Introduction to Networks 
This course covers networking architecture, structure, 
security, and functions; introduces the principles and 
structure of IP addressing and the fundamentals of 
Ethernet concepts, media, and operations to provide a 
foundation for the curriculum. Lab required. 
Prerequisites: CPMT 1305 and ITNW 1358. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
ITCC 1344 CCNA 2: Switching, Routing, and 
Wireless Essentials (SRWE) 
Describes the architecture, components, and operations 
of routers and switches in small networks and introduces 
wireless local area networks (WLAN) and security 
concepts; provides an in-depth understanding of how 
routers and switches operate and are implemented in the 
LAN environment. Lab required. Prerequisite: ITCC 
1314. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITCC 2320 CCNA 3: Enterprise Networking, 
Security, and Automation (ENSA) 
Describes the architecture, components, operations, and 
security to scale for large, complex networks, including 
wide area network (WAN) technologies. Emphasizes 
network security concepts and introduces network 
 
 
258 
 
virtualization and automation. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
ITCC 1344. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITCC 2330 CCNP Enterprise: Core Networking 
(ENCOR) 
Provides students with a broad scope of architectural 
understanding and implementation skills required by 
enterprise networks. The course covers switching, 
routing, wireless, and related security topics along with 
the technologies that support software-defined, 
programmable networks. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
ITCC 2320, CCNA Certification, or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITCC 2335 CCNP Enterprise: Advanced Routing 
(ENARSI) 
Supports the implementation and troubleshooting of 
advanced routing technologies and services including 
layer 3 VPN services, infrastructure security and 
infrastructure services used in enterprise networks. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: ITCC 2320, CCNA Certification, 
or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
ITMT 1371 Configuring and Supporting Microsoft 
Windows 10 (MD-100) 
Addresses the implementation and desktop support needs 
of customers that are planning to deploy and support 
Microsoft Windows 10 in a variety of stand-alone and 
network operating system environments. In-depth, 
hands-on training for Information Technology (IT) 
professionals responsible for the planning, 
implementation, management, and support of Windows 
10. Lab required. Prerequisite: ITNW 1358 or consent of 
Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITNW 1309 Fundamentals of Cloud Computing 
Introduction to cloud computing from a business and 
technical perspective, including cloud concepts, services, 
architecture, system integration, connectivity, data center 
migration, administration, security, compliance and 
technical support. Coverage includes preparation for 
industry certifications. Topics may adapt to changes in 
industry practices. Lab required. Prerequisite: ITCC 1314 
or ITNW 1358. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITNW 1336 Cloud Deployment & Infrastructure 
Management 
Focus on Cloud infrastructure, deployment, security 
models, and key considerations in migrating to Cloud 
computing. Includes the technologies and processes 
required to build on-premise and Cloud environments, 
including computation, storage, networking, 
virtualization, business continuity, security, and 
management. Lab required. Prerequisite: ITNW 1373. 
ITNW 2375 is strongly recommended. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
ITNW 1351 Fundamentals of Wireless LANs 
Design, plan, implement, operate, and troubleshoot 
Wireless Local Area Networks (WLANs). Includes 
WLAN design, installation, and configuration; and 
WLAN security issues and vendor interoperability 
strategies. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITNW 1354 Implementing and Supporting Servers 
(Windows Server) 
Implement, administer, and troubleshoot information 
systems that incorporate servers in a networked 
computing environment. Additionally, this course 
provides an introduction to Windows Server 2019. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: ITNW 1358 or ITCC 1314. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
ITNW 1358 Network+ 
Assists individuals in preparing for Computing 
Technology Industry Association (CompTIA) Network+ 
certification exam and career as a network professional. 
Additionally, prepares individuals for a career as a 
Network Engineer in the Information Technology 
support industry. Includes the various responsibilities and 
tasks required for service engineer to successfully perform 
in a specific environment. Lab required. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
ITNW 1364 Practicum (or Field Experience) - 
Computer Systems Networking and 
Telecommunications 
Practical, general workplace training supported by an 
individualized learning plan developed by the employer, 
college, and student. Prerequisite: ITCC 1344. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
ITNW 1373 Cloud Storage and Database 
Cloud Storage and Database technologies used in cloud 
computing. Topics include data storage for cloud, mobile, 
social media, and software. Provides a strong 
understanding of cloud computing concepts, technology, 
and architecture in support of storage technologies and 
prepares students for advanced concepts, technologies, 
and processes. This course investigates the existing 
concepts of Cloud Computing from the standpoint of 
technology resources and an internetworking perspective. 
The concepts that will be explored involve how Cloud 
Computing has matured, the growth of Cloud Computing 
and how the strategies that surround Cloud Computing 
have added to business agility. The course will study the 
vastness of Cloud Computing, the services that Cloud 
Computing offers, and several vendor case studies on 
259 
 
their methodology that drives Cloud Computing. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: ITNW 1309. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITNW 1374 Cloud Computing Security 
Introduction to Cloud Security including tools which 
monitor data moving to and from the cloud and between 
cloud platforms, identification of fraudulent use of data in 
the Cloud and its financial and performance impact. 
Third-party cloud security solutions including cloud 
security gateways, centralized cloud management, and 
native IaaS/PaaS platform security will be presented. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: ITNW 1309. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITNW 1375 Cloud Administrator I 
The Administration I course will be based on learning 
how to administrate Amazon Web Services. Understand 
how to administrator the key five pillars supporting 
Amazon Web Servers, which are Operational Excellence, 
Security Reliability, Performance Efficiency and Cost 
Optimization. Lab required. Prerequisite: ITNW 1309. 
ITSC 1316 is strongly recommended. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITNW 1376 Cloud Administrator II 
This course teaches students how to manage their Azure 
subscriptions, create and scale virtual machines, 
implement storage solutions, configure virtual 
networking, back up and share data, connect Azure and 
on-premises sites, manage network traffic, implement 
Azure Active Directory, secure identities, and monitor 
your solution. Lab required. Prerequisite: ITNW 1375. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
ITNW 1378 Wireless Network Administration 
A continuation of the Fundamentals of Wireless LANs 
class covering radio frequency technologies, antenna 
concepts, Wireless LAN Hardware and Software, wireless 
standards, and basic site surveys. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: ITNW 1351. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITNW 2327 Advanced Cloud Concepts 
Focus on enterprise Cloud architecture, with advanced 
topics including multi-Cloud platforms inclusive of 
computing, networking, storage, monitoring and 
database. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITNW 2370 Containerization and Micro Services 
Skills and knowledge related to Cloud computing 
architecture and services needed to create, deploy and 
manage containers will be introduced. Concepts of 
building blocks, container runtimes, container storage, 
networking and automation deployment, and 
orchestration of resources are delivered as skills through 
labs and lecture. Lab required. Prerequisite: ITSC 1316. 
ITNW 2375 is strongly recommended. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
ITNW 2371 Wireless Network Security 
This course covers security concepts and 
implementations on wireless LAN systems. Course 
includes wireless LAN discovery, intrusion and attack 
techniques, protocol analysis, and intrusion prevention. 
Lab required. Prerequisite: ITNW 1378. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
ITNW 2372 Wireless Network Design 
Focus on enterprise Cloud architecture, with advanced 
topics including multi-Cloud platforms inclusive of 
computing, networking, storage, monitoring and 
database. Lab required. Prerequisite: ITNW 1336 and 
ITNW 1376. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITNW 2373 Information Storage Management 
(EMC) 
The Information Storage Management course teaches the 
skills required in designing Storage Systems using Storage 
Networking Technologies and Virtualization concepts, 
Business Continuity approaches, and Storage Security and 
Management strategies. Lab required. Prerequisite: ITNW 
1358. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITNW 2374 Emerging Wireless Technology 
Topics address recently identified current events, skills, 
knowledge, and/or attitudes and behaviors pertinent to 
the technology or occupation and relevant to the 
professional development of the student. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: ITNW 1378. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITNW 2375 VMware vSphere: Installation, 
Configuration, and Management 
A study of Virtualization in computer network 
technology. The course covers the installation, 
configuration, and management of VMware vSphere, 
which consists of VMware vSphere ESXi and VMware 
vCenter Server. Lab required. Prerequisite: ITCC 1344, or 
ITNW 1354, or ITSC 1316, or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITNW 2376 Advanced Topics in Computer Systems 
Networking and Collaborative Technologies 
This course assimilates leading edge skills, knowledge, and 
advances in technologies relevant to the local industry 
needs. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITNW 2380 Cooperative Education - Computer 
Systems Networking and Telecommunications 
Career-related activities encountered in the student’s area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
 
 
260 
 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Contact the 
Associate Dean/Director for more information. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
ITSC 1305 Introduction to PC Operating Systems 
Introduction to personal computer operating systems 
including installation, configuration, file management, 
memory and storage management, control of peripheral 
devices, and use of utilities. Lab required. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
ITSC 1309 Integrated Software Applications I-MS 
Office 
Introduction to business productivity software suites 
using word processing, spreadsheets, databases, and/or 
presentation software. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSC 1315 IT Project Management 
Use of project management tools for developing a project 
plan including timelines, milestones, scheduling, life cycle 
phases, management frameworks, skills, and processes. 
Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSC 1316 Linux Installation and Configuration 
Introduction to Linux operating system. Includes Linux 
installation, basic administration, utilities and commands, 
upgrading, networking, security, and application 
installation. Emphasizes hands-on setup, administration, 
and management of Linux. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
ITNW 1358 or consent of the Associate Dean/Director. 
3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSC 1342 Shell Programming - Scripting 
Reading, writing, and debugging shell scripts. 
Development of scripts to automate frequently executed 
sequences of commands. Covers conditional logic, user 
interaction, loops, and menus to enhance the productivity 
and effectiveness of the user. Intended for programmers 
who are familiar with operating environments and reading 
and writing various shell scripts. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: ITNW 1358. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSC 2325 Advanced Linux (Red Hat RH124) 
Provides instruction in advance open-source Linux 
operating system. Develops directory services for clients, 
support users remotely, and install and configure network 
services. Additionally, this is an advanced course in the 
Linux operating system. The course equips you with 
Linux administration "survival skills" by focusing on 
foundational Linux concepts and core tasks. You will 
learn how to apply command-line concepts and 
enterprise-level tools, starting you on your journey toward 
becoming a full-time Linux system administrator. 
Includes Linux installation, basic administration, utilities 
and commands, upgrading, networking, security, and 
application installation. Emphasizes hands-on setup, 
administration, and management of Linux. Lab required. 
Prerequisite/Concurrent Enrollment: ITSC 1316 or 
consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSC 2339 Personal Computer Help Desk Support  
Diagnose and solve user hardware and software related 
problems with on-the-job and/or simulated projects. Lab 
required. Prerequisites: ITNW 1358 and ITSC 1305, or 
consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSC 2380 Cooperative Education-Computer and 
Information Sciences, General 
Career-related activities encountered in the student's area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Contact the 
Associate Dean/Director for more information. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
ITSE 1301 Web Design Tools 
Designing and publishing Web documents according to 
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) standards. 
Emphasis on optimization of graphics and images and 
exploration of the tools available for creating and editing 
Web documents. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSE 1306 PHP Programming 
Introduction to PHP, including the design of web-based 
applications, arrays, strings, regular expressions, file 
input/output, e-mail and database interfaces, stream and 
network programming, debugging, and security. 
Additionally, emphasizes hands-on programming skills 
necessary to develop secure and reliable PHP based web 
applications. Lab required. Prerequisites: COSC 1436 and 
ITSE 1311 or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSE 1311 Beginning Web Programming 
Skills development in web programming including mark-
up and scripting languages. Additionally, the course 
focuses on use of HTML and CSS to create web sites and 
includes an introduction to JavaScript. Lab required. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSE 1330 Introduction to C# Programming 
A study of C# syntax including data types, control 
structures, functions, syntax, and semantics of the 
language, classes, class relationships, and exception 
handling. Lab required. Prerequisite: COSC 1315 or 
COSC 1436 or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSE 1332 Introduction to Visual Basic.NET 
Programming 
Introduction to Visual Basic.NET (VB.NET) including 
data types, control structures, functions, syntax, and 
261 
 
semantics of the language, classes, class relationships, and 
exception handling. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSE 1333 Mobile Applications Development 
An overview of different mobile platforms and their 
development environments. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
ITSE 2302 or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSE 1346 Database Theory and Design 
Introduction to the analysis and utilization of data 
requirements and organization into normalized tables 
using the normal forms of database design. Additionally, 
an introduction to relational and non-relational database 
theory and the practical applications of a contemporary 
databases. Introduction to the analysis and utilization of 
data requirements and organization into normalized tables 
using the normal forms of database design. Topics may 
adapt to changes in industry practices. Lab required. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSE 1350 System Analysis and Design 
Introduction to the planning, design, and construction of 
computer information systems using the systems 
development life cycle and other appropriate design tools. 
Lab required. Prerequisite: COSC 1436, ITSE 1330, or 
ITSE 1359. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSE 1359 Introduction to Scripting Languages - 
Python 
Introduction to scripting languages including basic data 
types, control structures, regular expressions, 
input/output, and textual analysis. Topics may adapt to 
changes in industry practices. Lab required. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
ITSE 1380 Cooperative Education -Computer 
Programming/Programmer, General 
Career-related activities encountered in the student's area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Contact the 
Associate Dean/Director for more information. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
ITSE 1393 Special Topics in Computer Systems 
Analysis 
Topics address recently identified current events, skills, 
knowledge, and/or attitudes and behaviors pertinent to 
the technology or occupation and relevant to the 
professional development of the student. This course was 
designed to be repeated multiple times to improve 
student proficiency. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W)  
 
Business Intelligence 
An introduction to Business Intelligence analysis and 
reporting. The topics of study will include creating a 
data source, dimensional model, dimensions and 
measures, attribute relationships and user-defined 
hierarchies, calculated members, aggregations, and 
analysis reports using Excel. Prerequisites: ITSE 2309 
and ITSW 1304 or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 
 
ITSE 2302 Intermediate Web Programming 
Server-side and client-side techniques for Web 
development. Additionally, students design and 
implement fully interactive web sites using HTML5, CSS, 
and JavaScript. Lab required. Prerequisite: ITSE 1311 or 
consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSE 2309 Database Programming - SQL 
Database development using database programming 
techniques emphasizing database structures, modeling, 
and database access. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSE 2313 Web Authoring 
Instruction in designing and developing web pages that 
incorporate text, graphics, and other supporting elements 
using current technologies and authoring tools. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: ITSE 1311 or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSE 2347 Advanced Database Programming 
Database development using complex database 
programming techniques emphasizing multiple 
interrelated files, menu design, security implementation, 
and multiple access. Additionally, Advanced SQL Query 
Design, SQL Analytic functions, Database design, and 
Data Warehousing will be emphasized. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: ITSE 2309. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSE 2353 Advanced C# Programming 
C# programming using advanced features of the .NET 
Framework. Lab required. Prerequisite: ITSE 1311 and 
ITSE 1330 or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSE 2354 Advanced Oracle PL/SQL 
Advanced use of Oracle SQL. Topics include hierarchical 
queries, set based queries, correlated subqueries, scripting, 
and scripting generation. Prerequisite: ITSE 2309. Lab 
required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSE 2370 Descriptive Analytics 
An introduction to principles and techniques in data 
analysis for problem solving and decision making used in 
 
 
262 
 
business and industry. Lab required. Prerequisites: ITSE 
2309, ITSW 1304, and MATH 1342. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSE 2371 Front-End Web Frameworks 
Course explores the most common web frameworks used 
to create interactive and engaging front-end web 
applications. Students will learn to utilize JavaScript 
frameworks to develop complex web interfaces. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: ITSE 2302 or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSE 2374 Web Application Development 
A comprehensive application of skills learned in previous 
courses in a simulated workplace. Covers the 
development, testing, documenting, coding and 
implementation of a website, web application. This 
course may be used as a capstone course for a certificate 
or degree. Lab required. Prerequisite/Concurrent 
Enrollment: INEW 2334 or ITSE 2313. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
ITSE 2380 Cooperative Education-Computer 
Programming/Programmer, General 
Career-related activities encountered in the student's area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Contact the 
Associate Dean/Director for more information. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
ITSW 1304 Introduction to Spreadsheets-Excel 
Instruction in the concepts, procedures, and application 
of electronic spreadsheets. Lab required. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
ITSW 1307 Introduction to Database-Access 
Introduction to relational and non-relational database 
theory and the practical applications of a contemporary 
database. Topics may adapt to changes in industry 
practices. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSW 1310 Introduction to Presentation Graphics 
Software 
Instruction in the utilization of presentation software to 
produce multimedia presentations. Graphics, text, sound, 
animation and/or video may be used in presentation 
development. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSW 2334 Advanced Spreadsheets - with 
Visualization Tools 
Advanced techniques for developing and modifying 
spreadsheets. Includes macros and data analysis 
functions. Additionally, interpret and present data 
analytics reports. Use current data visualization tools. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: ITSW 1304 or BCIS 1305 or 
Consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSW 2370 SAS Programming 
Introduction to the principles and techniques of using the 
SAS Programming Application Language. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: ITSE 2309. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSY 1300 Fundamentals of Information Security 
An introduction to information security including 
vocabulary and terminology, ethics, the legal 
environment, and risk management. Identification of 
exposures and vulnerabilities and countermeasures are 
addressed. The importance of appropriate planning, 
policies and controls is also discussed. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: ITNW 1358. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSY 1371 OSINT and Introductory Security 
Analysis 
A study of open source and subscription threat 
intelligence. Includes the role of threat intelligence and 
organizational incident response. Topics include 
collection methods, management of operations, 
classification, production and analysis, assessment of 
threat vulnerability, business impact analysis, incidence 
response, and identification of various reporting 
requirements. The use of link diagrams and various types 
of association matrices will be introduced and 
emphasized. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSY 1372 Cyber-Psychology and the Effects of 
Emerging Technology 
Identify effects of psychological phenomena associated 
with or affected by emerging technology, identify effects 
on the individual and the combined effects of 
interpersonal communication in a globally connected 
ecosystem. Concepts include the application of 
cyberpsychology through the identification of emotional 
intelligence and cultural intelligence in a modern 
environment. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSY 2300 Operating System Security 
Safeguard operating systems by demonstrating support 
skills and designing and implementing security processes. 
Identify security threats and monitor network security 
implementations. Use best practices to configure 
operating systems to industry security standards. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: ITNW 1358. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSY 2301 Firewalls and Network Security Design 
Identify elements of secure network design that may 
include segmentation, Firewall implementation or a 
combination thereof to mitigate various types of security 
threats and attacks. Use Best Practices to design, 
implement, monitor, and manage a network security plan. 
Examine security incident postmortem reporting and 
ongoing network security activities. Lab required. 
263 
 
Prerequisite: ITSY 2300 or consent of the Associate 
Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSY 2330 Intrusion Detection 
Computer information systems security monitoring, 
intrusion detection, and crisis management. Includes 
alarm management, signature configuration, sensor 
configuration, and troubleshooting components. 
Emphasizes identifying, resolving, and documenting 
network crises and activating the response team. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: ITSY 2300. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSY 2341 Security Management Practices 
In-depth coverage of security management practices, 
including asset evaluation and risk management; cyber law 
and ethics issues; policies and procedures; business 
recovery and business continuity planning; network 
security design; and developing and maintaining a security 
plan. Lab required. Prerequisite(s): ITSY 2300 or consent 
of Associate Dean/Director. ITSY 1300 is strongly 
recommended. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSY 2342 Incident Response and Handling 
In-depth coverage of incident response and incident 
handling, including identifying sources of attacks and 
security breaches; analyzing security logs; recovering the 
system to normal; performing postmortem analysis; and 
implementing and modifying security measures. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: ITSY 2300 or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSY 2343 Computer System Forensics 
In-depth study of system forensics including 
methodologies used for analysis of computer security 
breaches. Collect document and evaluate evidence to 
perform postmortem analysis of a security breach. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: ITSY 2342, or ITSY 2330, or 
consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSY 2572 Certified Information Systems Security 
Professional (CISSP) Common Body of Knowledge 
Domain Instruct 
An in-depth study of the 10 domains which make up the 
Common Body of Knowledge (CBK) of information 
security professionals. The course is designed to instruct 
individuals to implement solid security practices, perform 
risk analysis, identify necessary countermeasures, and help 
the enterprise as a whole protect its facility, network, 
systems, and information. Prerequisites: ITSY 1300 and 
ITSY 2300, or equivalent experience and consent of the 
Associate Dean/Director. 5 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSY 2575 Certified Information Security Manager 
(CISM) 
An in-depth study of the five domains covered on the 
ISACA* - CISM professional certification exam. Each 
domain (Information Security Governance, Information 
Risk Management, Information Security Program 
Development, Information Security Program 
Management, and Incident Management and Response) 
covers the knowledge and tasks that cybersecurity 
professionals are expected to know how to perform in 
the workplace. *Previously known as Information 
Systems Audit and Control Association. Prerequisite: 
ITSY 1300, or ITSY 2300, or equivalent experience and 
consent of Associate Dean/Director. 5 credit hours. (W) 
 
ITSY 2576 EC Council Certified Information 
Security Officer 
An in-depth study of the five domains covered on the EC 
Council – Certified Chief Information Security Officer 
(CCISO) exam or EC Council Information Security 
Manager (EISM) as approved by EC Council. Each 
domain, [Governance and Risk Management (Policy, 
Legal, and Compliance)], (Information Security Controls, 
Compliance, and Audit Management), (Security Program 
Management and Operations), (Information Security 
Core Competencies), and (Strategic Planning, Finance, 
Procurement and Vendor Management), covers the 
knowledge and tasks that cybersecurity professionals are 
expected to know how to perform in the workplace. 
Prerequisites: ITSY1300 and ITSY 2300. 5 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
JAPN 1411 Beginning Japanese I 
Introduction to the basic skills of speaking, reading, 
writing, and listening with attention to selected aspects of 
Japanese culture; designed for students with little or no 
previous language training. Instruction is enhanced by the 
use of tapes, slides, and video cassettes. Lab required. 4 
credit hours. (A) 
 
JAPN 1412 Beginning Japanese II 
A continuation of JAPN 1411. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
JAPN 1411 or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 4 
credit hours. (A) 
 
JAPN 2311 Intermediate Japanese I 
Continuing development of the four basic skills of 
speaking, reading, writing, and listening, emphasizing 
conversational and reading skills. Designed for students 
who have completed Beginning Japanese II. Additional 
Kanji structures are introduced. Also includes attention to 
selected aspects of Japanese culture. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: JAPN 1412 or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
JAPN 2312 Intermediate Japanese II 
Continued development of four basic language skills with 
emphasis on conversation and reading skills. Additional 
Kanji and grammar structures are introduced. Includes 
attention to selected aspects of Japanese culture. Lab 
 
 
264 
 
required. Prerequisite: JAPN 2311 or consent of 
Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
KINE 1100 Beginning Weight Training 
Introduction to weight training and body building; learn 
the basic techniques for strength development and 
cardiovascular conditioning. Various weight machines, 
free weights and aerobic machines are used to establish an 
individual fitness program. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: A student may receive up to 4 credit hours of any 
combination of KINE course numbers in the 1100-1148 range; 
however, the same course cannot be taken more than twice. 
 
KINE 1106 Walking and Fitness 
Improve cardiovascular fitness, muscle tone, and 
flexibility through a vigorous walking and conditioning 
program. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: A student may receive up to 4 credit hours of any 
combination of KINE course numbers in the 1100-1148 range; 
however, the same course cannot be taken more than twice. 
 
KINE 1111 Beginning Basketball 
Develops basic skills and strategies through knowledge of 
the history, rules, and terminology and through 
participation in game situations. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: A student may receive up to 4 credit hours of any 
combination of KINE course numbers in the 1100-1148 range; 
however, the same course cannot be taken more than twice. 
 
KINE 1112 Beginning Soccer 
Develops the basic skills and strategies through 
knowledge of the history, rules and terminology and 
through participation in game situations. 1 credit hour. 
(A) 
Note: A student may receive up to 4 credit hours of any 
combination of KINE course numbers in the 1100-1148 range; 
however, the same course cannot be taken more than twice. 
 
KINE 1114 Volleyball 
Individual skills and techniques, application of rules and 
an introduction to offensive and defensive strategies are 
stressed. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: A student may receive up to 4 credit hours of any 
combination of KINE course numbers in the 1100-1148 range; 
however, the same course cannot be taken more than twice. 
 
KINE 1115 Beginning Archery 
Investigates the basic techniques, rules and scoring as well 
as the history and terminology of archery. 1 credit hour. 
(A) 
Note: A student may receive up to 4 credit hours of any 
combination of KINE course numbers in the 1100-1148 range; 
however, the same course cannot be taken more than twice. 
 
KINE 1116 Badminton 
History, rules, basic strokes and strategies in singles and 
doubles play are emphasized through intra-class 
competition. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: A student may receive up to 4 credit hours of any 
combination of KINE course numbers in the 1100-1148 range; 
however, the same course cannot be taken more than twice. 
 
KINE 1117 Beginning Tennis 
Stresses rules, scoring and fundamental techniques for 
beginners. Participation by skill level for singles and 
doubles play is made to ensure vigorous activity for 
cardiovascular fitness. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: A student may receive up to 4 credit hours of any 
combination of KINE course numbers in the 1100-1148 range; 
however, the same course cannot be taken more than twice. 
 
KINE 1120 Beginning Racquetball 
Instruction in rules and basic skills; develops the 
fundamental techniques of court play for beginners. 
Participation by skill level assures vigorous activity for 
cardiovascular fitness. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: A student may receive up to 4 credit hours of any 
combination of KINE course numbers in the 1100-1148 range; 
however, the same course cannot be taken more than twice. 
 
KINE 1123 Beginning Golf 
Stresses basic skills, history, terminology and scoring of 
golf. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: A student may receive up to 4 credit hours of any 
combination of KINE course numbers in the 1100-1148 range; 
however, the same course cannot be taken more than twice. 
 
KINE 1125 Bowling 
Teaches ball selection, stance, four-step approach, rules, 
and scoring procedures. Emphasis on game situations. 1 
credit hour. (A) 
Note: A student may receive up to 4 credit hours of any 
combination of KINE course numbers in the 1100-1148 range; 
however, the same course cannot be taken more than twice. 
 
KINE 1126 Self-Defense 
Basic understanding and practical application of 
fundamental self-defense techniques through physical 
conditioning. Includes balance, focus, breath control, 
block and counter, avoiding attack, striking, thrusting and 
kicking. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: A student may receive up to 4 credit hours of any 
combination of KINE course numbers in the 1100-1148 range; 
however, the same course cannot be taken more than twice. 
 
KINE 1127 Beginning Karate 
Introduction to basic techniques, formal exercises, and 
sparring techniques for the beginner. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: A student may receive up to 4 credit hours of any 
combination of KINE course numbers in the 1100-1148 range; 
however, the same course cannot be taken more than twice. 
 
KINE 1129 Beginning Hatha Yoga 
Practice of yogic postures, or "asana," defined as the 
265 
 
physical positioning that coordinates breathing with 
moving and holding still for the purpose of both 
stretching and strengthening parts of the body. 1 credit 
hour. (A) 
Note: A student may receive up to 4 credit hours of any 
combination of KINE course numbers in the 1100-1148 range; 
however, the same course cannot be taken more than twice. 
 
KINE 1131 Beginning Swimming 
Non-swimmers and beginners are taught basic swimming 
skills and strokes. Emphasizes personal safety skills and 
confidence in the water. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: A student may receive up to 4 credit hours of any 
combination of KINE course numbers in the 1100-1148 range; 
however, the same course cannot be taken more than twice. 
 
KINE 1136 Water Aerobics 
Fitness level is improved through exercises in the water. 
A non-impact style of exercises that utilizes water 
resistance for increasing muscular strength, endurance, 
and cardiovascular fitness. Swimming skills are not 
necessary. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: A student may receive up to 4 credit hours of any 
combination of KINE course numbers in the 1100-1148 range; 
however, the same course cannot be taken more than twice. 
 
KINE 1137 Swimming Conditioning 
Fitness level is improved through swimming strokes and 
water exercises. Different swimming programs enhance 
muscular strength, endurance and cardiovascular fitness. 
Prerequisite: Consent of Associate Dean/Director. 1 
credit hour. (A) 
Note: A student may receive up to 4 credit hours of any 
combination of KINE course numbers in the 1100-1148 range; 
however, the same course cannot be taken more than twice. 
 
KINE 1140 Beginning Aerobic Dance 
Aerobic exercise and step training incorporating light 
weights. Includes interval training, which adds a new 
variation to aerobic endurance and flexibility. 1 credit 
hour. (A) 
Note: A student may receive up to 4 credit hours of any 
combination of KINE course numbers in the 1100-1148 range; 
however, the same course cannot be taken more than twice. 
 
KINE 1142 Varsity Condition I 
Presentation of current scientific and technical 
information related to a particular activity with emphasis 
on developing health and skill related fitness, as well as 
fundamental skills. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: A student may receive up to 4 credit hours of any 
combination of KINE course numbers in the 1100-1148 range; 
however, the same course cannot be taken more than twice. 
 
KINE 1144 Varsity Sports I 
This course offers development of skills and personal 
potential for student athletes interested in improving their 
performance or preparing for further competition at the 
upper collegiate level. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: A student may receive up to 4 credit hours of any 
combination of KINE course numbers in the 1100-1148 range; 
however, the same course cannot be taken more than twice. 
 
KINE 1147 Beginning Aerobic Kickboxing/Karate 
Cardiovascular and body conditioning are acquired 
through the use of karate and martial arts techniques set 
to music and integrating punching bags. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: A student may receive up to 4 credit hours of any 
combination of KINE course numbers in the 1100-1148 range; 
however, the same course cannot be taken more than twice. 
 
KINE 1148 Introduction to Team Sports 
Develops the basic skills and strategies through the 
knowledge of the history, rules, and terminology. 
Students will participate in game situations. Three of the 
following activities will be elected for instruction: 
Basketball, Flag Football, Soccer, Softball, or Volleyball. 1 
credit hour. (A) 
Note: A student may receive up to 4 credit hours of any 
combination of KINE course numbers in the 1100-1148 range; 
however, the same course cannot be taken more than twice. 
 
KINE 1164 Introduction to Physical Fitness and 
Wellness 
This course will provide an overview of the lifestyle 
necessary for fitness and health. Student will participate in 
physical activities and assess their fitness status. Students 
will be introduced to proper nutrition, weight 
management, cardiovascular health, flexibility, and 
strength training. Additionally, this course introduces 
basic concepts of fitness, nutrition, health promotion, and 
disease prevention. Includes the study and practices of 
activities and principles that promote fitness and wellness. 
1 credit hour. (A) 
 
KINE 1301 Foundations of Kinesiology 
The purpose of this course is to provide students with an 
introduction to human movement that includes the 
historical development of physical education, exercise 
science, and sport. This course offers the student both an 
introduction to the knowledge base, as well as, 
information on expanding career opportunities. 3 credit 
hours (A) 
 
KINE 1304 Personal / Community Health 
This course provides an introduction to the 
fundamentals, concepts, strategies, applications, and 
contemporary trends related to understanding personal 
and/or community health issues. This course also focuses 
on empowering various populations with the ability to 
 
 
266 
 
practice healthy living, promote healthy lifestyles, and 
enhance individual well-being. 3 credit hours (A) 
 
KINE 1306 First Aid 
Instruction and practice for emergency care. Designed to 
enable students to recognize and avoid hazards within 
their environment, to render intelligent assistance in case 
of accident or sudden illness, and to develop skills 
necessary for the immediate and temporary care of the 
victim. Successful completion of the course may enable 
the student to receive a certificate from a nationally 
recognized agency. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
KINE 1308 Sports Officiating 
The purpose of the course is to study officiating 
requirements for sports and games with an emphasis on 
mechanics, rule interpretation, and enforcement. 3 credit 
hours. (A) 
 
KINE 1336 Introduction to Recreation and Sports 
Management 
Fundamental theory and concepts of recreational and 
sports activities with emphasis on programs, planning, 
and leadership. Additionally, the course will introduce 
basic principles of administration, marketing, 
management, and operations in relation to the various 
careers in sports and recreational management. An 
overview of the sports and recreation industry will be 
introduced. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
KINE 1338 Concepts of Physical Fitness 
This course is designed to familiarize students with 
knowledge, understanding and values of health related 
fitness and its influence on the quality of life emphasizing 
the development and implementation of fitness programs. 
Lab required. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
KINE 2100 Intermediate Weight Training 
Designed for the individual who has experience in basic 
weight training skills and wants to increase their 
knowledge of training techniques and conditioning. 1 
credit hour. (A) 
Note: A student may receive up to 4 credit hours of any 
combination of KINE course numbers in the 2100-2144 range; 
however, the same course cannot be taken more than twice. 
 
KINE 2106 Beginning Jogging and Fitness 
Develops cardiovascular endurance, flexibility and 
strength through jogging, stretching and weight training. 
Physical fitness assessment leads to development of an 
individual fitness program. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: A student may receive up to 4 credit hours of any 
combination of KINE course numbers in the 2100-2144 range; 
however, the same course cannot be taken more than twice. 
 
KINE 2111 Intermediate Basketball 
Designed for the individual who has experienced 
basketball skills and wants to increase their development 
and knowledge of basketball. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: A student may receive up to 4 credit hours of any 
combination of KINE course numbers in the 2100-2144 range; 
however, the same course cannot be taken more than twice. 
 
KINE 2112 Intermediate Soccer 
Basic skills and techniques are refined beyond the 
beginner level. Analysis and practice of strategies, safety, 
offensive and defensive patterns of play and competitive 
activities are covered. Course emphasis is placed on the 
development and preparation for participation on an 
intercollegiate team. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: A student may receive up to 4 credit hours of any 
combination of KINE course numbers in the 2100-2144 range; 
however, the same course cannot be taken more than twice. 
 
KINE 2115 Intermediate Archery 
Investigates intermediate level techniques for refinement 
of basic archery shooting skills and participation in 
competitive target shooting. The class is designed to help 
students learn more advanced techniques in the sport of 
archery through hands-on application of using the bow 
and arrow through lecture, demonstration, and practice of 
archery skills. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: A student may receive up to 4 credit hours of any 
combination of KINE course numbers in the 2100-2144 range; 
however, the same course cannot be taken more than twice. 
 
KINE 2117 Intermediate Tennis 
Develops and improves each skill level in serving, 
forehand and backhand drives, lobs and volleys. 
Performance strategies for both singles and doubles are 
drilled. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: A student may receive up to 4 credit hours of any 
combination of KINE course numbers in the 2100-2144 range; 
however, the same course cannot be taken more than twice. 
 
KINE 2120 Intermediate Racquetball 
Drills in serving, forehand and backhand drives, kill shots, 
Z shots and lobs help develop strategies for singles and 
doubles play. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: A student may receive up to 4 credit hours of any 
combination of KINE course numbers in the 2100-2144 range; 
however, the same course cannot be taken more than twice. 
 
KINE 2129 Intermediate Hatha Yoga 
The refinement of the asanas (postures) covered in KINE 
1129, with emphasis on breath work. Introduces more 
advanced asanas; emphasis on integrating yoga into daily 
routines at home and work. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: A student may receive up to 4 credit hours of any 
combination of KINE course numbers in the 2100-2144 range; 
however, the same course cannot be taken more than twice. 
 
KINE 2139 High Intensity Interval Training 
A training technique that involves giving all-out anaerobic 
267 
 
effort (80 - 95% of estimated maximal heart rate) through 
quick, intense bursts of exercise, followed by short, active 
rest periods (40 - 50% of estimate maximal heart rate). 
This type of training allows for a higher post-exercise 
oxygen consumption, thus using more energy (burning 
more calories from fat) post-exercise. By utilizing 
equipment such as medicine balls, kettlebells, jump ropes, 
dumbbells, stability balls, tension bands, etc., maximum 
cardiac output and a higher VO2 max can be achieved. 1 
credit hour. (A) 
Note: A student may receive up to 4 credit hours of any 
combination of KINE course numbers in the 2100-2144 range; 
however, the same course cannot be taken more than twice. 
 
KINE 2142 Varsity Condition II 
Presentation of current scientific and technical 
information related to a particular activity with emphasis 
on developing advanced health and skill related fitness, as 
well as fundamental skills. Prerequisite: KINE 1142. 1 
credit hour. (A) 
Note: A student may receive up to 4 credit hours of any 
combination of KINE course numbers in the 2100-2144 range; 
however, the same course cannot be taken more than twice. 
 
KINE 2144 Varsity Sports II 
This course offers advanced development of skills and 
personal potential for student athletes interested in 
improving their performance or preparing for further 
competition at the upper collegiate level. Prerequisite: 
KINE 1144. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: A student may receive up to 4 credit hours of any 
combination of KINE course numbers in the 2100-2144 range; 
however, the same course cannot be taken more than twice. 
 
KINE 2356 Care and Prevention of Athletic Injuries 
Prevention and care of athletic injuries with emphasis on 
qualities of a good athletic trainer, avoiding accidents and 
injuries, recognizing signs and symptoms of specific 
sports injuries and conditions, intermediate and long-term 
care of injuries, and administration procedures in athletic 
training. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
LGLA 1303 Legal Research 
Presents legal research techniques emphasizing the 
paralegal's role. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
LGLA 1305 Legal Writing 
Fundamentals of legal writing techniques including case 
and fact analysis, citation formats, and legal writing styles 
emphasizing the paralegal's role in legal writing. 
Prerequisite: LGLA 1370 or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
LGLA 1307 Introduction to Law and the Legal 
Professions 
Overview of the law and the legal professions including 
legal concepts, systems, and terminology; substantive 
areas of law and the federal and state judicial systems; 
ethical obligations and regulations; professional trends 
and issues with emphasis on the paralegal's role. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
LGLA 1323 Employment Law 
Presents the fundamental concepts of employment law, 
including employment contracts, at-will employment, 
governmental regulations, and discrimination issues, 
emphasizing the paralegal’s role in employment law. 
Prerequisite: LGLA 1307 or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
LGLA 1343 Bankruptcy 
Fundamental concepts of bankruptcy law and procedure 
are presented including individual and business 
liquidation and reorganization with emphasis on the 
paralegal's role. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
LGLA 1344 Texas Civil Litigation 
Fundamental concepts and procedures of Texas civil 
litigation including pretrial, trial, and post-trial phases of 
litigation emphasizing the paralegal's role in the Texas 
civil litigation process. Prerequisites: LGLA 1303, LGLA 
1345, and LGLA 2303, or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
LGLA 1345 Civil Litigation 
Presents fundamental concepts and procedures of civil 
litigation including pretrial, trial, and post-trial phases of 
litigation and emphasizes paralegal's role in civil litigation. 
3 credit hours. (W) 
 
LGLA 1351 Contracts 
Presents fundamental concepts of contract law including 
formation, performance, and enforcement of contracts 
under the common law and the Uniform Commercial 
Code with emphasis on the paralegal's role in contract 
law. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
LGLA 1353 Wills, Trusts, and Probate 
Administration 
Fundamental concepts of the law of wills, trusts, and 
probate administration emphasizing the paralegal's role. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
LGLA 1355 Family Law 
Fundamental concepts of family law including formal and 
informal marriages, divorce, annulment, marital property, 
and the parent-child relationship with emphasis on the 
paralegal's role in family law. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
LGLA 1370 Introduction to Legal Conventions 
Conventions of legal communication, including 
grammatical conventions, diction, style, legal citation 
 
 
268 
 
form, proofreading skills, and editing skills, with emphasis 
on the paralegal's role. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
LGLA 1380 Cooperative Education-Legal 
Assistant/Paralegal 
Career-related activities encountered in the student's area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Contact the 
Associate Dean / Director of the program for further 
information. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
LGLA 2303 Torts and Personal Injury Law 
Fundamental concepts of tort and personal injury law 
including intentional torts, negligence, and strict liability 
are presented with emphasis on the paralegal's role in tort 
and personal injury law. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
LGLA 2307 Law Office Management 
Fundamental principles and structure of management, 
administration, and substantive systems in the law office 
including law practice technology as applied to paralegals. 
3 credit hours. (W) 
 
LGLA 2309 Real Property 
Presents fundamental concepts of real property law 
including the nature of real property, rights and duties of 
ownership, land use, voluntary and involuntary 
conveyances, and the recording of and searching for real 
estate documents emphasizing the paralegal's role in real 
property law. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
LGLA 2311 Business Organizations 
Basic concepts of business organizations including law of 
agency, sole proprietorships, partnerships, corporations, 
and other emerging business entities with emphasis on 
the paralegal's role. Prerequisite: LGLA 1307 or LGLA 
2333 or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
LGLA 2313 Criminal Law and Procedure 
Fundamental concepts of criminal law and procedure 
from arrest to final disposition including principles of 
federal and state law emphasizing the role of the paralegal 
in the criminal justice system. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
LGLA 2323 Intellectual Property 
Presents the fundamentals of intellectual property law, 
including creation, procurement, preparation, and filing 
documents related to patents, copyrights, trademarks, and 
the processes of intellectual property litigation. 
Emphasizes the paralegal's role in intellectual property 
law. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
LGLA 2333 Advanced Legal Document Preparation 
Use of office technology skills in preparation of legal 
documents by paralegals based on hypothetical situations 
drawn from various areas of law. Prerequisite/Concurrent 
Enrollment: LGLA 1370 or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
LGLA 2339 Certified Paralegal Exam Review 
A review of the mandatory and optional topics covered in 
the Certified Paralegal Examination administered by the 
National Association of Legal Assistants. Prerequisites: 
LGLA 1305 and LGLA 1345, or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
LMGT 1319 Introduction to Business Logistics 
A systems approach to managing activities associated with 
traffic, transportation, inventory management, 
warehousing, packaging, order processing, and materials 
handling. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
LMGT 1325 Warehouse and Distribution Center 
Management 
Emphasis on physical distribution and total supply chain 
management. Includes warehouse operations 
management, hardware and software operations, bar 
codes, organizational effectiveness, just-in-time, and 
continuous replenishment. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
LMGT 2330 International Logistics Management 
Identification of the principles and practices involved in 
international distribution systems including the 
multinational corporation. Attention to global strategic 
planning, production, supply, manpower/labor, 
geography, business communications, cultural, political, 
and legal issues affecting global distribution and 
firm/host relationships. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
LMGT 2388 Internship: Logistics and Materials 
Management 
A work-based learning experience that enables the 
student to apply specialized occupational theory, skills 
and concepts. A learning plan is developed by the college 
and the employer. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
MATH 0314 College Algebra Support 
This course is a support for students enrolled in College 
Algebra. It will assist in the study of functions and 
equations. Prerequisite: TSI Math Assessment score of 
910-949 with a diagnostic score of 5, or MATH 0405 with 
a grade of "C" or better, or equivalent. Corequisite: 
MATH 1314. 3 credit hours. (D) 
 
MATH 0324 Mathematics for Business and Social 
Sciences Support 
269 
 
This course is a support for students enrolled in 
Mathematics for Business and Social Sciences. It will 
assist in the study of functions and equations. 
Prerequisite: TSI Math Assessment score of 910-949 with 
a diagnostic score of 5, or MATH 0405 with a grade of 
"C" or better, or equivalent. Corequisite: MATH 1324. 3 
credit hours. (D) 
 
MATH 0332 Contemporary Mathematics Support 
Intended for non-STEM (Science, Technology, 
Engineering and Mathematics) majors. Concepts and 
processes that support introductory treatments of sets 
and logic, financial mathematics, probability and statistics. 
Development of number sense, proportional reasoning, 
estimation, technology and communication are supported 
through this course. Prerequisite: TSI Math Assessment 
score of 910-949 with a diagnostic score of 5, or MATH 
0405 with a grade of "C" or better, or equivalent. 
Corequisite: MATH 1332. 3 credit hours. (D) 
 
MATH 0342 Elementary Statistical Methods Support 
A support course for Elementary Statistical Methods with 
emphasis on real numbers and graphing techniques in 
real-world problems. Prerequisite: TSI Math Assessment 
score of 910-949 with a diagnostic score of 5, or MATH 
0405 with a grade of "C" or better, or equivalent. 
Corequisite: MATH 1342. 3 credit hours. (D) 
 
MATH 0405 Math Foundations 
The course supports students in developing skills, 
strategies, and reasoning needed to succeed in 
mathematics, including communication and appropriate 
use of technology. Topics include the study of numeracy 
and the real number system; algebraic concepts, notation, 
and reasoning; quantitative relationships; mathematical 
models; and problem solving. Additionally, an emphasis 
will be placed on arithmetic operations, number 
conversions, solving linear equations and inequalities, 
percent with applications, algebraic expressions, 
polynomial operations and factoring, graphing linear 
equations, functions, geometric applications of square 
roots, an introduction to statistics, and developing critical 
thinking skills. Lab required. Prerequisite: TSI Math 
Assessment score of 910-949 with a diagnostic score of 3 
or 4, or equivalent. 4 credit hours. (D) 
 
MATH 1314 College Algebra 
In-depth study and applications of polynomial, rational, 
radical, exponential and logarithmic functions, and 
systems of equations using matrices. Additional topics 
such as sequences, series, probability, and conics may be 
included. Graphing calculator may be required. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: MATH 0314 with a grade of C or 
better, or MATH 0324 with a grade of C or better, or 
meet TSI college-readiness standard for Mathematics; or 
equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
MATH 1316 Plane Trigonometry 
In-depth study and applications of trigonometry including 
definitions, identities, inverse functions, solutions of 
equations, graphing, and solving triangles. Additional 
topics such as vectors, polar coordinates and parametric 
equations may be included. Graphing calculator required. 
Prerequisite: MATH 1314; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. 
(A) 
 
MATH 1324 Mathematics for Business and Social 
Sciences 
The application of common algebraic functions, including 
polynomial, exponential, logarithmic, and rational, to 
problems in business, economics, and the social sciences 
are addressed. The applications include mathematics of 
finance, including simple and compound interest and 
annuities; systems of linear equations; matrices; linear 
programming; and probability, including expected value. 
Graphing calculator required. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
MATH 0314 with a grade of C or better, or MATH 0324 
with a grade of C or better, or meet TSI college-readiness 
standard for Mathematics; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. 
(A) 
 
MATH 1325 Calculus for Business and Social 
Sciences 
This course is the basic study of limits and continuity, 
differentiation, optimization and graphing, and 
integration of elementary functions, with emphasis on 
applications in business, economics, and social sciences. 
This course is not a substitute for MATH 2413, Calculus 
I. Graphing calculator required. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: MATH 1314, or MATH 1324; or equivalent. 
3 credit hours. (A) 
 
MATH 1332 Contemporary Mathematics 
(Quantitative Reasoning) 
Intended for Non STEM (Science, Technology, 
Engineering, and Mathematics) majors. Topics include 
introductory treatments of sets and logic, financial 
mathematics, probability and statistics with appropriate 
applications. Number sense, proportional reasoning, 
estimation, technology, and communication should be 
embedded throughout the course. Additional topics may 
be covered. Additionally, this course is NOT intended to 
prepare students for calculus, business, or engineering 
courses. Prerequisite: MATH 0314 with a grade of C or 
better, or MATH 0324 with a grade of C or better, or 
MATH 0332 with a grade of C or better, or MATH 0305, 
or MATH 0406, or meet TSI college-readiness standard 
for Mathematics; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
MATH 1342 Elementary Statistical Methods 
Collection, analysis, presentation and interpretation of 
data and probability. Analysis includes descriptive 
statistics, correlation and regression, confidence intervals 
 
 
270 
 
and hypothesis testing. Use of appropriate technology is 
recommended. Graphing calculator may be required. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: MATH 0314 with a grade of C or 
better, or MATH 0324 with a grade of C or better, or 
MATH 0342 with a grade of C or better, or MATH 0305, 
or MATH 0406, or meet TSI college-readiness standard 
for Mathematics; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
MATH 1350 Mathematics for Teachers I 
(Fundamentals of Mathematics I) 
This course is intended to build or reinforce a foundation 
in fundamental mathematics concepts and skills. It 
includes the conceptual development of the following: 
sets, functions, numeration systems, number theory, and 
properties of the various number systems with an 
emphasis on problem solving and critical thinking. 
Prerequisite: MATH 1314; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. 
(A) 
Note: This course is intended for students pursuing the AAT degree 
with an emphasis on middle grades 4-8 and early childhood through 
grade 6. 
 
MATH 1351 Mathematics for Teachers II 
(Fundamentals of Mathematics II) 
This course is intended to build or reinforce a foundation 
in fundamental mathematics concepts and skills. It 
includes the concepts of geometry, measurement, 
probability, and statistics with an emphasis on problem 
solving and critical thinking. Prerequisite: MATH 1314, 
or MATH 1350; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
Note: This course is designed specifically for students who seek 
middle grade (4 through 8) teacher certification. 
 
MATH 1376 Calculus for Business and Economics II 
Continuation of Math 1325. In this course, application of 
differential equations, functions of several variables, 
Lagrange Multipliers, Least Squares Modeling, multiple 
integrals and infinite series will be covered. Basic 
concepts are related to multivariable calculus. Graphing 
calculator required. Lab required. Prerequisite: MATH 
1325. 3 credit hours. (A) 
Note: This course will transfer to a specific 2+2 baccalaureate 
program. Please check with your advisor to learn whether the course 
will transfer to the four-year program of your choice. There is an 
additional fee for this course. 
 
MATH 2305 Discrete Mathematics 
A course designed to prepare math, computer science, 
and engineering majors for a background in abstraction, 
notation, and critical thinking for the mathematics most 
directly related to computer science. Topics include: logic, 
relations, functions, basic set theory, countability and 
counting arguments, proof techniques, mathematical 
induction, combinatorics, discrete probability, recursion, 
sequence and recurrence, elementary number theory, 
graph theory, and mathematical proof techniques. 
Graphing calculator required. Prerequisite: MATH 2413 
with a C or better. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
MATH 2318 Linear Algebra 
Introduces and provides models for application of the 
concepts of vector algebra. Topics include finite 
dimensional vector spaces and their geometric 
significance; representing and solving systems of linear 
equations using multiple methods, including Gaussian 
elimination and matrix inversion; matrices; determinants; 
linear transformations; quadratic forms; eigenvalues and 
eigenvector; and applications in science and engineering. 
Graphing calculator required. Prerequisite: MATH 2414 
with a C or better. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
MATH 2320 Differential Equations 
Ordinary differential equations, including linear 
equations, systems of equations, equations with variable 
coefficients, existence and uniqueness of solutions, series 
solutions, singular points, transform methods, and 
boundary value problems; application of differential 
equations to real-world problems. Graphing calculator 
required. Lab required. Prerequisite: MATH 2414 with a 
C or better. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
MATH 2373 Matrices, Vectors, and Linear 
Programming 
Not for science majors. A study of matrices, vectors, 
determinants, inverses, system of linear equations, and 
linear programming with applications. Scientific calculator 
required. Prerequisite: MATH 1314; or equivalent. 3 
credit hours. (A) 
Note: This course will transfer to a specific 2+2 baccalaureate 
program. Please check with your advisor to learn whether the course 
will transfer to the four-year program of your choice. There is an 
additional fee for this course. 
 
MATH 2412 Pre-Calculus Math 
In-depth combined study of algebra, trigonometry, and 
other topics for calculus readiness. Graphing calculator 
required. Lab required. Prerequisite: MATH 1314 with a 
C or better; or equivalent preparation. 4 credit hours. (A) 
 
MATH 2413 Calculus I 
Limits and continuity; the Fundamental Theorem of 
Calculus; definition of the derivative of a function and 
techniques of differentiation; applications of the 
derivative to maximizing or minimizing a function; the 
chain rule, mean value theorem, and rate of change 
problems; curve sketching; definite and indefinite 
integration of algebraic, trigonometric, and transcendental 
functions, with an application to calculation of areas. 
Graphing calculator required. Lab included. Prerequisite: 
271 
 
MATH 2412 with a C or better; or equivalent 
preparation. 4 credit hours. (A) 
 
MATH 2414 Calculus II 
Differentiation and integration of transcendental 
functions; parametric equations and polar coordinates; 
techniques of integration; sequences and series; improper 
integrals. Graphing calculator required. Lab included. 
Prerequisite: MATH 2413 with a C or better. 4 credit 
hours. (A) 
 
MATH 2415 Calculus III 
Advanced topics in calculus, including vectors and vector-
valued functions, partial differentiation, Lagrange 
multipliers, multiple integrals, and Jacobians; application 
of the line integral, including Green's Theorem, the 
Divergence Theorem, and Stokes' Theorem. Graphing 
calculator required. Lab included. Prerequisite: MATH 
2414 with a C or better. 4 credit hours. (A) 
 
MDCA 1154 Medical Assisting Credentialing Exam 
Review 
A preparation for one of the National Commission for 
Certifying Agencies (NCCA) recognized credentialing 
exams. Prerequisites: HITT 1305, HPRS 2301, HPRS 
2321, MDCA 1309, MDCA 1321, MDCA 1417, MDCA 
1448, and MDCA 1452. 1 credit hour. (W) 
Note: Students who plan to begin the Level 1 Certificate, or the 
Associate of Applied Science, in Medical Assisting Advanced 
Practice in Fall 2023 or later should take MDCA 1254 instead 
of MDCA 1154. 
 
MDCA 1210 Medical Assistant Interpersonal and 
Communication Skills 
Emphasis on the application of basic psychological 
principles and the study of behavior as they apply to 
special populations. Topics include procedures for self-
understanding and social adaptability in interpersonal 
communication with patients and co-workers in an 
ambulatory care setting. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
MDCA 1254 Medical Assisting Credentialing Exam 
Review 
A preparation for one of the National Commission for 
Certifying Agencies (NCCA) recognized credentialing 
exams. Prerequisites: HPRS 2301, HPRS 2321, MDCA 
1210, MDCA 1309, MDCA 1321, MDCA 1417, MDCA 
1448, and MDCA 1452. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
MDCA 1309 Anatomy and Physiology for Medical 
Assistants 
Emphasis on structure and function of human cells, 
tissues, organs, and systems with overview of common 
pathophysiology. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
MDCA 1321 Administrative Procedures 
Medical office procedures including appointment 
scheduling, medical records creation and maintenance, 
interpersonal communications, bookkeeping tasks, 
coding, billing, collecting, third party reimbursement, 
credit arrangements, and computer use in the medical 
office. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
MDCA 1360 Clinical - Medical/Clinical Assistant 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Prerequisites: HPRS 
2301, HPRS 2321, MDCA 1210, MDCA 1309, MDCA 
1321, MDCA 1417, MDCA 1448, and MDCA 1452. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
MDCA 1417 Procedures in a Clinical Setting 
Emphasis on patient assessment, examination, and 
treatment as directed by physician. Includes vital signs, 
collection and documentation of patient information, 
asepsis, office clinical procedures, and other treatments as 
appropriate for ambulatory care settings. Lab required. 4 
credit hours. (W) 
 
MDCA 1448 Pharmacology & Administration of 
Medications 
Instruction in concepts and application of 
pharmacological principles. Focuses on drug 
classifications, principles and procedures of medication 
administration, mathematical systems and conversions, 
calculation of drug problems, and medico-legal 
responsibilities of the medical assistant. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: MDCA 1417. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
MDCA 1452 Medical Assistant Laboratory 
Procedures 
Application of governmental health care guidelines. 
Includes specimen collection and handling, quality 
assurance and quality control in performance of Clinical 
Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA)-waived 
laboratory testing. Lab required. Prerequisite: MDCA 
1417. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
MHSM  3305  Leadership for Healthcare 
Organizations 
The foundation and principles of lean leadership are 
emphasized, and tools for improved self-understanding of 
personal leadership styles and their impact on 
organizational functionality will be introduced. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: Admission to the Clinical 
Operations Management program. 3 credit hours. 
 
MHSM  3310  Legal Issues in Healthcare 
This course examines the various federal, state and local 
laws and regulations affecting health care delivery in the 
United States. It also covers public and private regulatory 
agencies, uses associated with professional malpractice, 
and business liability for health care produced and 
 
 
272 
 
services. Prerequisite: Admission to the Clinical 
Operations Management program. 3 credit hours. 
 
MHSM 3311 Healthcare Technology Information 
This course introduces the different types of information 
maintained by health care organizations commonly used 
health care software systems, robotic and automation 
interfaces, basic healthcare information security system 
standards, privacy laws and record archival. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: Admission to the Clinical Operations 
Management program. 3 credit hours. 
 
MHSM 3313 Data Analysis and Presentation 
Development 
This course identifies data management strategies and 
techniques and the development of data-informed 
decisions. Also included are best practices in creating 
effective presentations in written and verbal contexts. Lab 
Required. Prerequisite: Admission to the Clinical 
Operations Management program. 3 credit hours. 
 
MHSM 3315 Population Health 
Examine various entities whose collaborative efforts 
contribute to positive health outcomes for a community. 
Topics include social determinants of health, examination 
of healthcare costs, healthcare statistics, patient 
engagement, and impact of patient feedback. Prerequisite: 
Admission to the Clinical Operations Management 
program. 3 credit hours. 
 
MHSM 3320 Fundamentals of Business: Healthcare 
This course focuses on the identification of foundational 
business principles, incorporating analysis of the 
competitive landscape, marketing and promotion of an 
organization, accounting principles, and identification of 
stakeholders. Revenue cycle management will also be 
addressed. Lab Required. Prerequisite: Admission to the 
Clinical Operations Management program. 3 credit hours. 
 
MHSM 3335 Financial Management for Healthcare 
This course covers various health care revenue sources, 
commonly used health accounting software, department 
budget design, resource allocation, and methods of cost 
control. Lab required. Prerequisite: Admission to the 
Clinical Operations Management program. 3 credit hours. 
 
MHSM 4302 Healthcare Quality and Risk 
Management 
This course focuses on quality measures, patient safety, 
and risk management issues in healthcare organizations. 
Additional topics include policies and procedures, 
compliance, emergency management, and disaster 
preparedness. Lab required. Prerequisite: Admission to 
the Clinical Operations Management program. 3 credit 
hours. 
 
MHSM 4312 Talent Management in Healthcare 
This course focuses on the roles and responsibilities of 
the supervisor. It encompasses human resource concepts 
like effective hiring, conflict resolution, employee 
supervision, performance management, labor law, 
retention practices, and credentialing. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: Admission to the Clinical Operations 
Management program. 3 credit hours. 
 
MHSM 4315 Project Management 
This course provides a foundational understanding of 
project management. Topics include project scope, cost, 
quality, communication, risk, and procurement 
management. Lab required. Prerequisite: Admission to 
the Clinical Operations Management program. 3 credit 
hours. 
 
MHSM 4440 Case Analysis in Healthcare 
Management 
This course presents several cases for analysis. Students 
apply the competencies learned in their healthcare 
management courses to evaluate these real-world cases. 
Conversations with healthcare leaders and tours of 
facilities are also included in this class. Lab required. 
Prerequisites/Concurrent Enrollment: MHSM 3313, 
MHSM 4302, MHSM 3335, and MHSM 4312. 4 credit 
hours. 
 
MILS 1141 Foundations of Leadership 
Fundamental concepts of leadership in a profession in 
both classroom and outdoor laboratory environments. 
The study of time management skills, basic drill and 
ceremony, physical fitness, rappelling, leadership reaction 
course, first aid, making presentations and marksmanship. 
Concurrent enrollment in MILS 1180 leadership lab and 
mandatory participation in independent physical fitness 
training, plus optional participation in a weekend field 
training exercise. 1 credit hour. (A) 
 
MILS 1142 Introduction to Leadership 
Application of principles of leadership through 
participation in physically and mentally challenging 
exercises with upper-division ROTC students. Course 
focuses on communication skills, organizational ethics, 
and study and time management techniques. Concurrent 
enrollment in MILS 1180 leadership lab and mandatory 
participation in individual physical fitness training, plus 
optional participation in a weekend field training exercise. 
1 credit hour. (A) 
 
MILS 1180 Leadership Laboratory 
Practical laboratory of applied leadership and skills. 
Student-planned, -organized and -conducted training, 
oriented toward leadership development. Laboratory 
273 
 
topics include marksmanship, small unit tactics, multi-
tiered programs focused on individual skill levels. 
Uniform and equipment provided, no fee. May be 
repeated for credit. 1 credit hour. (A) 
 
MILS 2251 Individual/Team Development 
Application of ethics-based leadership skills and 
fundamentals of ROTC’s Leadership Development 
Program. Develop skills in oral presentations, concise 
writing, event planning, coordination of group efforts, 
advanced first aid, land navigation, and military tactics. 
Concurrent enrollment in MILS 1180 leadership lab and 
mandatory participation in individual physical fitness 
training, plus optional participation in a weekend field 
training exercise. 2 credit hours. (A) 
 
MILS 2252 Individual/Team Military Tactics 
Introduction to individual and team aspects of military 
tactics in small unit operations. Includes use of radio 
communications, making safety assessments, movement 
techniques, planning for team safety/security, and pre-
execution checks. Concurrent enrollment in MILS 1180 
leadership lab and mandatory participation in individual 
physical fitness training, plus optional participation in a 
weekend field training exercise. 2 credit hours. (A) 
 
MRKG 1301 Customer Relationship Management 
General principles of customer relationship management 
including skills, knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
MRKG 1311 Principles of Marketing 
Introduction to the marketing mix functions and process. 
Includes identification of consumer and organizational 
needs and explanation of environmental issues. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
MRKG 2312 e-Commerce Marketing 
Explore electronic tools utilized in marketing, focus on 
marketing communications in developing customer 
relationships. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
MRKG 2333 Principles of Selling 
Overview of the selling process. Identification of the 
elements of the communication process between buyers 
and sellers. Examination of the legal and ethical issues of 
organizations which affect salespeople. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
MRKG 2348 Marketing Research and Strategies 
Practical experiences in analyzing marketing studies using 
data-driven decision-making processes. Includes 
interrelationships among marketing mix. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
MRKG 2349 Advertising and Sales Promotion 
Integrated marketing communications. Includes 
advertising principles and practices. Emphasizes multi-
media of persuasive communication including buyer 
behavior, budgeting, and regulatory constraints. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
MRKG 2371 Strategies in Social Media Marketing 
Study of social media networks and their relationships to 
marketing programs. Explores social media marketing 
strategies and tactics, along with best practices. 
Prerequisite: Consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
MRKG 2372 Digital Marketing 
Analysis of Digital Marketing and its importance to 
Integrated Marketing Communications (IMC). Includes 
exploration of digital marketing strategies. 
Prerequisite/Concurrent Enrollment: MRKG 2371. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
MRKG 2373 Digital Marketing Analytics 
Analysis and application of Marketing data using a variety 
of analytics tools. Explores various marketing methods 
and best practices for achieving digital marketing 
objectives. Prerequisite: MRKG 2372. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
MRKG 2381 Cooperative Education- 
Marketing/Marketing Management, General 
Career-related activities encountered in the student's area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Contact the 
Associate Dean/Director for more information. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
MUAP 1101 Secondary Applied Music-Violin 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student's concentration, consisting of one 25-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 credit hour of a MUEN course, attend weekly 
Departmental recitals for the semester, and participate in 
a jury. Contact the Music Department for permission 
prior to registering. Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: 
Remain enrolled in at least one credit hour of MUEN 
class(es). 1 credit hour. (A) Note: Students may receive credit 
for up to 20 credit hours of any combination of MUAP courses. 
This includes MUAP 1101-MUAP 2291. 
 
MUAP 1105 Secondary Applied Music-Viola 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student's concentration, consisting of one 25-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 credit hour of a MUEN course, attend weekly 
Departmental recitals for the semester, and participate in 
 
 
274 
 
a jury. Contact the Music Department for permission 
prior to registering. Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: 
Remain enrolled in at least one credit hour of MUEN 
class(es). 1 credit hour. (A) Note: Students may receive credit 
for up to 20 credit hours of any combination of MUAP courses. 
This includes MUAP 1101-MUAP 2291. 
 
MUAP 1109 Secondary Applied Music-Cello 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student's concentration, consisting of one 25-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 credit hour of a MUEN course, attend weekly 
Departmental recitals for the semester, and participate in 
a jury. Contact the Music Department for permission 
prior to registering. Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: 
Remain enrolled in at least one credit hour of MUEN 
class(es). 1 credit hour. (A) Note: Students may receive credit 
for up to 20 credit hours of any combination of MUAP courses. 
This includes MUAP 1101-MUAP 2291. 
 
MUAP 1113 Secondary Applied Music-Double Bass 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student's concentration, consisting of one 25-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 credit hour of a MUEN course, attend weekly 
Departmental recitals for the semester, and participate in 
a jury. Contact the Music Department for permission 
prior to registering. Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: 
Remain enrolled in at least one credit hour of MUEN 
class(es). 1 credit hour. (A) Note: Students may receive credit 
for up to 20 credit hours of any combination of MUAP courses. 
This includes MUAP 1101-MUAP 2291. 
 
MUAP 1115 Secondary Applied Music-Electric Bass 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student's concentration, consisting of one 25-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 credit hour of a MUEN course, attend weekly 
Departmental recitals for the semester, and participate in 
a jury. Contact the Music Department for permission 
prior to registering. Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: 
Remain enrolled in at least one credit hour of MUEN 
class(es). 1 credit hour. (A) Note: Students may receive credit 
for up to 20 credit hours of any combination of MUAP courses. 
This includes MUAP 1101-MUAP 2291. 
 
MUAP 1117 Secondary Applied Music-Flute 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student's concentration, consisting of one 25-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 credit hour of a MUEN course, attend weekly 
Departmental recitals for the semester, and participate in 
a jury. Contact the Music Department for permission 
prior to registering. Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: 
Remain enrolled in at least one credit hour of MUEN 
class(es). 1 credit hour. (A) Note: Students may receive credit 
for up to 20 credit hours of any combination of MUAP courses. 
This includes MUAP 1101-MUAP 2291. 
 
MUAP 1121 Secondary Applied Music-Oboe 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student's concentration, consisting of one 25-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 credit hour of a MUEN course, attend weekly 
Departmental recitals for the semester, and participate in 
a jury. Contact the Music Department for permission 
prior to registering. Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: 
Remain enrolled in at least one credit hour of MUEN 
class(es). 1 credit hour. (A) Note: Students may receive credit 
for up to 20 credit hours of any combination of MUAP courses. 
This includes MUAP 1101-MUAP 2291. 
 
MUAP 1125 Secondary Applied Music-Bassoon 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student's concentration, consisting of one 25-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 credit hour of a MUEN course, attend weekly 
Departmental recitals for the semester, and participate in 
a jury. Contact the Music Department for permission 
prior to registering. Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: 
Remain enrolled in at least one credit hour of MUEN 
class(es). 1 credit hour. (A) Note: Students may receive credit 
for up to 20 credit hours of any combination of MUAP courses. 
This includes MUAP 1101-MUAP 2291. 
 
MUAP 1129 Secondary Applied Music-Clarinet 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student's concentration, consisting of one 25-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 credit hour of a MUEN course, attend weekly 
Departmental recitals for the semester, and participate in 
a jury. Contact the Music Department for permission 
prior to registering. Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: 
Remain enrolled in at least one credit hour of MUEN 
class(es). 1 credit hour. (A) Note: Students may receive credit 
for up to 20 credit hours of any combination of MUAP courses. 
This includes MUAP 1101-MUAP 2291. 
 
MUAP 1133 Secondary Applied Music-Saxophone 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student's concentration, consisting of one 25-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 credit hour of a MUEN course, attend weekly 
Departmental recitals for the semester, and participate in 
a jury. Contact the Music Department for permission 
prior to registering. Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: 
275 
 
Remain enrolled in at least one credit hour of MUEN 
class(es). 1 credit hour. (A) Note: Students may receive credit 
for up to 20 credit hours of any combination of MUAP courses.  
This includes MUAP 1101-MUAP 2291. 
 
MUAP 1137 Secondary Applied Music-Trumpet 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student's concentration, consisting of one 25-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 credit hour of a MUEN course, attend weekly 
Departmental recitals for the semester, and participate in 
a jury. Contact the Music Department for permission 
prior to registering. Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: 
Remain enrolled in at least one credit hour of MUEN 
class(es). 1 credit hour. (A) Note: Students may receive credit 
for up to 20 credit hours of any combination of MUAP courses. 
This includes MUAP 1101-MUAP 2291. 
 
MUAP 1141 Secondary Applied Music-French Horn 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student's concentration, consisting of one 25-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 credit hour of a MUEN course, attend weekly 
Departmental recitals for the semester, and participate in 
a jury. Contact the Music Department for permission 
prior to registering. Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: 
Remain enrolled in at least one credit hour of MUEN 
class(es). 1 credit hour. (A) Note: Students may receive credit 
for up to 20 credit hours of any combination of MUAP courses. 
This includes MUAP 1101-MUAP 2291. 
 
MUAP 1145 Secondary Applied Music-Trombone 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student's concentration, consisting of one 25-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 credit hour of a MUEN course, attend weekly 
Departmental recitals for the semester, and participate in 
a jury. Contact the Music Department for permission 
prior to registering. Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: 
Remain enrolled in at least one credit hour of MUEN 
class(es). 1 credit hour. (A) Note: Students may receive credit 
for up to 20 credit hours of any combination of MUAP courses. 
This includes MUAP 1101-MUAP 2291. 
 
MUAP 1149 Secondary Applied Music - Euphonium 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student's concentration, consisting of one 25-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 credit hour of a MUEN course, attend weekly 
Departmental recitals for the semester, and participate in 
a jury. Contact the Music Department for permission 
prior to registering. Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: 
Remain enrolled in at least one credit hour of MUEN 
class(es). 1 credit hour. (A) Note: Students may receive credit 
for up to 20 credit hours of any combination of MUAP courses. 
This includes MUAP 1101-MUAP 2291. 
 
MUAP 1153 Secondary Applied Music-Tuba 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student's concentration, consisting of one 25-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 credit hour of a MUEN course, attend weekly 
Departmental recitals for the semester, and participate in 
a jury. Contact the Music Department for permission 
prior to registering. Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: 
Remain enrolled in at least one credit hour of MUEN 
class(es). 1 credit hour. (A) Note: Students may receive credit 
for up to 20 credit hours of any combination of MUAP courses. 
This includes MUAP 1101-MUAP 2291. 
 
MUAP 1157 Secondary Applied Music-Percussion 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student's concentration, consisting of one 25-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 credit hour of a MUEN course, attend weekly 
Departmental recitals for the semester, and participate in 
a jury. Contact the Music Department for permission 
prior to registering. Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: 
Remain enrolled in at least one credit hour of MUEN 
class(es). 1 credit hour. (A) Note: Students may receive credit 
for up to 20 credit hours of any combination of MUAP courses. 
This includes MUAP 1101-MUAP 2291. 
 
MUAP 1158 Secondary Applied Music-Drum Set 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student's concentration, consisting of one 25-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 credit hour of a MUEN course, attend weekly 
Departmental recitals for the semester, and participate in 
a jury. Contact the Music Department for permission 
prior to registering. Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: 
Remain enrolled in at least one credit hour of MUEN 
class(es). 1 credit hour. (A) Note: Students may receive credit 
for up to 20 credit hours of any combination of MUAP courses. 
This includes MUAP 1101-MUAP 2291. 
 
MUAP 1161 Secondary Applied Music-Guitar 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student's concentration, consisting of one 25-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 credit hour of a MUEN course, attend weekly 
Departmental recitals for the semester, and participate in 
a jury. Contact the Music Department for permission 
prior to registering. Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: 
Remain enrolled in at least one credit hour of MUEN 
class(es). 1 credit hour. (A) Note: Students may receive credit 
 
 
276 
 
for up to 20 credit hours of any combination of MUAP courses. 
This includes MUAP 1101-MUAP 2291. 
 
MUAP 1162 Secondary Applied Music-Jazz Guitar 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student's concentration, consisting of one 25-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 credit hour of a MUEN course, attend weekly 
Departmental recitals for the semester, and participate in 
a jury. Contact the Music Department for permission 
prior to registering. Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: 
Remain enrolled in at least one credit hour of MUEN 
class(es). 1 credit hour. (A) Note: Students may receive credit 
for up to 20 credit hours of any combination of MUAP courses. 
This includes MUAP 1101-MUAP 2291. 
 
MUAP 1163 Secondary Applied Music-Steel String 
Guitar 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student's concentration, consisting of one 25-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 credit hour of a MUEN course, attend weekly 
Departmental recitals for the semester, and participate in 
a jury. Contact the Music Department for permission 
prior to registering. Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: 
Remain enrolled in at least one credit hour of MUEN 
class(es). 1 credit hour. (A) Note: Students may receive credit 
for up to 20 credit hours of any combination of MUAP courses. 
This includes MUAP 1101-MUAP 2291. 
 
MUAP 1165 Secondary Applied Music-Organ 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student's concentration, consisting of one 25-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 credit hour of a MUEN course, attend weekly 
Departmental recitals for the semester, and participate in 
a jury. Contact the Music Department for permission 
prior to registering. Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: 
Remain enrolled in at least one credit hour of MUEN 
class(es). 1 credit hour. (A) Note: Students may receive credit 
for up to 20 credit hours of any combination of MUAP courses. 
This includes MUAP 1101-MUAP 2291. 
 
MUAP 1169 Secondary Applied Music-Piano 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student's concentration, consisting of one 25-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 credit hour of a MUEN course, attend weekly 
Departmental recitals for the semester, and participate in 
a jury. Contact the Music Department for permission 
prior to registering. Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: 
Remain enrolled in at least one credit hour of MUEN 
class(es). 1 credit hour. (A) Note: Students may receive credit 
for up to 20 credit hours of any combination of MUAP courses. 
This includes MUAP 1101-MUAP 2291. 
 
MUAP 1170 Secondary Applied Music-Jazz Piano 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student's concentration, consisting of one 25-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 credit hour of a MUEN course, attend weekly 
Departmental recitals for the semester, and participate in 
a jury. Contact the Music Department for permission 
prior to registering. Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: 
Remain enrolled in at least one credit hour of MUEN 
class(es). 1 credit hour. (A) Note: Students may receive credit 
for up to 20 credit hours of any combination of MUAP courses. 
This includes MUAP 1101-MUAP 2291. 
 
MUAP 1177 Secondary Applied Music-Harp 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student's concentration, consisting of one 25-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 credit hour of a MUEN course, attend weekly 
Departmental recitals for the semester, and participate in 
a jury. Contact the Music Department for permission 
prior to registering. Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: 
Remain enrolled in at least one credit hour of MUEN 
class(es). 1 credit hour. (A) Note: Students may receive credit 
for up to 20 credit hours of any combination of MUAP courses. 
This includes MUAP 1101-MUAP 2291. 
 
MUAP 1181 Secondary Applied Music-Voice 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student's concentration, consisting of one 25-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 credit hour of a MUEN course, attend weekly 
Departmental recitals for the semester, and participate in 
a jury. Contact the Music Department for permission 
prior to registering. Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: 
Remain enrolled in at least one credit hour of MUEN 
class(es). 1 credit hour. (A) Note: Students may receive credit 
for up to 20 credit hours of any combination of MUAP courses. 
This includes MUAP 1101-MUAP 2291. 
 
MUAP 1187 Secondary Applied Music-Composition 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student's concentration, consisting of one 25-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 credit hour of a MUEN course, attend weekly 
Departmental recitals for the semester, and participate in 
a jury. Contact the Music Department for permission 
prior to registering. Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: 
Remain enrolled in at least one credit hour of MUEN 
class(es). 1 credit hour. (A) Note: Students may receive credit 
277 
 
for up to 20 credit hours of any combination of MUAP courses. 
This includes MUAP 1101-MUAP 2291. 
 
MUAP 1188 Secondary Applied Music-
Electroacoustic Composition 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student's concentration, consisting of one 25-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 credit hour of a MUEN course, attend weekly 
Departmental recitals for the semester, and participate in 
a jury. Contact the Music Department for permission 
prior to registering. Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: 
Remain enrolled in at least one credit hour of MUEN 
class(es). 1 credit hour. (A) Note: Students may receive credit 
for up to 20 credit hours of any combination of MUAP courses. 
This includes MUAP 1101-MUAP 2291. 
 
MUAP 1189 Secondary Applied Music-Songwriting 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student's concentration, consisting of one 25-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 credit hour of a MUEN course, attend weekly 
Departmental recitals for the semester, and participate in 
a jury. Contact the Music Department for permission 
prior to registering. Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: 
Remain enrolled in at least one credit hour of MUEN 
class(es). 1 credit hour. (A) Note: Students may receive credit 
for up to 20 credit hours of any combination of MUAP courses. 
This includes MUAP 1101-MUAP 2291. 
 
MUAP 1190 Secondary Applied Music-Arranging 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student's concentration, consisting of one 25-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 credit hour of a MUEN course, attend weekly 
Departmental recitals for the semester, and participate in 
a jury. Contact the Music Department for permission 
prior to registering. Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: 
Remain enrolled in at least one credit hour of MUEN 
class(es). 1 credit hour. (A) Note: Students may receive credit 
for up to 20 credit hours of any combination of MUAP courses. 
This includes MUAP 1101-MUAP 2291. 
 
MUAP 1191 Secondary Applied Music Conducting 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student's concentration, consisting of one 25-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 credit hour of a MUEN course, attend weekly 
Departmental recitals for the semester, and participate in 
a jury. Contact the Music Department for permission 
prior to registering. Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: 
Remain enrolled in at least one credit hour of MUEN 
class(es). 1 credit hour. (A) Note: Students may receive credit 
for up to 20 credit hours of any combination of MUAP courses. 
This includes MUAP 1101-MUAP 2291. 
 
MUAP 2201 Concentration Applied Music-Violin 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student’s concentration, consisting of one 50-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 (one) credit hour of a MUEN course and at least 4 
(four) credit hours to be selected from MUSI, MUEN, 
MUSB, or MUSC courses. All MUAP students must 
attend weekly Departmental recitals for the semester (in 
addition to their weekly lesson), perform in 1 (one) 
Departmental recital, and participate in a jury at the end 
of the semester. For full-time Music majors only. Contact 
the Music Department for permission prior to registering. 
Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: Remain enrolled in at 
least one credit hour of MUEN class(es). Remain enrolled 
in at least 4 credit hours of Performing Arts classes 
(Music, Dance, Theatre), including at least one credit 
hour of MUSB, MUSI or MUSC class(es). Full-time 
enrollment (12 credit hour minimum) status. 2 credit 
hours. (A) 
Note: Students may receive credit for up to 20 credit hours of any 
combination of MUAP courses. This includes MUAP 1101- 
2291. 
 
MUAP 2205 Concentration Applied Music-Viola 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student’s concentration, consisting of one 50-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 (one) credit hour of a MUEN course and at least 4 
(four) credit hours to be selected from MUSI, MUEN, 
MUSB, or MUSC courses. All MUAP students must 
attend weekly Departmental recitals for the semester (in 
addition to their weekly lesson), perform in 1 (one) 
Departmental recital, and participate in a jury at the end 
of the semester. For full-time Music majors only. Contact 
the Music Department for permission prior to registering. 
Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: Remain enrolled in at 
least one credit hour of MUEN class(es). Remain enrolled 
in at least 4 credit hours of Performing Arts classes 
(Music, Dance, Theatre), including at least one credit 
hour of MUSB, MUSI or MUSC class(es). Full-time 
enrollment (12 credit hour minimum) status. 2 credit 
hours. (A) 
Note: Students may receive credit for up to 20 credit hours of any 
combination of MUAP courses. This includes MUAP 1101- 
2291. 
 
MUAP 2209 Concentration Applied Music-Cello 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student’s concentration, consisting of one 50-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 (one) credit hour of a MUEN course and at least 4 
 
 
278 
 
(four) credit hours to be selected from MUSI, MUEN, 
MUSB, or MUSC courses. All MUAP students must 
attend weekly Departmental recitals for the semester (in 
addition to their weekly lesson), perform in 1 (one) 
Departmental recital, and participate in a jury at the end 
of the semester. For full-time Music majors only. Contact 
the Music Department for permission prior to registering. 
Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: Remain enrolled in at 
least one credit hour of MUEN class(es). Remain enrolled 
in at least 4 credit hours of Performing Arts classes 
(Music, Dance, Theatre), including at least one credit 
hour of MUSB, MUSI or MUSC class(es). Full-time 
enrollment (12 credit hour minimum) status. 2 credit 
hours. (A) 
Note: Students may receive credit for up to 20 credit hours of any 
combination of MUAP courses. This includes MUAP 1101- 
2291. 
 
MUAP 2213 Concentration Applied Music-Double 
Bass 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student’s concentration, consisting of one 50-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 (one) credit hour of a MUEN course and at least 4 
(four) credit hours to be selected from MUSI, MUEN, 
MUSB, or MUSC courses. All MUAP students must 
attend weekly Departmental recitals for the semester (in 
addition to their weekly lesson), perform in 1 (one) 
Departmental recital, and participate in a jury at the end 
of the semester. For full-time Music majors only. Contact 
the Music Department for permission prior to registering. 
Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: Remain enrolled in at 
least one credit hour of MUEN class(es). Remain enrolled 
in at least 4 credit hours of Performing Arts classes 
(Music, Dance, Theatre), including at least one credit 
hour of MUSB, MUSI or MUSC class(es). Full-time 
enrollment (12 credit hour minimum) status. 2 credit 
hours. (A) 
Note: Students may receive credit for up to 20 credit hours of any 
combination of MUAP courses. This includes MUAP 1101- 
2291. 
 
MUAP 2215 Concentration Applied Music-Electric 
Bass 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student’s concentration, consisting of one 50-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 (one) credit hour of a MUEN course and at least 4 
(four) credit hours to be selected from MUSI, MUEN, 
MUSB, or MUSC courses. All MUAP students must 
attend weekly Departmental recitals for the semester (in 
addition to their weekly lesson), perform in 1 (one) 
Departmental recital, and participate in a jury at the end 
of the semester. For full-time Music majors only. Contact 
the Music Department for permission prior to registering. 
Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: Remain enrolled in at 
least one credit hour of MUEN class(es). Remain enrolled 
in at least 4 credit hours of Performing Arts classes 
(Music, Dance, Theatre), including at least one credit 
hour of MUSB, MUSI or MUSC class(es). Full-time 
enrollment (12 credit hour minimum) status. 2 credit 
hours. (A)  
Note: Students may receive credit for up to 20 credit hours of any 
combination of MUAP courses. This includes MUAP 1101- 
2291. 
 
MUAP 2217 Concentration Applied Music-Flute 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student’s concentration, consisting of one 50-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 (one) credit hour of a MUEN course and at least 4 
(four) credit hours to be selected from MUSI, MUEN, 
MUSB, or MUSC courses. All MUAP students must 
attend weekly Departmental recitals for the semester (in 
addition to their weekly lesson), perform in 1 (one) 
Departmental recital, and participate in a jury at the end 
of the semester. For full-time Music majors only. Contact 
the Music Department for permission prior to registering. 
Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: Remain enrolled in at 
least one credit hour of MUEN class(es). Remain enrolled 
in at least 4 credit hours of Performing Arts classes 
(Music, Dance, Theatre), including at least one credit 
hour of MUSB, MUSI or MUSC class(es). Full-time 
enrollment (12 credit hour minimum) status. 2 credit 
hours. (A)  
Note: Students may receive credit for up to 20 credit hours of any 
combination of MUAP courses. This includes MUAP 1101- 
2291. 
 
MUAP 2221 Concentration Applied Music-Oboe 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student’s concentration, consisting of one 50-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 (one) credit hour of a MUEN course and at least 4 
(four) credit hours to be selected from MUSI, MUEN, 
MUSB, or MUSC courses. All MUAP students must 
attend weekly Departmental recitals for the semester (in 
addition to their weekly lesson), perform in 1 (one) 
Departmental recital, and participate in a jury at the end 
of the semester. For full-time Music majors only. Contact 
the Music Department for permission prior to registering. 
Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: Remain enrolled in at 
least one credit hour of MUEN class(es). Remain enrolled 
in at least 4 credit hours of Performing Arts classes 
(Music, Dance, Theatre), including at least one credit 
hour of MUSB, MUSI or MUSC class(es). Full-time 
enrollment (12 credit hour minimum) status. 2 credit 
hours. (A)  
Note: Students may receive credit for up to 20 credit hours of any 
279 
 
combination of MUAP courses. This includes MUAP 1101- 
2291. 
 
MUAP 2225 Concentration Applied Music-Bassoon 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student’s concentration, consisting of one 50-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 (one) credit hour of a MUEN course and at least 4 
(four) credit hours to be selected from MUSI, MUEN, 
MUSB, or MUSC courses. All MUAP students must 
attend weekly Departmental recitals for the semester (in 
addition to their weekly lesson), perform in 1 (one) 
Departmental recital, and participate in a jury at the end 
of the semester. For full-time Music majors only. Contact 
the Music Department for permission prior to registering. 
Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: Remain enrolled in at 
least one credit hour of MUEN class(es). Remain enrolled 
in at least 4 credit hours of Performing Arts classes 
(Music, Dance, Theatre), including at least one credit 
hour of MUSB, MUSI or MUSC class(es). Full-time 
enrollment (12 credit hour minimum) status. 2 credit 
hours. (A)  
Note: Students may receive credit for up to 20 credit hours of any 
combination of MUAP courses. This includes MUAP 1101- 
2291. 
 
MUAP 2229 Concentration Applied Music-Clarinet 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student’s concentration, consisting of one 50-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 (one) credit hour of a MUEN course and at least 4 
(four) credit hours to be selected from MUSI, MUEN, 
MUSB, or MUSC courses. All MUAP students must 
attend weekly Departmental recitals for the semester (in 
addition to their weekly lesson), perform in 1 (one) 
Departmental recital, and participate in a jury at the end 
of the semester. For full-time Music majors only. Contact 
the Music Department for permission prior to registering. 
Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: Remain enrolled in at 
least one credit hour of MUEN class(es). Remain enrolled 
in at least 4 credit hours of Performing Arts classes 
(Music, Dance, Theatre), including at least one credit 
hour of MUSB, MUSI or MUSC class(es). Full-time 
enrollment (12 credit hour minimum) status. 2 credit 
hours. (A) 
Note: Students may receive credit for up to 20 credit hours of any 
combination of MUAP courses. This includes MUAP 1101- 
2291. 
 
MUAP 2233 Concentration Applied Music-
Saxophone 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student’s concentration, consisting of one 50-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 (one) credit hour of a MUEN course and at least 4 
(four) credit hours to be selected from MUSI, MUEN, 
MUSB, or MUSC courses. All MUAP students must 
attend weekly Departmental recitals for the semester (in 
addition to their weekly lesson), perform in 1 (one) 
Departmental recital, and participate in a jury at the end 
of the semester. For full-time Music majors only. Contact 
the Music Department for permission prior to registering. 
Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: Remain enrolled in at 
least one credit hour of MUEN class(es). Remain enrolled 
in at least 4 credit hours of Performing Arts classes 
(Music, Dance, Theatre), including at least one credit 
hour of MUSB, MUSI or MUSC class(es). Full-time 
enrollment (12 credit hour minimum) status. 2 credit 
hours. (A) 
Note: Students may receive credit for up to 20 credit hours of any 
combination of MUAP courses. This includes MUAP 1101- 
2291. 
 
MUAP 2237 Concentration Applied Music-Trumpet 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student’s concentration, consisting of one 50-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 (one) credit hour of a MUEN course and at least 4 
(four) credit hours to be selected from MUSI, MUEN, 
MUSB, or MUSC courses. All MUAP students must 
attend weekly Departmental recitals for the semester (in 
addition to their weekly lesson), perform in 1 (one) 
Departmental recital, and participate in a jury at the end 
of the semester. For full-time Music majors only. Contact 
the Music Department for permission prior to registering. 
Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: Remain enrolled in at 
least one credit hour of MUEN class(es). Remain enrolled 
in at least 4 credit hours of Performing Arts classes 
(Music, Dance, Theatre), including at least one credit 
hour of MUSB, MUSI or MUSC class(es). Full-time 
enrollment (12 credit hour minimum) status. 2 credit 
hours. (A) 
Note: Students may receive credit for up to 20 credit hours of any 
combination of MUAP courses. This includes MUAP 1101- 
2291. 
 
MUAP 2241 Concentration Applied Music-French 
Horn 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student’s concentration, consisting of one 50-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 (one) credit hour of a MUEN course and at least 4 
(four) credit hours to be selected from MUSI, MUEN, 
MUSB, or MUSC courses. All MUAP students must 
attend weekly Departmental recitals for the semester (in 
addition to their weekly lesson), perform in 1 (one) 
Departmental recital, and participate in a jury at the end 
of the semester. For full-time Music majors only. Contact 
the Music Department for permission prior to registering. 
 
 
280 
 
Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: Remain enrolled in at 
least one credit hour of MUEN class(es). Remain enrolled 
in at least 4 credit hours of Performing Arts classes 
(Music, Dance, Theatre), including at least one credit 
hour of MUSB, MUSI or MUSC class(es). Full-time 
enrollment (12 credit hour minimum) status. 2 credit 
hours. (A) 
Note: Students may receive credit for up to 20 credit hours of any 
combination of MUAP courses. This includes MUAP 1101- 
2291. 
 
MUAP 2245 Concentration Applied Music-
Trombone 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student’s concentration, consisting of one 50-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 (one) credit hour of a MUEN course and at least 4 
(four) credit hours to be selected from MUSI, MUEN, 
MUSB, or MUSC courses. All MUAP students must 
attend weekly Departmental recitals for the semester (in 
addition to their weekly lesson), perform in 1 (one) 
Departmental recital, and participate in a jury at the end 
of the semester. For full-time Music majors only. Contact 
the Music Department for permission prior to registering. 
Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: Remain enrolled in at 
least one credit hour of MUEN class(es). Remain enrolled 
in at least 4 credit hours of Performing Arts classes 
(Music, Dance, Theatre), including at least one credit 
hour of MUSB, MUSI or MUSC class(es). Full-time 
enrollment (12 credit hour minimum) status. 2 credit 
hours. (A) 
Note: Students may receive credit for up to 20 credit hours of any 
combination of MUAP courses. This includes MUAP 1101- 
2291. 
 
MUAP 2249 Concentration Applied Music-
Euphonium 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student's concentration, consisting of one 50-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 (one) credit hour of a MUEN course and at least 4 
(four) credit hours to be selected from MUSI, MUEN, 
MUSB, or MUSC courses. All MUAP students must 
attend weekly Departmental recitals for the semester (in 
addition to their weekly lesson), perform in 1 (one) 
Departmental recital, and participate in a jury at the end 
of the semester. For full-time Music majors only. Contact 
the Music Department for permission prior to registering. 
Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: Remain enrolled in at 
least one credit hour of MUEN class(es). Remain enrolled 
in at least 4 credit hours of Performing Arts classes 
(Music, Dance, Theatre), including at least one credit 
hour of MUSB, MUSI, or MUSC class(es). Full-time 
enrollment (12 credit hour minimum) status. 2 credit 
hours. (A) 
Note: Students may receive credit for up to 20 credit hours of any 
combination of MUAP courses. This includes MUAP 1101-
2291. 
 
MUAP 2253 Concentration Applied Music-Tuba 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student’s concentration, consisting of one 50-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 (one) credit hour of a MUEN course and at least 4 
(four) credit hours to be selected from MUSI, MUEN, 
MUSB, or MUSC courses. All MUAP students must 
attend weekly Departmental recitals for the semester (in 
addition to their weekly lesson), perform in 1 (one) 
Departmental recital, and participate in a jury at the end 
of the semester. For full-time Music majors only. Contact 
the Music Department for permission prior to registering. 
Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: Remain enrolled in at 
least one credit hour of MUEN class(es). Remain enrolled 
in at least 4 credit hours of Performing Arts classes 
(Music, Dance, Theatre), including at least one credit 
hour of MUSB, MUSI or MUSC class(es). Full-time 
enrollment (12 credit hour minimum) status. 2 credit 
hours. (A) 
Note: Students may receive credit for up to 20 credit hours of any 
combination of MUAP courses. This includes MUAP 1101- 
2291. 
 
MUAP 2257 Concentration Applied Music-
Percussion 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student’s concentration, consisting of one 50-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 (one) credit hour of a MUEN course and at least 4 
(four) credit hours to be selected from MUSI, MUEN, 
MUSB, or MUSC courses. All MUAP students must 
attend weekly Departmental recitals for the semester (in 
addition to their weekly lesson), perform in 1 (one) 
Departmental recital, and participate in a jury at the end 
of the semester. For full-time Music majors only. Contact 
the Music Department for permission prior to registering. 
Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: Remain enrolled in at 
least one credit hour of MUEN class(es). Remain enrolled 
in at least 4 credit hours of Performing Arts classes 
(Music, Dance, Theatre), including at least one credit 
hour of MUSB, MUSI or MUSC class(es). Full-time 
enrollment (12 credit hour minimum) status. 2 credit 
hours. (A) 
Note: Students may receive credit for up to 20 credit hours of any 
combination of MUAP courses. This includes MUAP 1101- 
2291. 
 
MUAP 2258 Concentration Applied Music-Drum Set 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student’s concentration, consisting of one 50-
281 
 
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 (one) credit hour of a MUEN course and at least 4 
(four) credit hours to be selected from MUSI, MUEN, 
MUSB, or MUSC courses. All MUAP students must 
attend weekly Departmental recitals for the semester (in 
addition to their weekly lesson), perform in 1 (one) 
Departmental recital, and participate in a jury at the end 
of the semester. For full-time Music majors only. Contact 
the Music Department for permission prior to registering. 
Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: Remain enrolled in at 
least one credit hour of MUEN class(es). Remain enrolled 
in at least 4 credit hours of Performing Arts classes 
(Music, Dance, Theatre), including at least one credit 
hour of MUSB, MUSI or MUSC class(es). Full-time 
enrollment (12 credit hour minimum) status. 2 credit 
hours. (A) 
Note: Students may receive credit for up to 20 credit hours of any 
combination of MUAP courses. This includes MUAP 1101- 
2291. 
 
MUAP 2261 Concentration Applied Music-Guitar 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student’s concentration, consisting of one 50-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 (one) credit hour of a MUEN course and at least 4 
(four) credit hours to be selected from MUSI, MUEN, 
MUSB, or MUSC courses. All MUAP students must 
attend weekly Departmental recitals for the semester (in 
addition to their weekly lesson), perform in 1 (one) 
Departmental recital, and participate in a jury at the end 
of the semester. For full-time Music majors only. Contact 
the Music Department for permission prior to registering. 
Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: Remain enrolled in at 
least one credit hour of MUEN class(es). Remain enrolled 
in at least 4 credit hours of Performing Arts classes 
(Music, Dance, Theatre), including at least one credit 
hour of MUSB, MUSI or MUSC class(es). Full-time 
enrollment (12 credit hour minimum) status. 2 credit 
hours. (A) 
Note: Students may receive credit for up to 20 credit hours of any 
combination of MUAP courses. This includes MUAP 1101- 
2291. 
 
MUAP 2262 Concentration Applied Music-Jazz 
Guitar 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student’s concentration, consisting of one 50-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 (one) credit hour of a MUEN course and at least 4 
(four) credit hours to be selected from MUSI, MUEN, 
MUSB, or MUSC courses. All MUAP students must 
attend weekly Departmental recitals for the semester (in 
addition to their weekly lesson), perform in 1 (one) 
Departmental recital, and participate in a jury at the end 
of the semester. For full-time Music majors only. Contact 
the Music Department for permission prior to registering. 
Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: Remain enrolled in at 
least one credit hour of MUEN class(es). Remain enrolled 
in at least 4 credit hours of Performing Arts classes 
(Music, Dance, Theatre), including at least one credit 
hour of MUSB, MUSI or MUSC class(es). Full-time 
enrollment (12 credit hour minimum) status. 2 credit 
hours. (A) 
Note: Students may receive credit for up to 20 credit hours of any 
combination of MUAP courses. This includes MUAP 1101- 
2291. 
 
MUAP 2263 Concentration Applied Music-Steel 
String Guitar 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student’s concentration, consisting of one 50-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 (one) credit hour of a MUEN course and at least 4 
(four) credit hours to be selected from MUSI, MUEN, 
MUSB, or MUSC courses. All MUAP students must 
attend weekly Departmental recitals for the semester (in 
addition to their weekly lesson), perform in 1 (one) 
Departmental recital, and participate in a jury at the end 
of the semester. For full-time Music majors only. Contact 
the Music Department for permission prior to registering. 
Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: Remain enrolled in at 
least one credit hour of MUEN class(es). Remain enrolled 
in at least 4 credit hours of Performing Arts classes 
(Music, Dance, Theatre), including at least one credit 
hour of MUSB, MUSI or MUSC class(es). Full-time 
enrollment (12 credit hour minimum) status. 2 credit 
hours. (A) 
Note: Students may receive credit for up to 20 credit hours of any 
combination of MUAP courses. This includes MUAP 1101- 
2291. 
 
MUAP 2265 Concentration Applied Music-Organ 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student’s concentration, consisting of one 50-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 (one) credit hour of a MUEN course and at least 4 
(four) credit hours to be selected from MUSI, MUEN, 
MUSB, or MUSC courses. All MUAP students must 
attend weekly Departmental recitals for the semester (in 
addition to their weekly lesson), perform in 1 (one) 
Departmental recital, and participate in a jury at the end 
of the semester. For full-time Music majors only. Contact 
the Music Department for permission prior to registering. 
Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: Remain enrolled in at 
least one credit hour of MUEN class(es). Remain enrolled 
in at least 4 credit hours of Performing Arts classes 
(Music, Dance, Theatre), including at least one credit 
hour of MUSB, MUSI or MUSC class(es). Full-time 
enrollment (12 credit hour minimum) status. 2 credit 
hours. (A) 
 
 
282 
 
Note: Students may receive credit for up to 20 credit hours of any 
combination of MUAP courses. This includes MUAP 1101- 
2291. 
 
MUAP 2269 Concentration Applied Music-Piano 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student’s concentration, consisting of one 50-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 (one) credit hour of a MUEN course and at least 4 
(four) credit hours to be selected from MUSI, MUEN, 
MUSB, or MUSC courses. All MUAP students must 
attend weekly Departmental recitals for the semester (in 
addition to their weekly lesson), perform in 1 (one) 
Departmental recital, and participate in a jury at the end 
of the semester. For full-time Music majors only. Contact 
the Music Department for permission prior to registering. 
Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: Remain enrolled in at 
least one credit hour of MUEN class(es). Remain enrolled 
in at least 4 credit hours of Performing Arts classes 
(Music, Dance, Theatre), including at least one credit 
hour of MUSB, MUSI or MUSC class(es). Full-time 
enrollment (12 credit hour minimum) status. 2 credit 
hours. (A) 
Note: Students may receive credit for up to 20 credit hours of any 
combination of MUAP courses. This includes MUAP 1101- 
2291. 
 
MUAP 2270 Concentration Applied Music-Jazz 
Piano 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student’s concentration, consisting of one 50-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 (one) credit hour of a MUEN course and at least 4 
(four) credit hours to be selected from MUSI, MUEN, 
MUSB, or MUSC courses. All MUAP students must 
attend weekly Departmental recitals for the semester (in 
addition to their weekly lesson), perform in 1 (one) 
Departmental recital, and participate in a jury at the end 
of the semester. For full-time Music majors only. Contact 
the Music Department for permission prior to registering. 
Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: Remain enrolled in at 
least one credit hour of MUEN class(es). Remain enrolled 
in at least 4 credit hours of Performing Arts classes 
(Music, Dance, Theatre), including at least one credit 
hour of MUSB, MUSI or MUSC class(es). Full-time 
enrollment (12 credit hour minimum) status. 2 credit 
hours. (A) 
Note: Students may receive credit for up to 20 credit hours of any 
combination of MUAP courses. This includes MUAP 1101- 
2291. 
 
MUAP 2277 Concentration Applied Music-Harp 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student’s concentration, consisting of one 50-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 (one) credit hour of a MUEN course and at least 4 
(four) credit hours to be selected from MUSI, MUEN, 
MUSB, or MUSC courses. All MUAP students must 
attend weekly Departmental recitals for the semester (in 
addition to their weekly lesson), perform in 1 (one) 
Departmental recital, and participate in a jury at the end 
of the semester. For full-time Music majors only. Contact 
the Music Department for permission prior to registering. 
Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: Remain enrolled in at 
least one credit hour of MUEN class(es). Remain enrolled 
in at least 4 credit hours of Performing Arts classes 
(Music, Dance, Theatre), including at least one credit 
hour of MUSB, MUSI or MUSC class(es). Full-time 
enrollment (12 credit hour minimum) status. 2 credit 
hours. (A) 
Note: Students may receive credit for up to 20 credit hours of any 
combination of MUAP courses. This includes MUAP 1101- 
2291. 
 
MUAP 2281 Concentration Applied Music-Voice 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student’s concentration, consisting of one 50-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 (one) credit hour of a MUEN course and at least 4 
(four) credit hours to be selected from MUSI, MUEN, 
MUSB, or MUSC courses. All MUAP students must 
attend weekly Departmental recitals for the semester (in 
addition to their weekly lesson), perform in 1 (one) 
Departmental recital, and participate in a jury at the end 
of the semester. For full-time Music majors only. Contact 
the Music Department for permission prior to registering. 
Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: Remain enrolled in at 
least one credit hour of MUEN class(es). Remain enrolled 
in at least 4 credit hours of Performing Arts classes 
(Music, Dance, Theatre), including at least one credit 
hour of MUSB, MUSI or MUSC class(es). Full-time 
enrollment (12 credit hour minimum) status. 2 credit 
hours. (A) 
Note: Students may receive credit for up to 20 credit hours of any 
combination of MUAP courses. This includes MUAP 1101- 
2291. 
 
MUAP 2287 Concentration Applied Music-
Composition 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student’s concentration, consisting of one 50-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 (one) credit hour of a MUEN course and at least 4 
(four) credit hours to be selected from MUSI, MUEN, 
MUSB, or MUSC courses. All MUAP students must 
attend weekly Departmental recitals for the semester (in 
addition to their weekly lesson), perform in 1 (one) 
Departmental recital, and participate in a jury at the end 
of the semester. For full-time Music majors only. Contact 
283 
 
the Music Department for permission prior to registering. 
Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: Remain enrolled in at 
least one credit hour of MUEN class(es). Remain enrolled 
in at least 4 credit hours of Performing Arts classes 
(Music, Dance, Theatre), including at least one credit 
hour of MUSB, MUSI or MUSC class(es). Full-time 
enrollment (12 credit hour minimum) status. 2 credit 
hours. (A) 
Note: Students may receive credit for up to 20 credit hours of any 
combination of MUAP courses. This includes MUAP 1101- 
2291. 
 
MUAP 2288 Concentration Applied Music-
Electroacoustic Composition 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student’s concentration, consisting of one 50-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 (one) credit hour of a MUEN course and at least 4 
(four) credit hours to be selected from MUSI, MUEN, 
MUSB, or MUSC courses. All MUAP students must 
attend weekly Departmental recitals for the semester (in 
addition to their weekly lesson), perform in 1 (one) 
Departmental recital, and participate in a jury at the end 
of the semester. For full-time Music majors only. Contact 
the Music Department for permission prior to registering. 
Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: Remain enrolled in at 
least one credit hour of MUEN class(es). Remain enrolled 
in at least 4 credit hours of Performing Arts classes 
(Music, Dance, Theatre), including at least one credit 
hour of MUSB, MUSI or MUSC class(es). Full-time 
enrollment (12 credit hour minimum) status. 2 credit 
hours. (A) 
Note: Students may receive credit for up to 20 credit hours of any 
combination of MUAP courses. This includes MUAP 1101- 
2291. 
 
MUAP 2289 Concentration Applied Music-
Songwriting 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student’s concentration, consisting of one 50-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 (one) credit hour of a MUEN course and at least 4 
(four) credit hours to be selected from MUSI, MUEN, 
MUSB, or MUSC courses. All MUAP students must 
attend weekly Departmental recitals for the semester (in 
addition to their weekly lesson), perform in 1 (one) 
Departmental recital, and participate in a jury at the end 
of the semester. For full-time Music majors only. Contact 
the Music Department for permission prior to registering. 
Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: Remain enrolled in at 
least one credit hour of MUEN class(es). Remain enrolled 
in at least 4 credit hours of Performing Arts classes 
(Music, Dance, Theatre), including at least one credit 
hour of MUSB, MUSI or MUSC class(es). Full-time 
enrollment (12 credit hour minimum) status. 2 credit 
hours. (A) 
Note: Students may receive credit for up to 20 credit hours of any 
combination of MUAP courses. This includes MUAP 1101- 
2291. 
 
MUAP 2290 Concentration Applied Music-Arranging 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student’s concentration, consisting of one 50-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 (one) credit hour of a MUEN course and at least 4 
(four) credit hours to be selected from MUSI, MUEN, 
MUSB, or MUSC courses. All MUAP students must 
attend weekly Departmental recitals for the semester (in 
addition to their weekly lesson), perform in 1 (one) 
Departmental recital, and participate in a jury at the end 
of the semester. For full-time Music majors only. Contact 
the Music Department for permission prior to registering. 
Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: Remain enrolled in at 
least one credit hour of MUEN class(es). Remain enrolled 
in at least 4 credit hours of Performing Arts classes 
(Music, Dance, Theatre), including at least one credit 
hour of MUSB, MUSI or MUSC class(es). Full-time 
enrollment (12 credit hour minimum) status. 2 credit 
hours. (A) 
Note: Students may receive credit for up to 20 credit hours of any 
combination of MUAP courses. This includes MUAP 1101- 
2291. 
 
MUAP 2291 Concentration Applied Music-
Conducting 
Individual instruction in voice, instrument, composition, 
or conducting. Additionally, private instruction in the area 
of the student’s concentration, consisting of one 50-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
1 (one) credit hour of a MUEN course and at least 4 
(four) credit hours to be selected from MUSI, MUEN, 
MUSB, or MUSC courses. All MUAP students must 
attend weekly Departmental recitals for the semester (in 
addition to their weekly lesson), perform in 1 (one) 
Departmental recital, and participate in a jury at the end 
of the semester. For full-time Music majors only. Contact 
the Music Department for permission prior to registering. 
Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisites: Remain enrolled in at 
least one credit hour of MUEN class(es). Remain enrolled 
in at least 4 credit hours of Performing Arts classes 
(Music, Dance, Theatre), including at least one credit 
hour of MUSB, MUSI or MUSC class(es). Full-time 
enrollment (12 credit hour minimum) status. 2 credit 
hours. (A) 
Note: Students may receive credit for up to 20 credit hours of any 
combination of MUAP courses. This includes MUAP 1101- 
2291. 
 
MUEN 1121 Jazz Lab Band 
Examples of major instrumental ensembles may include 
but are not limited to concert band, marching band, 
 
 
284 
 
collaborative piano, jazz band, and orchestra. 
Additionally, participation in a large band concentrating 
on jazz and commercial music performance styles. 
Consisting of 16-21 instrumentalists and one vocalist, the 
band performs both traditional and contemporary jazz 
literature. A number of performances both on and off 
campus are given each semester. Lab required. 1 credit 
hour. (A) 
Note: Students may take MUEN 1121 and MUEN 1122 for a 
combined total of no more than 8 credit hours. 
 
MUEN 1122 Symphonic Wind Ensemble 
Examples of major instrumental ensembles may include 
but are not limited to concert band, marching band, 
collaborative piano, jazz band, and orchestra. 
Additionally, study and performance of traditional and 
contemporary symphonic wind literature. Students 
participate in weekly rehearsals and perform on scheduled 
concerts. Basic instrumental proficiency is required. Lab 
required. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: Students may take MUEN 1121 and MUEN 1122 for a 
combined total of no more than 8 credit hours. 
 
MUEN 1131 New Music Ensemble 
Examples of small instrumental ensembles may include 
but are not limited to wind, string, percussion, piano, and 
mixed ensembles in various styles. Additionally, performs 
experimental, avant garde, electronic, and contemporary 
music for mixed media ensemble including compositions 
by student composers. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
Audition. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: Students may take MUEN 1131, MUEN 1132, 
MUEN 1133, MUEN 1134, MUEN 1135, MUEN 1136, 
MUEN 1137, MUEN 1138, MUEN 1139, and MUEN 
1140 for a combined total of no more than 8 credit hours. 
 
MUEN 1132 Keyboard Ensemble 
Examples of small instrumental ensembles may include 
but are not limited to wind, string, percussion, piano, and 
mixed ensembles in various styles. Additionally, 
traditional piano literature for multiple performers and 
arrangements for electronic keyboard ensemble. Several 
performances each semester. Lab required. 1 credit hour. 
(A) 
Note: Students may take MUEN 1131, MUEN 1132, 
MUEN 1133, MUEN 1134, MUEN 1135, MUEN 1136, 
MUEN 1137, MUEN 1138, MUEN 1139, and MUEN 
1140 for a combined total of no more than 8 credit hours. 
 
MUEN 1133 Woodwind Ensemble 
Examples of small instrumental ensembles may include 
but are not limited to wind, string, percussion, piano, and 
mixed ensembles in various styles. Additionally, a small 
group of woodwinds performs traditional classical 
repertoire. Lab required. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: Students may take MUEN 1131, MUEN 1132, 
MUEN 1133, MUEN 1134, MUEN 1135, MUEN 1136, 
MUEN 1137, MUEN 1138, MUEN 1139, and MUEN 
1140 for a combined total of no more than 8 credit hours. 
 
MUEN 1134 Brass Ensemble 
Examples of small instrumental ensembles may include 
but are not limited to wind, string, percussion, piano, and 
mixed ensembles in various styles. Additionally, a small 
group of brass players perform traditional classical 
repertoire. Lab required. 1 credit hour. (A)  
Note: Students may take MUEN 1131, MUEN 1132, 
MUEN 1133, MUEN 1134, MUEN 1135, MUEN 1136, 
MUEN 1137, MUEN 1138, MUEN 1139, and MUEN 
1140 for a combined total of no more than 8 credit hours. 
 
MUEN 1135 Expressions Combo 
Examples of small instrumental ensembles may include 
but are not limited to wind, string, percussion, piano, and 
mixed ensembles in various styles. Additionally, 
expressions Combo is a small ensemble (4-6) of musicians 
who serve as the rhythm selection for the Expressions 
Vocal Jazz ensemble. In addition to rehearsing and 
performing with Expressions, the combo also prepares its 
own arrangements and performs as an independent 
ensemble. Typical repertoire includes bebop, Latin, and 
fusion standards. This ensemble may have several 
performances each semester. This group may have an 
annual tour. Lab required. Prerequisite: Audition. 1 credit 
hour. (A) 
Note: Students may take MUEN 1131, MUEN 1132, 
MUEN 1133, MUEN 1134, MUEN 1135, MUEN 1136, 
MUEN 1137, MUEN 1138, MUEN 1139, and MUEN 
1140 for a combined total of no more than 8 credit hours. 
 
MUEN 1136 Chamber Ensemble 
Example of small instrumental ensembles may include 
but are not limited to wind, string, percussion, piano, and 
mixed ensembles in various styles. Students participate in 
weekly rehearsals and perform on scheduled concerts. 
Basic instrumental proficiency is required. Lab required. 1 
credit hour. (A) 
Note: Students may take MUEN 1131, MUEN 1132, 
MUEN 1133, MUEN 1134, MUEN 1135, MUEN 1136, 
MUEN 1137, MUEN 1138, MUEN 1139, and MUEN 
1140 for a combined total of no more than 8 credit hours. 
 
MUEN 1137 Guitar Ensemble 
Examples of small instrumental ensembles may include 
but are not limited to wind, string, percussion, piano, and 
mixed ensembles in various styles. Additionally, a small 
group of guitarists performs traditional classical 
repertoire. Lab required. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: Students may take MUEN 1131, MUEN 1132, 
MUEN 1133, MUEN 1134, MUEN 1135, MUEN 1136, 
285 
 
MUEN 1137, MUEN 1138, MUEN 1139, and MUEN 
1140 for a combined total of no more than 8 credit hours. 
 
MUEN 1138 Percussion Ensemble 
Examples of small instrumental ensembles may include 
but are not limited to wind, string, percussion, piano, and 
mixed ensembles in various styles. Additionally, a small 
group of percussion players performs jazz and traditional 
repertoire. Lab required. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: Students may take MUEN 1131, MUEN 1132, 
MUEN 1133, MUEN 1134, MUEN 1135, MUEN 1136, 
MUEN 1137, MUEN 1138, MUEN 1139, and MUEN 
1140 for a combined total of no more than 8 credit hours. 
 
MUEN 1139 String Ensemble 
Examples of small instrumental ensembles may include 
but are not limited to wind, string, percussion, piano, and 
mixed ensembles in various styles. Additionally, a small 
group of string players performs traditional classical 
repertoire. Lab required. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: Students may take MUEN 1131, MUEN 1132, 
MUEN 1133, MUEN 1134, MUEN 1135, MUEN 1136, 
MUEN 1137, MUEN 1138, MUEN 1139, and MUEN 
1140 for a combined total of no more than 8 credit hours. 
 
MUEN 1140 Jazz Combo 
Examples of small instrumental ensembles may include 
but are not limited to wind, string, percussion, piano, and 
mixed ensembles in various styles. Additionally, 
participation in a small jazz ensemble concentrating on 
jazz and commercial music performance styles. Ensemble 
consists of 4-9 instrumental/vocal members. Repertoire 
includes instrumental and vocal music typical of small 
jazz groups. A number of performances both on and off 
campus are given each semester. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: Audition or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: Students may take MUEN 1131, MUEN 1132, 
MUEN 1133, MUEN 1134, MUEN 1135, MUEN 1136, 
MUEN 1137, MUEN 1138, MUEN 1139, and MUEN 
1140 for a combined total of no more than 8 credit hours. 
 
MUEN 1141 Collin Chorale 
Any large chorale ensemble. Additionally, this mixed 
choral ensemble studies and performs a wide variety of 
music representing the choral literature. This ensemble 
may have several performances each semester. This group 
may have an annual tour and open to all interested 
students. Lab required. Prerequisite: Consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: Student may take MUEN 1141 and MUEN 1142 for a 
combined total of no more than 8 credit hours. 
 
MUEN 1142 Expressions Vocal Jazz Ensemble 
Any large choral ensemble. Additionally, this group works 
on a wide variety of jazz styles throughout the year. They 
also work in conjunction with a jazz combo allowing 
them to experience solo jazz singing. This select ensemble 
of 10-16 singers has several performances each semester. 
This group may have an annual tour. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: Audition. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: Student may take MUEN 1141 and MUEN 1142 for a 
combined total of no more than 8 credit hours. 
 
MUEN 1151 A Capella Pop Group 
Examples of small vocal ensembles may include but are 
not limited to glee club, madrigals, opera/musical theater, 
commercial and folk. Additionally, this is a study and 
performance of accompanied and a cappella vocal music 
including contemporary pop and jazz repertoire for 
various sized groups and voice combinations. There may 
be several performances on and off campus each 
semester. Lab required. Prerequisite: Audition. 1 credit 
hour. (A) 
Note: Student may take MUEN 1151, MUEN 1152, MUEN 
1153, and MUEN 1154 for a combined total of no more than 8 
credit hours. 
 
MUEN 1152 Opera Theatre Ensemble 
Example of small vocal ensembles may include but are 
not limited to glee club, madrigals, opera/musical theater, 
commercial, and folk. Additionally, this is a study of 
opera through performances of scenes and full 
productions. Emphasis is placed on the musical and 
dramatic qualities of performance, preparation of 
character, and aspects of language diction from the 
selected production. Lab required. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: Student may take MUEN 1151, MUEN 1152, MUEN 
1153, and MUEN 1154 for a combined total of no more than 8 
credit hours. 
 
MUEN 1153 Chamber Choir 
Example of small vocal ensembles may include but are 
not limited to glee club, madrigals, opera/musical theater, 
commercial, and folk. Additionally, a select audition-only 
choir devoted to performance of an eclectic repertory of 
choral literature for mixed voices (S.A.T.B.). This course 
will focus on the development of vocal technique, 
performance practices, and will culminate with several 
performances throughout the year both on and off 
campus. This group may have an annual tour. Repertoire 
consists of advanced collegiate music. Lab required. 1 
credit hour. (A) 
Note: Student may take MUEN 1151, MUEN 1152, MUEN 
1153, and MUEN 1154 for a combined total of no more than 8 
credit hours. 
 
MUEN 1154 Musical Theatre Ensemble 
Examples of small vocal ensembles may include but are 
not limited to glee club, madrigals, opera/musical theater, 
commercial, and folk. Additionally, this is a study of 
musical theatre through performances of scenes and 
small-scale productions. Emphasis is placed on the 
musical and dramatic qualities of performance, 
 
 
286 
 
preparation of character, and aspects of language diction 
from the selected production. Lab required. 1 credit hour. 
(A) 
Note: Students may take MUEN 1151, MUEN 1152, 
MUEN 1153, and MUEN 1154 for a combined total of no 
more than 8 credit hours. 
 
MUSB 1305 Survey of the Music Business 
An overview of the music industry including songwriting, 
live performance, the record industry, music 
merchandising, contracts and licenses, and career 
opportunities. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
MUSB 1341 Concert Promotion and Venue 
Management 
Concert promotion and venue management. Includes 
considerations in purchasing a club, concert promotion 
and advertising, talent buying, city codes, insurance, Texas 
Alcoholic Beverage Commission Regulation, performance 
rights organization licenses, personnel management and 
concert production and administration. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: MUSB 1305. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
MUSB 2301 Music Marketing 
Methods of music distribution, retailing, and wholesaling. 
Includes identifying a target market, image building, 
distribution (brick and mortar vs. digital delivery), pricing, 
advertising, and marketing mix. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
MUSB 2345 Live Music and Talent Management 
An examination of the role, scope, and activities of the 
talent manager including establishing the artist/manager 
relationship; planning the artist’s career; and developing 
goals, strategies, and tactics with an overall view of the 
live music business. Lab required. Prerequisite: MUSB 
1305. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
MUSB 2350 Commercial Music Project 
The primary objective of this course is to apply the skills 
learned in other Commercial Music courses. This is a 
hands-on project-oriented course aimed at helping 
students create a portfolio of their work. Artists and their 
music will be the focus. Each student must design and 
complete his/her own project with instructor approval. 
Lab required. Prerequisite: Consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
MUSB 2355 Legal Aspects of the Entertainment 
Industry 
Copyright law and the various agreements used in the 
entertainment industry. Emphasizes contracts used by 
music publishers, record companies, artist managers, 
record producers, film and television producers, and 
booking agencies. Prerequisite: MUSB 1305. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
MUSB 2380 Cooperative Education-Music 
Management 
Career-related activities encountered in the student's area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Contact the 
Associate Dean/Director for more information. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
MUSC 1209 Conducting Class 
Introduction to the art of conducting including regular 
and irregular beat patterns, subdivision, and beat pattern 
varieties applied to musical literature and practical 
experiences. Lab required. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
MUSC 1313 Commercial Music Theory I 
Introduction to chord progressions, song forms, and 
harmonic techniques used in commercial music. Topics 
include modern chord notation and chord voicings. 
Prerequisite: MUSI 1303. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
MUSC 1321 Songwriting I 
Introduction to the techniques of writing marketable 
songs including the writing of lyrics and melodies, setting 
lyrics to music, developing lyrical and musical "hooks," 
analyzing the marketplace, and developing a production 
plan for a song demo. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
MUSC 1323 Audio Electronics 
Basic concepts in electricity, Ohm's Law, circuit analysis 
and troubleshooting. Includes soldering techniques, and 
equipment maintenance. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
MUSC 1327 Audio Engineering I 
The tools, personnel and standard workflow of a 
recording studio. Topics include fundamentals of sound 
and overview of tracking, editing, and mixing audio. Lab 
required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
MUSC 1331 MIDI I 
Exploration of Musical Instrument Digital Interface 
(MIDI) systems and applications. Includes the MIDI 
language and applications in the studio environment using 
software-based sequencing programs. Lab required. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
MUSC 1333 Synthesis I 
An exploration of sound synthesis. Includes additive, 
287 
 
subtractive, and modulation-based synthesizers. Lab 
required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
MUSC 1405 Live Sound I 
An overview of the field of live sound. Includes principles 
of live sound and the theory and interconnection of the 
components of a sound reinforcement system. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: MUSC 1327. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
MUSC 2313 Commercial Music Theory II 
Continuation of Commercial Music Theory I. 
Emphasizes harmonic and melodic analysis, extended 
chord theory, and modal and altered scales. Prerequisite: 
MUSC 1313 or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
MUSC 2314 Improvisation Theory I 
Chordal structures of commercial music genres. 
Emphasizes extemporaneous performance. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
MUSC 2330 Commercial Music Arranging and 
Composition 
Presentation of techniques for arranging and composing 
projects in the commercial music industry. Lab required. 
3 credit hours. (W) 
 
MUSC 2345 Synthesis II 
Advanced sound synthesis. Includes hybrid synthesis and 
digital sampling. Lab required. Prerequisite: MUSC 1333. 
3 credit hours. (W) 
 
MUSC 2351 Audio for Video 
Advanced audio techniques for video production. 
Includes synchronization, automated mixdown, audio 
post production for video, and editing techniques. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: ARTV 1343 or MUSC 1327. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
MUSC 2355 MIDI II 
Advanced MIDI concepts and techniques. Includes 
synchronizing MIDI and audio and advanced sequencer 
operation. Prerequisite: MUSC 1331 with a grade of “C” 
or better; or consent of Associate Dean/Director. Lab 
required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
MUSC 2356 Songwriting II 
Continuation in the development of techniques for 
writing marketable songs including the writing of lyrics 
and melodies, setting lyrics to music, developing lyrical 
and musical "hooks," analyzing the marketplace, and 
developing a production plan for a song demo. 
Prerequisite: MUSC 1321, or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
MUSC 2403 Live Sound II 
Overview of stage monitor systems. Includes monitor 
systems set-up and operation and stage management. 
Also covers interactivity between sound management, 
performance quality, and audience experience. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: MUSC 1405. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
MUSC 2427 Audio Engineering II 
Implementation of the recording process, including 
microphones, audio console, multi-track recorder, and 
signal processing devices. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
MUSC 1327 with a grade of "B" or better; or consent of 
Associate Dean/Director. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
MUSC 2447 Audio Engineering III 
Advanced techniques in recording and manipulation of 
audio. Includes digital audio editing, recording techniques, 
and signal processing. Prerequisite: MUSC 2427 with a 
grade of “B” or better; or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. Lab required. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
MUSC 2448 Audio Engineering IV 
Continued enhancement of recording, mixing, arranging, 
and editing. Includes the role of the producer in session 
planning, communication, budgeting, business aspects, 
technical considerations, and music markets. Prerequisite: 
MUSC 2447 with a grade of “B” or better; or consent of 
Associate Dean/Director. Lab required. 4 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
MUSC 2453 Live Sound III 
Advanced concepts of live sound engineering for front-
of-house mix. Includes techniques required to build and 
maintain a live sound mix for an audience. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: MUSC 2403. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
MUSC 2471 Audio Plugins 
Exploration of plugins used in Digital Audio 
Workstations, with special emphasis on industry standard 
third-party developers. Lab required. Prerequisite: MUSC 
2427. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
MUSI 1116 Sight Singing & Ear Training I 
Singing tonal music in treble and bass clefs, and aural 
study of elements of music, such as scales, intervals and 
chords, and dictation of basic rhythm, melody and 
diatonic harmony. Lab required. 1 credit hour. (A) 
 
MUSI 1117 Sight Singing & Ear Training II 
Singing tonal music in various clefs, continued aural study 
of the elements of music, and dictation of intermediate 
rhythm, melody and diatonic harmony. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: MUSI 1116. 1 credit hour. (A) 
 
MUSI 1161 International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) for 
singers 
A study of the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) and 
 
 
288 
 
its application to singing in English, Italian, German, and 
French. 1 credit hour. (A) 
 
MUSI 1181 Piano Class I 
Beginning class instruction in the fundamentals of 
keyboard technique. Additionally, emphasis is given on 
the practical application of music theory involving 
harmonization, transposition and related keyboard skills. 
Lab required. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: Student may take MUSI 1181, MUSI 1182, MUSI 
2181, and MUSI 2182 for a combined total of no more than 4 
credit hours. 
 
MUSI 1182 Piano Class II 
Advanced beginning class instruction in the fundamentals 
of keyboard technique. Additionally, this is a continuation 
of MUSI 1181. Development of two-octave minor scales, 
arpeggios, diatonic chord progressions, and piano 
repertoire. Lab required. Prerequisite: MUSI 1181. 1 
credit hour. (A) 
Note: Student may take MUSI 1181, MUSI 1182, MUSI 
2181, and MUSI 2182 for a combined total of no more than 4 
credit hours. 
 
MUSI 1183 Voice Class 
Class instruction in the fundamentals of singing including 
breathing, tone production, and diction. Designed for 
students with little or no previous voice training. Does 
not apply to a music major degree. Lab required. 1 credit 
hour. (A) 
 
MUSI 1192 Guitar Class 
Class instruction in the fundamental guitar playing, 
including technique, music-reading, fretboard theory, 
melodic and harmonic realizations. Lab required. 1 credit 
hour. (A) 
 
MUSI 1303 Fundamentals of Music 
Introduction to the basic elements of music theory, 
including scales, intervals, keys, triads, elementary ear 
training, notation, meter, and rhythm. Course does not 
apply to a music major degree. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
MUSI 1306 Music Appreciation 
Understanding music through the study of cultural 
periods, major composers, and musical elements, 
illustrated with audio recordings and live performances. 
Course does not apply to a music major degree. 
Additionally, this course conducts an overview of music 
history that includes the study of Western art music - the 
six major eras, composers, their works and musical styles. 
Emphasis is given to vocabulary and critical listening 
skills needed to develop an eclectic taste in music. Music 
Field of Study (FOS) majors must take MUSI 1307. 
Prerequisite: Meet TSI standard for INRW 0315; or 
equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
MUSI 1307 Music Literature 
A survey of the styles and forms of music as it developed 
from the middle ages to the present. This course will 
familiarize the student with cultural context, terminology, 
genres, and notation. Additionally, study of selected 
works in music literature chosen from the six major eras 
of Western art music history. Includes musical styles, 
forms, and composers from the Medieval period to the 
present. Critical listening skills and technical musical 
terms are emphasized in this course. Required for all 
Music Field of Study (FOS) majors. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
MUSI 1310 American Music 
A general survey of various styles of music of the 
Americas, including but not limited to jazz, folk, rock, 
and contemporary music. Additionally, course does not 
apply to a Music Field of Study (FOS) major. Music FOS 
majors must take MUSI 1307. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
MUSI 1311 Music Theory I 
The study of analysis and writing of tonal melody and 
diatonic harmony, including fundamental music concepts, 
scales, intervals, chords, 7th chords, and early four-part 
writing. Analysis of small compositional forms. Optional 
correlated study at the keyboard. Additionally, 
investigation of music modes, transposition, cadences and 
non-harmonic tones, phrase structure, musical textures, 
and four-part voice leading. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
MUSI 1312 Music Theory II 
The study of analysis and writing of tonal melody and 
diatonic harmony, including diatonic chords and seventh 
chords in root position and inversions, non-chord tones, 
and functional harmony. Introduction to more complex 
topics, such as modulation, may occur. Optional 
correlated study at the keyboard. Prerequisite: MUSI 
1311. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
MUSI 2116 Sight Singing & Ear Training III 
Singing more difficult tonal music in various clefs, aural 
study including dictation of more complex rhythm, 
melody, chromatic harmony, and extended tertian 
structures. Lab required. Prerequisite: MUSI 1117. 1 
credit hour. (A) 
Note: Student may take MUSI 2116 and MUSI 2117 for a 
combined total of no more than 4 credit hours. 
 
MUSI 2117 Sight Singing & Ear Training IV 
Singing advanced tonal music and introduction of modal 
and post-tonal melodies. Aural study including dictation 
of advanced rhythm, melody, and harmony. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: MUSI 2116. 1 credit hour. (A) 
289 
 
Note: Student may take MUSI 2116 and MUSI 2117 for a 
combined total of no more than 4 credit hours. 
 
MUSI 2181 Piano Class III 
Intermediate class instruction of keyboard technique. 
Additionally, this is a continuation of MUSI 1182. 
Development of three-octave scales and arpeggios, 
accompaniment patterns, intermediate and 20th century 
piano repertoire, advanced sight reading skills. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: MUSI 1182. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: Student may take MUSI 1181, MUSI 1182, MUSI 
2181, and MUSI 2182 for a combined total of no more than 4 
credit hours. 
 
MUSI 2182 Piano Class IV 
Advanced class instruction of keyboard technique. 
Additionally, this is a continuation of MUSI 2181. 
Culmination of skills including scales and arpeggios four-
octaves hands together, advanced chord progressions, 
repertoire, and sight reading. Prepares music majors for 
piano barrier exams. Lab required. Prerequisite: MUSI 
2181. 1 credit hour. (A) 
Note: Student may take MUSI 1181, MUSI 1182, MUSI 
2181, and MUSI 2182 for a combined total of no more than 4 
credit hours. 
 
MUSI 2311 Music Theory III 
Advanced harmony voice leading, score analysis and 
writing of more advanced tonal harmony including 
chromaticism and extended-tertian structures. Optional 
correlated study at the keyboard. Additionally, study of 
music theory from late Renaissance polyphony through 
Baroque counterpoint and continuing with the chromatic 
harmonies of the Classic period as found within Sonata 
Allegro and Rondo formal structures. Prerequisite: MUSI 
1312. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
MUSI 2312 Music Theory IV 
Continuation of advanced chromaticism and survey of 
analytical and compositional procedures in post-tonal 
music. Optional correlated study at the keyboard. 
Prerequisite: MUSI 2311. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
MUSI 2389 Academic Cooperative 
An instructional program designed to integrate on-
campus study with practical hands-on work experience. 
In conjunction with class seminars, the individual student 
will set specific goals and objectives in the study of music. 
Contact the Associate Dean/Director for more 
information. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
MUSP 1104 Applied Commercial Music: Bass Guitar 
Private instruction in bass guitar with goals related to 
commercial music. Consists of one 100-minute lesson per 
week. Students must remain enrolled in one ensemble 
course. Students must also attend weekly Departmental 
recitals for the semester, and perform for a jury at the end 
of the semester. Prerequisite: Audition and consent of 
Associate Dean/Director. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
MUSP 1105 Applied Commercial Music: Commercial 
Guitar 
Private instruction in commercial guitar with goals related 
to commercial music. Consists of one 100-minute lesson 
per week. Students must remain enrolled in one ensemble 
course. Students must also attend weekly Departmental 
recitals for the semester, and perform for a jury at the end 
of the semester. Prerequisite: Audition and consent of 
Associate Dean/Director. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
MUSP 1110 Applied Commercial Music: Piano 
Private instruction in piano, with goals related to 
commercial music. Consists of one 100-minute lesson per 
week. Students must remain enrolled in one ensemble 
course. Students must also attend weekly Departmental 
recitals for the semester, and perform for a jury at the end 
of the semester. Prerequisite: Audition and consent of 
Associate Dean/Director. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
MUSP 1113 Introductory Group Piano I 
Fundamentals of playing various accompaniment patterns 
with chords. Includes reading standard notation, basic 
scales, and learning introductory improvisational skills. 
Lab required. 1 credit hours. (W) 
 
MUSP 1114 Introductory Group Piano II 
Continuation of playing various accompaniment patterns 
with chords. Includes reading standard notation, scales, 
and learning improvisational skills. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: MUSP 1113 or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
MUSP 1117 Applied Commercial Music: Percussion 
Private instruction in percussion with goals related to 
commercial music. Consists of one 100-minute lesson per 
week. Students must remain enrolled in one ensemble 
course. Students must also attend weekly Departmental 
recitals for the semester, and perform for a jury at the end 
of the semester. Prerequisite: Audition and consent of 
Associate Dean/Director. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
MUSP 1127 Applied Commercial Music: Voice 
Private instruction in voice with goals related to 
commercial music. Consists of one 100-minute lesson per 
week. Students must remain enrolled in one ensemble 
course. Students must also attend weekly Departmental 
recitals for the semester, and perform for a jury at the end 
of the semester. Prerequisite: Audition and consent of 
Associate Dean/Director. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
MUSP 1151 Small Commercial Music Ensemble: 
Recording 
Participation in a small recording ensemble concentrating 
on commercial music performance styles. Prerequisite: 
 
 
290 
 
Audition and consent of Associate Dean/Director. 1 
credit hour. (W) 
 
MUSP 1153 Small Commercial Music Ensemble: 
Rock 
Participation in a rock ensemble concentrating on 
commercial music performance styles. Prerequisite: 
Audition and consent of Associate Dean/Director. 1 
credit hour. (W) 
 
MUSP 1202 Introductory Group Voice 
Introduction to Speech Level Singing philosophy and 
technique with goals related to commercial voice. 
Emphasizes sight singing and harmony singing applicable 
to commercial background singing. Prerequisite: Audition 
and consent of Associate Dean/Director. 2 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
MUSP 2230 Advanced Applied Commercial Music: 
Voice 
Advanced private instruction in voice with goals related 
to commercial music. Consists of one 150-minute lesson 
per week. Students must remain enrolled in one ensemble 
course. Students must also attend weekly Departmental 
recitals for the semester, and perform for a jury at the end 
of the semester. Lab required. Prerequisite: Audition and 
consent of Associate Dean/Director. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
MUSP 2233 Advanced Applied Commercial Music: 
Bass Guitar 
Advanced private instruction in bass guitar with goals 
related to commercial music. Consists of one 150-minute 
lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in one 
ensemble course. Students must also attend weekly 
Departmental recitals for the semester, and perform for a 
jury at the end of the semester. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
Audition and consent of Associate Dean/Director. 2 
credit hours. (W) 
 
MUSP 2235 Advanced Applied Commercial Music: 
Piano 
Advanced private instruction in piano with goals related 
to commercial music. Consists of one 150-minute lesson 
per week. Students must remain enrolled in one ensemble 
course. Students must also attend weekly Departmental 
recitals for the semester, and perform for a jury at the end 
of the semester. Lab required. Prerequisite: Audition and 
consent of Associate Dean/Director. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
MUSP 2237 Advanced Applied Commercial Music: 
Commercial Guitar 
Advanced private instruction in commercial guitar with 
goals related to commercial music. Consists of one 150-
minute lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in 
one ensemble course. Students must also attend weekly 
Departmental recitals for the semester, and perform for a 
jury at the end of the semester. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
Audition and consent of Associate Dean/Director. 2 
credit hours. (W) 
 
MUSP 2249 Advanced Applied Commercial Music: 
Percussion 
Advanced private instruction in percussion with goals 
related to commercial music. Consists of one 150-minute 
lesson per week. Students must remain enrolled in one 
ensemble course. Students must also attend weekly 
Departmental recitals for the semester, and perform for a 
jury at the end of the semester. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
Audition and consent of Associate Dean/Director. 2 
credit hours. (W) 
 
NCBM 004A Mastery Extension for Math Foundations
This Non-Course Based Option is a unique opportunity 
for students who were unsuccessful in MATH 0405. This 
option allows students to gain mastery of Math 
Foundations topics by attending an intensive 2-week 
session during the Wintermester and Maymester sessions. 
Prerequisite: To be eligible, students must have taken the 
final exam and earned a grade of "FD" with an average of 
50-69% in MATH 0405 during the prior semester. 
 
NCBM 005A Mastery Extension for Beginning Algebra
This Non-Course Based Option is a unique opportunity 
for students who were unsuccessful in MATH 0332 or 
MATH 0342. This option allows students to gain mastery 
of Beginning Algebra topics by attending an intensive 2-
week session during the Wintermester and Maymester 
sessions.
 
NCBM 010A Mastery Extension for Intermediate Algebra
This Non-Course Based Option is a unique opportunity 
for students who were unsuccessful in MATH 0314 or 
MATH 0324. This option allows students to gain mastery 
of Intermediate Algebra topics by attending an intensive 
2-week session during the Wintermester and Maymester 
sessions.
 
NUPC 1160 Clinical - Nursing Assistant/Aide and 
Patient Care Assistant/Aide 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Prerequisites: 
291 
 
NURA 1301, NURA 1160, DSAE 1340, and PLAB 1323. 
Corequisite: NUPC 1320. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
NUPC 1320 Patient Care Technician/Assistant 
Training, skills, and knowledge needed to gain 
employment as a Patient Care Technician in a hospital 
setting. Lab required. Prerequisites: NURA 1301, NURA 
1160, DSAE 1340, and PLAB 1323. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
NURA 1160 Clinical-Nursing Aide and Patient Care 
Assistant 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Prerequisite / 
Concurrent Enrollment: NURA 1301. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
NURA 1301 Nurse Aide for Health Care 
Knowledge, skills, and abilities essential to provide basic 
care to residents of long-term care facilities. Topics 
include resident's rights, communication, safety, 
observation, reporting and assisting residents in 
maintaining basic comfort and safety. Emphasis is on 
effective interaction with members of the health care 
team, restorative services, mental health, and social 
service's needs. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
NURS 3210 Transitions to the BSN Role 
Educational and role development opportunities for 
nurses will be examined. This course focuses on the 
baccalaureate-prepared nursing role with emphasis on the 
following topics: Nursing Theory, Professional 
Foundations of Practice, Critical Abilities of the 
Baccalaureate Nurse, Quality and Safety for Individuals, 
Families, Aggregates and Society, and selected 
Professional Nursing Concepts. The roles of the 
baccalaureate-prepared nurses and standards that define 
professionalism are explored. Prerequisite: Admission to 
the RN-to-BSN program. 2 credit hours. 
 
NURS 3220 Health Promotion Across Lifespan 
The role of the nurse in promoting health and reducing 
risk behaviors of individuals and families across the 
lifespan is the focus of this course. Exemplars of 
nutrition, physical activity and stress management will be 
examined with an emphasis on the impact of genetics, 
values, lifestyle, and cultural influences. Client teaching as 
an essential function of the nurse is emphasized. In the 
clinical practicum, the student will facilitate his/ her 
understanding of factors that enhance health promotion 
and risk reduction through the development of a long-
term relationship with a client and family. Prerequisite: 
Admission to the RN-to-BSN program. 2 credit hours. 
 
NURS 3330 Ethics in Health Care 
This course builds on the ethical and legal foundations 
for professional nursing practice and health care services. 
Ethical, legal, and moral/social principles along with the 
ANA Code for Nurses are applied to selected common 
and complex health care related situations. The role of 
ethics in the development of professionalism and 
professional values is explored. Prerequisite: Admission 
to the RN-to-BSN program. 3 credit hours. 
 
NURS 3340 Population-focused Community Health 
I 
Introduces the concept of the community of 
persons/patients, families, and populations as the adult 
and geriatric patient in the healthcare system and the roles 
of the nurse in community services. Nurse roles include 
public policy, provision of primary care, prevention of 
disease or health risk, education and health promotion, 
and restoration. Prerequisite: Admission to the RN-to-
BSN program. 3 credit hours. 
 
NURS 3350 Advanced Health Assessment 
An in-depth coverage of a comprehensive health 
assessment with an emphasis on health promotion and 
how this concept is applied within nursing practice. This 
course focuses on the techniques of data collection and 
physical assessment and applying these across the lifespan 
and in a variety of diverse population groups and 
populations. This course lends itself to a concept-based 
approach. Prerequisite: Admission to the RN-to-BSN 
program. 3 credit hours. 
 
NURS 3450 Advanced Health Assessment / Clinical 
An in-depth coverage of a comprehensive health 
assessment with an emphasis on health promotion and 
how this concept is applied within nursing practice. This 
course focuses on the techniques of data collection and 
physical assessment and applying these across the lifespan 
and in a variety of diverse population groups and 
populations. This course lends itself to a concept-based 
approach. Clinical/Lab required. Prerequisite: Admission 
to the RN-to-BSN program. 4 credit hours. 
 
NURS 4115 Healthcare Organization 
This course explores the U.S. health care delivery 
organizations and payment systems. Perspectives of 
providers, institutions, insurers, and health care workers 
are described. The role of information in the continuity of 
care among institutions and inter-disciplinary care teams 
is articulated. The electronic information infrastructure is 
examined with implications for nursing practice. 
Prerequisite: Admission to the RN-to-BSN program. 1 
credit hour. 
 
NURS 4225 Nursing Informatics 
This course explores evidence-based research and 
practice through health care informatics. Includes 
informatics theories, networks, skills, technology, system 
implementation, and management of data bases. The role 
of information in the continuity of care among 
 
 
292 
 
institutions and inter-disciplinary care teams is articulated. 
The electronic information infrastructure, including 
telehealth and individually-customized health care, is 
examined with implications for nursing practice. 
Prerequisite: Admission to the RN-to-BSN program. 2 
credit hours. 
 
NURS 4235 Health Care Quality 
Provides a multidisciplinary background in the science of 
healthcare quality management. Students will learn to 
develop and plan for execution of quality improvement 
plans, using a quality indicator assessment program, as the 
framework to develop a paper that identifies quality 
indicators, their measurements and nursing interventions 
to improve the quality measurement. Valued-based 
purchasing will be defined and interventions to assure 
quality and cost containment will be discussed. 
Prerequisite: Admission to the RN-to-BSN program. 2 
credit hours. 
 
NURS 4345 Population-focused Community Health 
II 
Introduces the concept of the community of 
persons/patients, families, and populations as the 
maternal and pediatric patient in the healthcare system 
and the roles of the nurse in community services. Nurse 
roles include public policy, provision of primary care, 
prevention of disease or health risk, education and health 
promotion, and restoration. Prerequisite: Admission to 
the RN-to-BSN program. 3 credit hours. 
 
NURS 4354 Professional Project 
This course requires the registered nurse to synthesize 
knowledge acquired in the RN-BSN curriculum toward 
the development of the Professional Nursing role. 
Integrated content expectations are evolving issues, 
lifelong learning, impact of cultural issues, and promotion 
of the nursing profession. Practicum project required. 
Prerequisite: Admission to the RN-to-BSN program and 
Associate Dean/Director approval required. 3 credit 
hours. 
 
NURS 4355 Research and Evidence-based Practice 
This course provides a beginning foundation for the use 
of research in practice through a synthesis of introductory 
research knowledge with emphasis on writing, and 
scholarly exchange. The knowledge gained in this course 
prepares the student to understand the language of 
research and the scientific process. This course will 
prepare the student to understand the steps of the 
evidenced-based practice process and identify various 
EBP models to translate evidence into practice. The 
topics of articulating the clinical questions, using 
electronic databases to locate evidence, evaluating levels 
of evidence, and critically appraising the evidence to 
translate into the best evidence will be explored. Ethical 
issues in research and evidence-based practice will be 
discussed. The course focuses on enhancing the student's 
ability to read, comprehend, critically appraise, and apply 
the best evidence to the professional practice of nursing. 
Prerequisite: Admission to the RN-to-BSN program. 3 
credit hours. 
 
NURS 4365 Leadership and Management 
This course emphasizes leadership and management 
theories in communication and conflict resolution, 
budgeting, human resource management, quality and 
safety, risk management, change, delegation, decision 
making, and current issues and trends. Prerequisite: 
Admission to the RN-to-BSN program. 3 credit hours. 
 
NURS 4465 Leadership and Management / Clinical 
This course emphasizes leadership and management 
theories in communication and conflict resolution, 
budgeting, human resource management, quality and 
safety, risk management, change, delegation, decision 
making, and current issues and trends. Clinical 
experiences focus on management of issues and 
interactive observation of leaders and managers in a 
variety of settings. Prerequisite: Admission to the RN-to-
BSN program. 4 credit hours. 
 
OSHT 1305 OSHA Regulations - Construction 
Industry 
A study of Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration (OSHA) regulations pertinent to the 
construction industry. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
OSHT 1307 Construction Site Safety and Health 
Introduction to safety requirements for construction sites 
including occupational health and environmental 
controls. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
OSHT 1309 Physical Hazards Control 
A study of the physical hazards in industry and the 
methods of workplace design and redesign to control 
these hazards. Emphasis on the regulation codes and 
standards associated with the control of physical hazards. 
Lab required. Prerequisite: OSHT 1307. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
OSHT 1313 Accident Prevention, Inspection, and 
Investigation 
Provides a basis for understanding the nature of 
occupational hazard recognition, accident prevention, loss 
reduction, inspection techniques, and accident 
investigation analysis. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
OSHT 1316 Material Handling 
Proper methods for material handling and storage 
including safety practices, proper equipment usage, 
293 
 
engineering controls, and personal protective equipment. 
Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
OSHT 2309 Safety Program Management 
Examine the major safety management issues that affect 
the workplace including safety awareness, loss control, 
regulatory issues, and human behavior modification. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: OSHT 1307. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
OSHT 2310 Principles of Safety Engineering 
Methods to predict, eliminate, or reduce unsafe 
conditions at the design and construction stage utilizing 
engineering controls. Includes methods of analysis, 
prioritization, and implementation of control measures 
for potentially hazardous situations in the workplace. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: OSHT 1307. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
OSHT 2320 Safety Training Presentation 
Techniques 
Principles of developing and presenting effective 
industrial/business training. Emphasis on instructor 
qualifications and responsibilities, principles of teaching 
including use of teaching aids and presentation skills. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: OSHT 1313. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
OSHT 2337 Advanced Risk Management 
An exploration of safety management systems such as 
OSHAS, ANSI, and ISO. OSHAS Guidelines for 
Implementation; Risk Manager Standards Vocabulary for 
Risk Management Principles and Risk Assessment 
Techniques. The FAA Safety Management Systems and 
other similar programs. Lab required. Prerequisite: OSHT 
1309. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
OSHT 2380 Cooperative Education - Occupational 
Safety and Health Technology/Technician 
Career-related activities encountered in the student's area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Contact the 
Associate Dean/Director for more information. 
Prerequisite: Departmental Permit. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
PFPB 1306 Basic Blueprint Reading for Plumbers 
Introduction to reading and interpreting working 
drawings. Includes symbols and abbreviations and the use 
of sketching techniques to create isometric and 
orthographic drawings of drain, waste, vent, hot and cold 
water, and gas piping components. Lab required. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
PFPB 1321 Plumbing Maintenance and Repair 
Instruction in the practices and procedures employed by a 
plumber including public relations. Lab required. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
PFPB 1323 Plumbing Codes I 
State and local plumbing codes and the application of 
potable water, waste water, and gas systems relating to 
residential and light commercial settings. Lab required. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
PFPB 1347 Backflow Prevention 
Principles, practices, and regulations of backflow. 
Includes backpressure, public health, laws and 
responsibilities, mechanics and use of backflow devices, 
and equipment testing used in backflow devices. Lab 
required. Prerequisites: PFPB 1321 and PFPB 1350. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
PFPB 1350 Plumbing and Pipefitting Equipment 
and Safety 
Safe use of hand tools, power tools, rigging, and power 
equipment used in the plumbing trade for installation of 
different plumbing systems. Lab required. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
PFPB 1371 Plumbing Fundamentals 
Introduction to the basic principles of plumbing. Topics 
include drains, vents, water lines, gas lines and plumbing 
fixtures. Note: This course is designed for non-plumbing 
majors. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
PFPB 2308 Piping Standards and Materials 
Identification, description, and application of piping 
standards and specifications. Includes identification and 
use of various metallic and non-metallic piping materials, 
identification and installation of valves, and material take-
offs. Lab required. Prerequisite: PFPB 1321. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
PFPB 2309 Residential Construction Plumbing I 
Skill development in the procedures and techniques 
employed by a plumber in the rough-in and top-out 
stages of a new home or the remodeling of an older 
home. Lab required. Prerequisites/Concurrent 
Enrollment: PFPB 1321 and PFPB 1350. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
PFPB 2336 Commercial Construction and Fixture 
Setting 
Practices and procedures employed by a plumber in the 
common construction in a commercial building including 
drain, waste, and vent systems, water systems, and fixture 
installations. Lab required. Prerequisites: PFPB 1321 and 
PFPB 1350. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
PFPB 2349 Field Measuring, Sketching, and Layout 
Field dimensioning, measuring, sketching, and layout of 
 
 
294 
 
future process piping and the use, care, and setup of 
transit and level. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
PFPB 2371 Advanced Plumbing Practices 
Introduction to and familiarization with water pressure 
booster and recirculation systems, indirect and special 
wastes, hydronic and solar heating systems, private water 
well systems, private waste disposal systems, swimming 
pools and hot tubs, plumbing for mobile homes and 
travel trailer parks, and introduction to medical gas and 
vacuum systems. Lab required. Prerequisites: PFPB 1323, 
PFPB 1350, and PFPB 2349. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
PHIL 1301 Introduction to Philosophy 
A study of major issues in philosophy and/or the work of 
major philosophical figures in philosophy. Topics in 
philosophy may include theories of reality, theories of 
knowledge, theories of value, and their practical 
applications. Additionally, texts studied will be from 
ancient, medieval, and modern sources. Prerequisite: Meet 
TSI college-readiness standard for Reading and Writing; 
or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
PHIL 1304 Introduction to World Religions 
A comparative study of world religions, including but not 
limited to Hinduism, Buddhism, Judaism, Christianity, 
and Islam. Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness 
standard for Reading and Writing; or equivalent.  3 credit 
hours. (A) 
 
PHIL 2303 Introduction to Formal Logic 
The purpose of the course is to introduce the student to 
symbolic logic, including syllogisms, propositional and 
predicate logic, and logical proofs in a system of rules. 
Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness standard for 
Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
PHIL 2306 Introduction to Ethics 
The systematic evaluation of classical and/or 
contemporary ethical theories concerning the good life, 
human conduct in society, morals, and standards of value. 
Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness standard for 
Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
PHIL 2307 Introduction to Social and Political 
Philosophy 
A study of major issues in social and political theory 
and/or the work of major philosophical figures in this 
area.  Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness standard 
for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
PHIL 2321 Philosophy of Religion 
A study of the major issues in the philosophy of religion 
such as the existence and nature of God, the relationships 
between faith and reason, the nature of religious language, 
religious experience, and the problem of evil. Prerequisite: 
Meet TSI college-readiness standard for Reading and 
Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
PHRA 1102 Pharmacy Law 
Overview of federal and state laws governing the practice 
of pharmacy. The role of the pharmacy technician and the 
pharmacist and their associated responsibilities. Includes 
Code of Ethics, patient confidentiality, and a comparison 
of legal and ethical aspects. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
PHRA 1160 Clinical - Pharmacy 
Technician/Assistant 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
PHRA 1201 Introduction to Pharmacy 
An overview of the qualifications, operational guidelines, 
and job duties of a pharmacy technician. 2 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
PHRA 1205 Drug Classification 
A study of pharmaceutical drugs, abbreviations, 
classifications, dosages, side effects, and routes of 
administration. Lab required. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
PHRA 1209 Pharmaceutical Mathematics I 
Solving pharmaceutical calculation problems encountered 
in the preparation and distribution of drugs. Lab required. 
2 credit hours. (W) 
 
PHRA 1243 Pharmacy Technician Certification 
Review 
A review of major topics covered on the national 
Pharmacy Technician Certification Examination (PTCE). 
2 credit hours. (W) 
 
PHRA 1260 Clinical - Pharmacy 
Technician/Assistant 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
PHRA 1313 Community Pharmacy Practice 
Introduction to the skills necessary to process, prepare, 
label, and maintain records of prescriptions in a 
community pharmacy to include customer service, count 
and pour techniques, prescription calculations, drug 
selection and preparation, over-the-counter drugs, 
inventory management and legal parameters. Lab 
required. Prerequisite/Concurrent Enrollment: PHRA 
1209. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
PHRA 1347 Pharmaceutical Mathematics II 
Advanced concepts of Pharmaceutical Mathematics. Lab 
295 
 
required. Prerequisite/Concurrent Enrollment: PHRA 
1209. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
PHRA 1349 Institutional Pharmacy Practice 
Fundamentals of the diverse roles and practice of 
pharmacy technicians in an institutional pharmacy setting. 
In-depth coverage of hospital pharmacy organization, 
work flow and personnel, safety techniques, data entry, 
packaging and labeling operations, inpatient drug 
distribution systems including investigational drugs, 
continuous quality improvement and inventory control. 
Lab required. Prerequisite/Concurrent Enrollment: 
PHRA 1209. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
PHRA 1441 Pharmacy Drug Therapy and Treatment 
Study of therapeutic agents, their classifications, 
properties, actions, and effects on the human body and 
their role in the management of disease. Lab required. 
Prerequisites: PHRA 1313 and PHRA 1349. 4 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
PHRA 1445 Compounding Sterile Preparations 
The process of compounding sterile preparations and 
aseptic technique within legal and regulatory guidelines 
specified by USP <797> standards. Lab required. 
Prerequisites: PHRA 1209 and PHRA 1349. 4 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
PHTC 1300 Photo Digital Imaging I 
An introduction to computer and software instruction for 
imaging. Includes color, gray scale, image conversion, 
presentation, and ethics. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
PHTC 1311. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
PHTC 1311 Fundamentals of Photography/Digital 
An introduction to camera operation and image 
production, composition, correct exposure and proper 
lighting. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
PHTC 1341 Color Photography I 
Examination of color theory as it applies to photography. 
Emphasis on color concepts and the intricacies of seeing 
and photographing in color. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
PHTC 1311. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
PHTC 1343 Expressive Photography 
A study of formal, professional, and individual uses of 
photography by applying photographic technology to 
personalized needs. Emphasis on creative visual thinking 
and problem solving and the exploration of personal 
vision. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
PHTC 1345 Illustrative Photography I 
Instruction in the technical aspects involved in 
commercial photography. Topics include lighting 
equipment, techniques of production photography, 
reproduction principles, illustrative techniques, and 
advertising. Lab required. Prerequisite: PHTC 1353. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
PHTC 1347 Landscape Photography 
Skill development in the inspection of the landscape 
visually and photographically utilizing various camera 
formats. Topics include exploration of historic, 
geographical, and cultural locations, and review of 
landscape photographers. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
ARTS 2348 or ARTS 2356 or PHTC 1311. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
PHTC 1351 Photojournalism I 
Presentation of photographic techniques used by 
photojournalists in newspapers, magazines, trade 
publications and digital media to include news, feature, 
sports, editorial portraits, and photo essays. Includes a 
study of layout design and the freelance market. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: PHTC 1311. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
PHTC 1353 Portraiture I 
Skill development in the photographic principles of 
portrait lighting, posing, and subject rapport. This is a 
foundation course in photographic portraiture. 
Assignments are designed to provide both aesthetic 
challenges as well as comprehensive studio technique. All 
students must participate in class demos and stick close to 
prescribed procedures on assignments in order to 
maintain studio privileges. There will be a mixture of 
color and black and white materials used, with accent on 
studio time rather than darkroom or computer time. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: PHTC 1311. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
PHTC 1371 Book, Design, and Presentation 
Structure and creation of promotional material and one-
of-a-kind material, with emphasis on composition and 
design elements. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
PHTC 2308 Wedding Photography 
Introduction to the processes and concepts of 
photographing a wedding to include booking, 
photographing, and post-production. Lab required. 
Prerequisites: PHTC 1300, and PHTC 2353 or PHTC 
1351. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
PHTC 2331 Architectural Photography 
Study of the equipment, processes, and procedures 
necessary for the photography of building exteriors and 
interiors, dusk/night and night architectural landscapes, 
and construction progress. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
PHTC 1311. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
PHTC 2340 Photographic Studio Management 
In-depth study of photography business management, 
pricing, market analysis, promotion, networking, job 
acquisition, and photographic equipment analysis. Lab 
 
 
296 
 
required. Prerequisite: PHTC 2349 or PHTC 2353. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
PHTC 2342 Fashion Photography 
Skill development in fashion photography in terms of 
trends and techniques included in studio and location 
work. Emphasizes model direction and lighting control. 
Lab required. Prerequisite: PHTC 1353. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
PHTC 2343 Portfolio Development 
A culmination experience for the evaluation of the 
student’s photographic competencies. Includes 
association with a professional photographic 
organization, completion of portfolio, professional self-
presentation, comprehensive exam, and seminars in areas 
of photographic interest. Prerequisite: Consent of 
Associate Dean/Director. Lab required. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
PHTC 2349 Photo Digital Imaging II 
Advanced concepts in the use of the computer and 
software for photographic manipulation and output. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: PHTC 1300. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
PHTC 2353 Portraiture II 
Advanced concepts in the study of principles of effective 
portraiture with specific emphasis on unique presentation 
and environmental and location studies. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: PHTC 1353. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
PHTC 2371 Video Production for Photographers 
This is a foundation course in professional video 
production for photographers, including video capture, 
editing, sound recording, color grading, and delivery. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: PHTC 1311. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
PHTC 2380 Cooperative Education - Commercial 
Photography 
Career-related activities encountered in the student’s area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Prerequisite: 
Consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
PHYS 1401 College Physics I 
Lecture: Fundamental principles of physics, using algebra 
and trigonometry; the principles and applications of 
classical mechanics and thermodynamics, including 
harmonic motion, mechanical waves and sound, physical 
systems, Newton's Laws of Motion, and gravitation and 
other fundamental forces; with emphasis on problem 
solving. Lab: Laboratory activities will reinforce 
fundamental principles of physics, using algebra and 
trigonometry; the principles and applications of classical 
mechanics and thermodynamics, including harmonic 
motion, mechanical waves and sound, physical systems, 
Newton's Laws of Motion, and gravitation and other 
fundamental forces; emphasis will be on problem solving. 
Lab required. Prerequisites: MATH 1314, and either 
MATH 1316 or MATH 2412. 4 credit hours. (A) 
 
PHYS 1402 College Physics II 
Lecture: Fundamental principles of physics, using algebra 
and trigonometry; the principles and applications of 
electricity and magnetism, including circuits, 
electrostatics, electromagnetism, waves, sound, light, 
optics, and modern physics topics; with emphasis on 
problem solving. Lab: Laboratory activities will reinforce 
fundamental principles of physics, using algebra and 
trigonometry; the principles and applications of electricity 
and magnetism, including circuits, electrostatics, 
electromagnetism, waves, sound, light, optics, and 
modern physics topics; with emphasis on problem 
solving. Lab required. Prerequisite: PHYS 1401 in the last 
five years with a grade of C or better. 4 credit hours. (A) 
 
PHYS 1403 Stars and Galaxies 
Introduction to stars and galaxies; basic tools and 
concepts in astronomy and physics are discussed. Subjects 
studied include stellar evolution, supernovae, black holes, 
neutron stars, galaxies, and quasars. Laboratory exercises, 
night observations, planetarium and observatory visits 
combine to enhance lecture material. Lab required. 
Prerequisites: TSI Math score of 910-949 with a 
diagnostic score of 5, and TSI college-readiness standard 
for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 4 credit hours. (A) 
 
PHYS 1404 Solar System 
Introduction to the solar system; basic tools and concepts 
in astronomy and physics are discussed. Subjects studied 
include planets, moons, asteroids, comets, solar system 
formation, and solar system exploration. Laboratory 
exercises, night observations, planetarium and 
observatory visits combine to enhance lecture material. 
Lab required. Prerequisites: TSI Math score of 910-949 
with a diagnostic score of 5, and TSI college-readiness 
standard for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 4 credit 
hours. (A) 
 
PHYS 1405 Elementary Physics I - Conceptual 
Physics 
This course presents concepts of classical and modern 
physics with application to biology and health sciences. 
What students should bring to this course is curiosity 
about how the world works. Intended for liberal arts, 
health science, or any majors. Lab required. Prerequisites: 
TSI Math score of 910-949 with a diagnostic score of 5, 
297 
 
and TSI college-readiness standard for Reading and 
Writing; or equivalent. 4 credit hours. (A) 
 
PHYS 1410 Physics of Music and Sound 
This course is a study of the physics governing 
production, transmission and perception of sound. The 
focus is on the physical characteristics of sound, as well as 
the basic physical relationships that govern all vibrations 
and waves. We will also consider how sound is affected 
by the environment (acoustics) and how sound is 
physically and physiologically perceived. Laboratory 
exercises and classroom demonstrations combine to 
enhance lecture material. Lab required. Prerequisites: TSI 
Math score of 910-949 with a diagnostic score of 5, and 
TSI college-readiness standard for Reading and Writing; 
or equivalent. 4 credit hours. (A) 
 
PHYS 1415 Physical Science I 
Investigation of everyday phenomena of the physical 
world, which helps students to achieve a well-grounded 
understanding of selected science concepts as well as the 
skills that enable and encourage rational independent 
thinking. Lab required. Prerequisites: TSI Math score of 
910-949 with a diagnostic score of 5, and TSI college-
readiness standard for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 
4 credit hours. (A) 
 
PHYS 1417 Physical Science II 
Investigation of topics in physics, chemistry, geology, and 
meteorology in the context of a one-semester astronomy 
course. Topics will include: Celestial measurement of 
time, calendars, and seasons; geology and meteorology of 
the Earth, Moon, and planets; Chemistry and physics of 
stars and galaxies; and the interdisciplinary question of life 
beyond Earth. Laboratory exercises and night 
observations combine to enhance lecture material. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: TSI Math score of 910-949 with a 
diagnostic score of 5, and TSI college-readiness standard 
for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 4 credit hours. (A) 
 
PHYS 2389 Academic Co-op Physics 
Integrates on-campus study with practical hands-on work 
experience in physics. In conjunction with class seminars, 
the student will set specific goals and objectives in the 
study of physics. Contact the Associate Dean/Director 
for more information. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
PHYS 2425 University Physics I 
Lecture: Fundamental principles of physics, using calculus 
for science, computer science, and engineering majors; 
the principles and applications of classical and modern 
mechanics, including harmonic motion and physical 
systems, and the laws of thermodynamics; and emphasis 
on problem solving. Lab: Basic laboratory experiments 
supporting theoretical principles presented in the lecture 
section involving the principles and applications of 
classical mechanics, including harmonic motion and 
physical systems; experimental design, data collection and 
analysis, and preparation of laboratory reports. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: MATH 2413 equivalent within the 
last five years with a grade of "C" or better. 
Prerequisite/Concurrent enrollment: MATH 2414 
equivalent. 4 credit hours. (A) 
 
PHYS 2426 University Physics II 
Lecture: Principles of physics for science, computer 
science, and engineering majors, using calculus, involving 
the principles of electricity and magnetism, including 
circuits, electromagnetism, waves, sound, light, and 
optics, and modern physics. Lab: Laboratory experiments 
supporting theoretical principles presented in the lecture 
section involving the principles of electricity and 
magnetism, including circuits, electromagnetism, waves, 
sound, light, and optics; experimental design, data 
collection and analysis, and preparation of laboratory 
reports. Lab required. Prerequisites: MATH 2414 
equivalent, and PHYS 2425 within the last five years with 
a grade of "C" or better. 4 credit hours. (A) 
 
PLAB 1260 Clinical - Phlebotomy 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Prerequisite: 
Department Permit. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
PLAB 1323 Phlebotomy 
Skill development in the performance of a variety of 
blood collection methods using proper techniques and 
standard precautions. Includes vacuum collection devices, 
syringes, capillary skin puncture, butterfly needles and 
blood culture, and specimen collection on adults, 
children, and infants. Emphasis on infection prevention, 
patient identification, specimen labeling, quality 
assurance, specimen handling, processing, accessioning, 
professionalism, ethics, and medical terminology. Lab 
required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
POFI 2301 Word Processing-MS Word 
Word processing software focusing on business 
applications. Lab required. Prerequisite/ Concurrent 
enrollment: POFT 1329. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
POFI 2331 Desktop Publishing for the Office-MS 
Office 
In-depth coverage of desktop publishing terminology, 
text editing, and use of design principles. Emphasis on 
layout techniques, graphics, multiple page displays, and 
business applications. Lab required. Prerequisite: POFI 
2301. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
POFT 1307 Proofreading and Editing 
Instruction in proofreading and editing skills necessary to 
 
 
298 
 
assure accuracy in business documents. Lab required. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
POFT 1319 Records and Information Management I 
Introduction to basic records information management 
systems including manual and electronic filing. Lab 
required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
POFT 1329 Beginning Keyboarding 
Skill development of keyboarding techniques. Emphasis 
on development of acceptable speed and accuracy levels 
and formatting basic documents. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
POFT 1349 Administrative Office Procedures II 
In-depth coverage of office procedures with emphasis on 
decision-making, goal setting, management theories, and 
critical thinking. To be completed during the last semester 
of the Business Office Support Systems degree or 
certificate. Lab required. Prerequisites: ITSC 1309, POFI 
2301, POFT 1307, and POFT 1319. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
POFT 1380 Cooperative Education-Administrative 
Assistant and Secretarial Science, General 
Career-related activities encountered in the student's area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Contact the 
Associate Dean/Director for more information. 
Prerequisite: Consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
POFT 2312 Business Correspondence and 
Communication 
Development of writing and presentation skills to 
produce effective business communications. Lab 
required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
POFT 2331 Administrative Project Solutions 
Advanced concepts of project management and office 
procedures integrating software applications, critical 
thinking, and problem-solving skills. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
POFT 2371 Strategies in Social Media 
This course focuses on creating professional business 
presence by using current social media applications. 
Topics will include strategies, effective communication, 
networking, audience engagement, best practices and 
using social media apps to communicate, engage, and 
market to business customers and stakeholders. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
PSGT 1205 Neurophysiology of Sleep 
Review of the human central nervous system as related to 
sleep. Emphasis on associated wave patterns and 
collection and utilization of sleep histories. Major 
Requirement: AAS - Polysomnographic Technology. 2 
credit hours. (W) 
 
PSGT 1215 Introduction to Polysomnography 
Introduction to the history of sleep medicine and the role 
of the technologist in current practice settings. Lab 
required. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
PSGT 1260 Certificate Clinical I-Polysomnography 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Prerequisite: 
Admitted to the Certificate -Polysomnographic 
Technology Program. Corequisite: PSGT 1400. Major 
Requirement: Certificate - Polysomnographic 
Technology. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
PSGT 1310 Neuroanatomy and Physiology 
Basic neuroanatomy and physiology. Includes neurologic 
history, neurologic exam, and diagnostic tools applied to 
the study of various neurologic disorders. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
PSGT 1340 Sleep Disorders 
Disorders that affect sleep. Includes insomnia, circadian 
rhythm disorders, narcolepsy, sleep disordered breathing, 
REM Behavior, movement and neuromuscular disorders, 
medical, and psychiatric. Prerequisite: PSGT 1310. Major 
Requirement: AAS or Certificate - Polysomnographic 
Technology. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
PSGT 1360 AAS Clinical I-Polysomnography 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Prerequisite: PSGT 
1400. Major Requirement: AAS-Polysomnographic 
Technology. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
PSGT 1400 Polysomnography I 
Introduction to polysomnographic technology. Includes 
terminology, instrumentation, patient safety, infection 
control, recording and monitoring techniques, 
documentation, professional issues, and patient-
technologist interactions. Lab required. Major 
Requirement: AAS or Certificate - Polysomnographic 
Technology. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
PSGT 2205 Sleep Scoring and Staging 
Development of skills for sleep scoring, staging, and 
record preparation. Lab required. Prerequisite: PSGT 
1400. Major Requirement: AAS or Certificate - 
Polysomnographic Technology. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
PSGT 2250 Infant and Pediatric Polysomnography 
Sleep physiology and the normal sleep patterns of the 
299 
 
infant and pediatric population. Includes opportunities to 
perform a pediatric study. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
PSGT 1400. Major Requirement: AAS or Certificate - 
Polysomnographic Technology. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
PSGT 2260 Certificate Clinical II - Polysomnography 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Prerequisite: PSGT 
1260. Major Requirement: Certificate - Polysomnographic 
Technology. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
PSGT 2271 Pharmacology for Polysomnography 
Discusses the basic principles of pharmacology and the 
clinical and pharmacological treatment of sleep disorders. 
Addresses the use of sleep medication in children, 
adolescents, and the elderly. Examines the administration, 
mode of action, and the physiological effects of 
pharmacological agents on sleep. Prerequisite: PSGT 
1205. Major Requirement: AAS - Polysomnographic 
Technology. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
PSGT 2272 Polysomnography Exam Preparation 
Comprehensive review to optimize polysomnography 
credentialing exam success. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
Consent of Associate Dean/Director. Major 
Requirement: AAS or Certificate - Polysomnographic 
Technology. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
PSGT 2360 AAS Clinical II - Polysomnography 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Prerequisite: PSGT 
1360. Major Requirement: AAS Polysomnographic 
Technology. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
PSGT 2361 AAS Clinical III - Polysomnography 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Prerequisite: PSGT 
2360. Major Requirement: AAS Polysomnographic 
Technology. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
PSGT 2374 Clinical Sleep Education 
Overview of the role of the Clinical Sleep Educator, 
including patient education delivery styles, examination of 
patient learning styles, and a review to optimize 
credentialing exam success on the Certification in Clinical 
Sleep Health (CCSH) Exam. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
Consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
PSGT 2411 Polysomnography II 
Current practices in polysomnography. Includes the use 
of specialized equipment used to record and monitor 
various physiological parameters involved with sleep 
testing. Emphasizes sleep disorders, theory of testing and 
treatment procedures, and analysis of polysomnography 
data. Lab required. Prerequisite: PSGT 1400. Major 
Requirement: AAS or Certificate - Polysomnographic 
Technology. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
PSTR 1301 Fundamentals of Baking 
Fundamentals of baking including dough, quick breads, 
pies, cakes, cookies, and tarts. Instruction in flours, 
fillings, and ingredients. Topics include baking 
terminology, tool and equipment use, formula 
conversions, functions of ingredients, and the evaluation 
of baked products. Professional chef uniform and kitchen 
tools required. Lab required. Prerequisite: Mandatory 
Culinary / Pastry Arts Orientation. 3 credit hours. (W) 
Note: Culinary lab classes require extended periods of time standing 
in place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds), reaching, bending, 
and working around open flames and with cleaning chemicals. 
 
PSTR 1305 Breads and Rolls 
Concentration on fundamentals of chemically and yeast 
raised breads and rolls. Instruction on commercial 
preparation of a wide variety of products. Professional 
chef uniform and kitchen tools required. Lab required. 
Prerequisites: CHEF 1305 with a grade of "C" or better 
and PSTR 1301 with a grade of "C" or better. 3 credit 
hours. (W)  
Note: Culinary lab classes require extended periods of time standing 
in place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds), reaching, bending, 
and working around open flames and with cleaning chemicals. 
 
PSTR 1306 Cake Decorating I 
Introduction to skills, concepts and techniques of cake 
decorating. Professional chef uniform and kitchen tools 
required. Lab required. Prerequisites: CHEF 1305 with a 
grade of "C" or better and PSTR 1301 with a grade of 
"C" or better. 3 credit hours. (W) 
Note: Culinary lab classes require extended periods of time standing 
in place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds), reaching, bending, 
and working around open flames and with cleaning chemicals. 
 
PSTR 1310 Pies, Tarts, Teacakes, and Cookies 
Focus on preparation of American and European style 
pie and tart fillings and dough, cookies, teacakes, custard 
and batters. Instruction of finishing and presentation 
techniques. Professional chef uniform and kitchen tools 
required. Lab required. Prerequisites: CHEF 1305 with a 
grade of "C" or better and PSTR 1301 with a grade of 
"C" or better. 3 credit hours. (W) 
Note: Culinary lab classes require extended periods of time standing 
in place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds), reaching, bending, 
and working around open flames and with cleaning chemicals. 
 
PSTR 1312 Laminated Dough, Pate a Choux, and 
Donuts 
Focus on preparation of laminated dough to include puff 
 
 
300 
 
pastry, croissant, Danish and a variety of pate a choux 
products and donuts. Fillings and finishing techniques 
included. Professional chef uniform and kitchen tools 
required. Lab required. Prerequisite: PSTR 1310. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
Note: Culinary lab classes require extended periods of time standing 
in place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds), reaching, bending, 
and working around open flames and with cleaning chemicals. 
 
PSTR 1340 Plated Desserts 
Preparation and service of hot and cold desserts with a 
focus on individual desserts, a la minute preparations, and 
numerous components within one preparation. Emphasis 
on station organization, timing, and service coordination 
for restaurant dessert production. Professional chef 
uniform and kitchen tools required. Lab required. 
Prerequisites: CHEF 1305 with a grade of "C" or better 
and PSTR 1301 with a grade of "C" or better. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
Note: Culinary lab classes require extended periods of time standing 
in place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds), reaching, bending, 
and working around open flames and with cleaning chemicals. 
 
PSTR 1342 Quantity Bakeshop Production 
Advanced baking techniques to include volume 
production of a variety of breads and desserts. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: PSTR 1343. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
PSTR 1343 Bakery Operations and Management 
Introduction to management, marketing, supervision, and 
sanitation principles required in retail bakery operations. 
Emphasis on cost control, pricing, computer usage, and 
personnel issues. Lab required. Prerequisite: PSTR 1310. 
3 credit hours. (W) 
 
PSTR 1364 Practicum (or Field Experience) - Baking 
and Pastry Arts/Baker/Pastry Chef 
Practical, general workplace training supported by an 
individualized learning plan developed by the employer, 
college, and student. Prerequisite: PSTR 1310. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
PSTR 2301 Chocolates and Confections 
Production and decoration of traditional truffles, 
marzipan, molded and hand-dipped chocolate, caramels, 
nougats, and pate de fruit. Professional chef uniform and 
kitchen tools required. Lab required. Prerequisites: CHEF 
1305 with a grade of "C" or better and PSTR 1301 with a 
grade of "C" or better. 3 credit hours. (W) 
Note: Culinary lab classes require extended periods of time standing 
in place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds), reaching, bending, 
and working around open flames and with cleaning chemicals. 
 
PSTR 2307 Cake Decorating II 
A course in decoration of specialized and seasonal 
products. Professional chef uniform and kitchen tools 
required. Lab required. Prerequisite: PSTR 1306 with a 
grade of "C" or better. 3 credit hours. (W) 
Note: Culinary lab classes require extended periods of time standing 
in place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds), reaching, bending, 
and working around open flames and with cleaning chemicals. 
 
PSTR 2331 Advanced Pastry Shop 
A study of classical desserts, French and international 
pastries, hot and cold desserts, ice creams and ices, 
chocolate work, and decorations. Emphasis on advanced 
techniques. Professional chef uniform and kitchen tools 
required. Lab required. Prerequisites: PSTR 1305, PSTR 
1306, PSTR 1310, PSTR 2301 and PSTR 2307. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
Note: Culinary lab classes require extended periods of time standing 
in place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds), reaching, bending, 
and working around open flames and with cleaning chemicals. 
 
PSTR 2380 Cooperative Education-Baking and 
Pastry Arts/Baker/Pastry Chef 
Career-related activities encountered in the student’s area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Prerequisites: 
CHEF 1305 with a grade of "C" or better, PSTR 1301 
with a grade of "C" or better, and completion of 9 credit 
hours in the major core of PSTR. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
PSYC 2301 General Psychology 
General Psychology is a survey of the major psychological 
topics, theories and approaches to the scientific study of 
behavior and mental processes. Prerequisite: Meet TSI 
college-readiness standard for Reading and Writing; or 
equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
PSYC 2306 Human Sexuality 
This course will provide an overview of the broad field of 
human sexuality. Topics will be covered from various 
perspectives - biological, sociological, anthropological, 
etc., but will focus primarily on the psychological 
perspective. The goal is for each student to learn factual, 
scientifically-based information that will provoke thought 
and contribute to his/her own decision-making on sexual 
issues outside of the classroom. Prerequisite: Meet TSI 
college-readiness standard for Reading and Writing; or 
equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
Note: Students may take either PSYC 2306 or SOCI 2306 but 
not both. 
 
PSYC 2314 Life-Span Growth and Development 
Life-Span Growth and Development is a study of social, 
emotional, cognitive and physical factors and influences 
of a developing human from conception to death. 
Prerequisites: PSYC 2301, and meet TSI college-readiness 
301 
 
standard for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit 
hours. (A) 
 
PSYC 2315 Psychology of Adjustment 
Gives students deeper insight into their lives and those 
around them. Includes enhancing self awareness, stress 
coping, healthy relationships and dealing with loss. 
Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness standard for 
Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
PSYC 2316 Psychology of Personality 
In-depth study of theories of personality with practical 
application of each. Methods of personality measurement 
and assessment are also included. Prerequisites: PSYC 
2301, and meet TSI college-readiness standard for 
Reading and Writing; or equivalent.   3 credit hours. (A) 
 
PSYC 2317 Statistical Methods in Psychology 
This course covers descriptive and inferential statistics 
used in psychological research and assessment. It includes 
measurement, characteristics of distributions; measures of 
central tendency and variability; transformed scores; 
correlation and regression; probability theory; and 
hypotheses testing and inference. (PSYC 2317 is included 
in the Psychology Field of Study.) Prerequisite: PSYC 
2301 and MATH 1314. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
PSYC 2319 Social Psychology 
Research and theory regarding social factors that 
influence human behavior. Focuses on attitudes, 
interpersonal attraction, aggression, conformity, 
communication, values, roles and group processes. These 
principles will be applied to the human experience. 
Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness standard for 
Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit hours (A) 
 
PSYC 2320 Abnormal Psychology 
This course provides an introduction to the 
psychological, biological, and socio-cultural factors 
involved in the development, diagnosis, and treatment of 
psychological disorders. It includes a review of the 
historical understanding of abnormal behavior and the 
development of modern diagnostic systems. It includes 
discussion of psychological research and practice as it 
relates to mental health and psychological functioning, as 
well as legal and ethical issues. (PSYC 2320 is included in 
the Psychology Field of Study.) Prerequisites: PSYC 2301, 
and meet TSI college-readiness standard for Reading and 
Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
PSYC 2330 Biological Psychology 
An introduction to the biological bases of behavior. 
Topics include evolution, genetics, research methods in 
behavioral neuroscience, motivation and emotion, 
sensation and perception, learning and memory, lifespan 
development, cognition, psychological disorders, and 
other complex behaviors. (PSYC 2330 is included in the 
Psychology Field of Study.) Prerequisites: PSYC 2301, 
and meet TSI college-readiness standard for Reading and 
Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
PSYC 2389 Academic Co-op Psychology 
Integrates on-campus study with practical hands-on work 
experience in psychology. In conjunction with class 
seminars, the student will set specific goals and objectives 
in the study of psychology. Contact the Associate 
Dean/Director for more information. Prerequisite: Meet 
TSI college-readiness standard for Reading and Writing; 
or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
PTHA 1160 Clinical - Physical Therapist Assistant 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Prerequisite: PTHA 
1409. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
PTHA 1201 The Profession of Physical Therapy 
Introduction to the profession of physical therapy and the 
role of the physical therapist assistant. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
PTHA 1225 Communication in Health Care 
Communication theories and principles for optimal 
delivery of health care. Prerequisite: PTHA 1409. 2 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
PTHA 1229 Applied Physical Principles 
The application of physical principles to selected 
interventions in physical therapy. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: PTHA 1409. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
PTHA 1266 Practicum - Physical Therapist Assistant 
I 
Practical, general workplace training supported by an 
individualized learning plan developed by the employer, 
college, and student. Prerequisites: PTHA 1225, PTHA 
1229, PTHA 2201, PTHA 2205, PTHA 2409, PTHA 
1321, PTHA 1413, and PTHA 1431. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
PTHA 1321 Pathophysiology for the PTA 
Study of the pathophysiology of diseases/conditions 
encountered in physical therapy. Prerequisite: PTHA 
1405. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
PTHA 1405 Basic Patient Care Skills 
The application of basic patient handling, functional 
skills, communication, and selected data collection 
techniques. Lab required. Prerequisite: PTHA 1409. 4 
credit hours. (W) 
 
PTHA 1409 Introduction to Physical Therapy 
Introduction to the profession of physical therapy and the 
role of the physical therapist assistant. Includes the 
application of basic patient handling, functional skills, 
 
 
302 
 
communication, and selected data collection techniques. 
Lab required. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
PTHA 1413 Functional Anatomy 
The relationship of the musculoskeletal and 
neuromuscular systems to normal and abnormal 
movement. Lab required. Prerequisite: BIOL 2401. 4 
credit hours. (W) 
 
PTHA 1431 Physical Agents 
Biophysical principles, physiological effects, efficacy, and 
application of physical agents. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
PTHA 1409. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
PTHA 2201 Essentials of Data Collection 
Data collection techniques used to assist in patient/client 
management. Lab required. Prerequisite: PTHA 1405. 2 
credit hours. (W) 
 
PTHA 2205 Neurology 
Study of neuroanatomy and neurophysiology as it relates 
to neurological conditions. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
PTHA 1409. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
PTHA 2239 Professional Issues 
Discussion of professional issues and behaviors related to 
clinical practice; preparation for transition into the 
workforce. Prerequisite: PTHA 2435. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
PTHA 2250 Current Concepts in Physical Therapy 
Current concepts, skills, and knowledge in the provision 
of physical therapy services. Includes enhancement of 
professional development. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
PTHA 2201. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
PTHA 2266 Practicum - Physical Therapist Assistant 
II 
Practical, general workplace training supported by an 
individualized learning plan developed by the employer, 
college, and student. Prerequisites: PTHA 2250, PTHA 
2431, and PTHA 2435. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
PTHA 2267 Practicum - Physical Therapist Assistant 
III 
Practical, general workplace training supported by an 
individualized learning plan developed by the employer, 
college, and student. Prerequisites: PTHA 2250, PTHA 
2431, and PTHA 2435. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
PTHA 2409 Therapeutic Exercise 
Concepts, principles, and application of techniques 
related to therapeutic exercise and functional training. 
Lab required. Prerequisite: PTHA 1405. 4 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
PTHA 2431 Management of Neurological Disorders 
Comprehensive rehabilitation techniques of selected 
neurological disorders. Lab required. Prerequisite: PTHA 
2205. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
PTHA 2435 Rehabilitation Techniques 
Comprehensive rehabilitation of selected diseases and 
disorders. Lab required. Prerequisite: PTHA 1266. 4 
credit hours. (W) 
 
RBTC 1405 Robotic Fundamentals 
An introduction to flexible automation. Topics include 
installation, repair, maintenance, and development of 
flexible robotic manufacturing systems. Lab required. 4 
credit hours. (W) 
 
RBTC 2345 Robot Application, Set-up, and Testing 
A course that provides the student with laboratory 
experience in the installation, set-up, and testing of 
robotic cells. Topics include maintenance. Prerequisite: 
RBTC 1305. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
RECL 1303 Athletic Program Planning 
A study of planning, organizing, and conducting activities 
for athletic programs. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
RECT 1301 Introduction to Therapeutic Recreation 
The history, purpose, and trends of therapeutic 
recreation. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
RELE 1300 Contract Forms and Addenda 
Promulgated Contract Forms, which shall include, but is 
not limited to, unauthorized practice of law, broker-
lawyer committee, current promulgated forms, 
commission rules governing use of forms and case studies 
involving use of forms. Prerequisite/Concurrent 
enrollment: RELE 1311. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
RELE 1301 Principles of Real Estate I 
A beginning overview of licensing as a real estate broker 
and sales agent. Includes ethics of practice as a license 
holder, titles to and conveyance of real estate, legal 
descriptions, deeds, encumbrances and liens, distinctions 
between personal and real property, appraisal, finance and 
regulations, closing procedures, and real estate 
mathematics. Covers at least three hours of classroom 
instruction on federal, state, and local laws relating to 
housing discrimination, housing credit discrimination, and 
community reinvestment. Fulfills at least 30 of 60 hours 
of required instruction for sales agent license. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
RELE 1303 Real Estate Appraisal 
The central purposes and functions of an appraisal, social 
and economic determinants of value, appraisal case 
studies, cost, market data and income approaches to value 
303 
 
estimates, final correlations, and reporting. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
RELE 1307 Real Estate Investments 
Characteristics of real estate investments. Includes 
techniques of investment analysis, time-valued money, 
discounted and nondiscounted investment criteria, 
leverage, tax shelters, depreciation, and applications to 
property tax. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
RELE 1311 Law of Contracts 
Elements of a contract, offer and acceptance, statute of 
frauds, specific performance and remedies for breach, 
unauthorized practice of law, commission rules relating to 
use of adopted forms and owner disclosure requirements. 
3 credit hours. (W) 
 
RELE 1315 Property Management 
The role of the property manager, landlord policies, 
operational guidelines, leases, lease negotiations, tenant 
relations, maintenance, reports, habitability laws, and the 
Fair Housing Act. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
RELE 1319 Real Estate Finance 
Monetary systems, primary and secondary money 
markets, sources of mortgage loans, federal government 
programs, loan applications, processes and procedures, 
closing costs, alternative financial instruments, equal 
credit opportunity laws affecting mortgage lending, 
Community Reinvestment Act, and the state housing 
agency. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
RELE 1321 Real Estate Marketing 
Real estate professionalism and ethics; characteristics of 
successful sales agent; time management; psychology of 
marketing; listing procedures; advertising; negotiation and 
closing financing; and the Deceptive Trade Practices-
Consumer Protection Act. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
RELE 1325 Real Estate Mathematics 
Basic arithmetic skills. Includes mathematical logic, 
percentages, interest, time value of money, depreciation, 
amortization, proration, and estimation of closing 
statements. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
RELE 1338 Principles of Real Estate II 
A continuing overview of licensing as a broker or sales 
agent. Includes ethics of practice as a license holder, titles 
to and conveyance of real estate, legal descriptions, deeds, 
encumbrances and liens, distinctions between personal 
and real property, appraisal, finance and regulations, 
closing procedures, and real estate mathematics. Covers at 
least three hours of classroom instruction on federal, 
state, and local laws relating to housing, discrimination, 
housing credit discrimination, and community 
reinvestment. Fulfills at least 30 of 60 hours of required 
instruction for sales agent license. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
RELE 1380 Cooperative Education - Real Estate 
Career-related activities encountered in the student's area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Contact the 
Associate Dean/Director for more information. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
RELE 2301 Law of Agency 
Law of agency including principal-agent relationships, the 
authority of an agent, the termination of an agent's 
authority, the fiduciary and other duties of an agent, 
employment law, deceptive trade practices, listing or 
buying representation procedures, and the disclosure of 
an agency. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
RELE 2331 Real Estate Brokerage 
A study of law of agency, planning and organization, 
operational policies and procedures, recruiting, selection 
and training of personnel, records and control, and real 
estate firm analysis and expansion criteria. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
RNSG 1125 Professional Nursing Concepts I 
Introduction to professional nursing concepts and 
exemplars within the professional nursing roles: member 
of profession, provider of patient-centered care, patient 
safety advocate, and member of the health care team. 
Content includes clinical judgment, communication, 
ethical-legal, evidence-based practice, health promotion 
health information technology, patient-centered care, 
patient education, professionalism, safety, and 
team/collaboration. Emphasizes role development of the 
professional nurse. This course lends itself to a concept-
based approach. Prerequisite: Admission to the AAS - 
Nursing (RN) Program. Corequisites: RNSG 1128, 
RNSG 1161, RNSG 1216 and RNSG 1430, or consent of 
Associate Dean/Director. Major Requirement: AAS - 
Nursing (RN). 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
RNSG 1126 Professional Nursing Concepts II 
Expanding professional nursing concepts and exemplars 
within the professional nursing roles. Applying concepts 
of clinical judgment, ethical-legal, evidence-based 
practice, patient-centered care, professionalism, safety, 
and team/collaboration to the exemplars presented in the 
Health Care Concepts II course. Introduces concepts of 
leadership and management. Emphasizes role 
development of the professional nurse. This course lends 
itself to a concept-based approach. Prerequisites: RNSG 
1125, RNSG 1128, RNSG 1161, RNSG 1216 and RNSG 
1430, all with a grade of "C" or better, or consent of 
 
 
304 
 
Program Director. Corequisites: RNSG 1533 and RNSG 
2361, or consent of Associate Dean/Director. Major 
Requirement: AAS - Nursing (RN). 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
RNSG 1128 Introduction to Health Care Concepts 
An introduction to concept-based learning with emphasis 
on selected pathophysiological concepts with nursing 
applications. Concepts include acid-base balance, fluid 
and electrolytes, immunity, gas exchange, perfusion, 
metabolism, coping, and tissue integrity. This course 
lends itself to a concept-based approach. Prerequisites: 
Admission to the Nursing Program and consent of 
Associate Dean/Director. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
RNSG 1137 Professional Nursing Concepts III 
Application of professional nursing concepts and 
exemplars within the professional nursing roles. Utilizes 
concepts of clinical judgment, ethical-legal, evidence-
based practice, patient-centered care, professionalism, 
safety, teamwork, and collaboration. Introduces the 
concepts of quality improvement, health information 
technology, and health care organizations. Incorporates 
concepts into role development of the professional nurse. 
This course lends itself to a concept-based approach. Lab 
required. Prerequisites: RNSG 1126, RNSG 1533, and 
RNSG 2361; or RNSG 1424; or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. Prerequisite/Concurrent Enrollment: 
RNSG 1538 and RNSG 2362; or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. Major Requirement: AAS – Nursing 
(RN) or AAS – Nursing (LVN-to-RN Bridge). 1 credit 
hour. (W) 
 
RNSG 1161 Clinical I-Nursing-Registered Nurse 
Training 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Additionally, clinical 
experiences in an acute care facility give the student an 
opportunity to practice technical, assessment, and 
communication skills with patients. The student begins 
applying knowledge of concepts and developing clinical 
judgment skills in direct patient care. Specific learning 
objectives guide the student’s clinical experiences, 
focusing on the application of concepts and skills learned 
in RNSG 1125, 1128, 1216, and 1430. Prerequisite: 
Admission to the AAS - Nursing (RN) Program. 
Corequisites: RNSG 1125, RNSG 1128, RNSG 1216, 
RNSG 1430, or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 
Major Requirement: AAS - Nursing (RN). 1 credit hour. 
(A) 
 
RNSG 1163 Clinical I – Transitional Registered 
Nursing/Registered Nurse 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Additionally, virtual 
and classroom clinical experiences in the classroom, 
simulation, and lab facilities give the student an 
opportunity to practice technical, assessment, and 
communication skills with simulated patients. The student 
begins applying knowledge of concepts and developing 
clinical judgment skills in direct patient care. Specific 
learning objectives guide the student’s virtual clinical 
experiences, focusing on the application of concepts and 
skills learned in previous semesters. Prerequisites: 
Admission to the Nursing (LVN-to-RN Bridge) Program 
and consent of Associate Dean/Director. 
Prerequisite/Concurrent Enrollment: RNSG 1216 or 
consent of Associate Dean/Director. Corequisite: RNSG 
1424 or consent of Associate Dean/Director. Major 
Requirement: AAS – Nursing (LVN-to-RN Bridge). 1 
credit hour. (W) 
 
RNSG 1216 Professional Nursing Competencies 
Development of professional nursing competencies in the 
care of patients throughout the lifespan. Emphasizes 
psychomotor skills and clinical reasoning in the 
performance of nursing procedures related to the 
concepts of: clinical judgment, comfort, elimination, fluid 
and electrolytes, nutrition, gas exchange, safety, functional 
ability, immunity, metabolism, mobility, and tissue 
integrity. Includes health assessment and medication 
administration. This course lends itself to a concept-based 
approach. Lab required. Prerequisites: Admission to the 
Nursing Program and consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 
Prerequisite/Concurrent Enrollment: RNSG 1163 and 
RNSG 1424; or RNSG 1161 and RNSG 1430; or consent 
of Associate Dean/Director. Major Requirement: AAS – 
Nursing (RN) or AAS – Nursing (LVN-to-RN Bridge). 2 
credit hours. (W) 
 
RNSG 1301 Pharmacology 
Introduction to the science of pharmacology with 
emphasis on the actions, interactions, adverse effects, and 
nursing implications of drug classifications. Content 
includes the roles and responsibilities of the nurse in safe 
administration of medications within a legal/ethical 
framework. This course lends itself to either a blocked or 
integrated approach. Lab required. Prerequisites: 
Admission to the Nursing (LVN-to-RN Bridge) Program 
and consent of Associate Dean/Director. Major 
Requirement: AAS – Nursing (LVN-to-RN Bridge). 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
RNSG 1424 Concept-Based Transition to 
Professional Nursing Practice 
Integration of previous health care knowledge and skills 
into the role development of the professional nurse as a 
provider of patient-centered care, patient safety advocate, 
member of health care team, and member of the 
profession. Emphasis is on clinical decision-making for 
305 
 
patients and their families. Review of selected health care 
and professional nursing concepts with application 
through exemplars. Health care concepts include 
comfort, diversity, elimination, functional ability, human 
development, mobility, nutrition, sensory perception, 
sleep, coping, thermoregulation, tissue integrity, acid-base 
balance, clotting, cognition, fluid and electrolyte balance, 
gas exchange, immunity, metabolism, nutrition, grief, and 
perfusion. Professional nursing concepts include clinical 
judgment, communication, ethical-legal, evidence-based 
practice, health promotion, health information 
technology, patient-centered care, patient education, 
professionalism, safety, teamwork and collaboration. 
Introduces concepts of leadership and management. This 
course lends itself to a concept-based approach. Lab 
required. Prerequisites: Admission to the Nursing (LVN-
to-RN Bridge) Program and consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. Prerequisite/Concurrent Enrollment: 
RNSG 1216 or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 
Corequisite: RNSG 1163 or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. Major Requirement: AAS –Nursing 
(LVN-to-RN Bridge). 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
RNSG 1430 Health Care Concepts I 
In-depth coverage of foundational health care concepts 
with application through selected exemplars. Concepts 
include comfort, diversity, elimination, functional ability, 
human development, mobility, nutrition, sensory 
perception, sleep, thermoregulation, grief, and tissue 
integrity. Emphasizes development of clinical judgment 
skills in the beginning nurse. This course lends itself to a 
concept-based approach. Lab required. Prerequisites: 
Admission to the Nursing Program and consent of 
Associate Dean/Director. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
RNSG 1533 Health Care Concepts II 
In-depth coverage of health care concepts with 
application through selected exemplars. Concepts include 
acid-base balance, coping, clotting, cognition, fluid and 
electrolytes, gas exchange, immunity, metabolism, 
nutrition, comfort, and perfusion. Provides continuing 
opportunities for development of clinical judgment skills. 
This course lends itself to a concept-based approach. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: RNSG 1430. Major Requirement: 
AAS – Nursing (RN). 5 credit hours. (W) 
 
RNSG 1538 Health Care Concepts III 
In-depth coverage of health care concepts with nursing 
application through selected exemplars. Concepts include 
cellular regulation, end of life, immunity, interpersonal 
relationships, grief, human development, intracranial 
regulation, mood/affect, comfort, sexuality, mobility, and 
reproduction. Provides continuing opportunities for 
development of clinical judgment skills. This course lends 
itself to a concept-based approach. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: RNSG 1533 or RNSG 1424; or consent of 
Associate Dean/Director. Prerequisite/Concurrent 
Enrollment: RNSG 1137 or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. Corequisite: RNSG 2362 or consent of 
Associate Dean/Director. Major Requirement: AAS – 
Nursing (RN) or AAS – Nursing (LVN-to-RN Bridge). 5 
credit hours. (W) 
 
RNSG 2138 Professional Nursing Concepts IV 
Integration of professional nursing concepts and 
exemplars within the professional nursing roles. 
Synthesizes concepts of clinical judgment, ethical-legal, 
evidence-based practice, leadership and management, 
patient-centered care, professionalism, teamwork, and 
collaboration through exemplars presented in the Health 
Care Concepts courses. Emphasizes concept of quality 
improvement and introduces health policy. Incorporates 
concepts into role development of the professional nurse. 
This course lends itself to a concept-based approach. Lab 
required. Prerequisites: RNSG 1137, RNSG 1538, and 
RNSG 2362; or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 
Prerequisite/Concurrent Enrollment: RNSG 2363 and 
RNSG 2539; or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 
Major Requirement: AAS – Nursing (RN) or AAS – 
Nursing (LVN-to-RN Bridge). 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
RNSG 2361 Clinical II-Nursing-Registered Nurse 
Training 
A health-related, work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Additionally, clinical 
experiences in an acute care facility give the student an 
opportunity to practice technical, assessment, and 
communication skills with patients. The student 
continues applying knowledge of concepts and clinical 
judgment skills in direct patient care. A clinical experience 
in a psychiatric setting provides mental health experience. 
Specific learning objectives guide the student’s clinical 
experiences, focusing on the application of concepts and 
skills learned in RNSG 1126 and RNSG 1533. 
Prerequisites: RNSG 1125, RNSG 1128, RNSG 1161, 
RNSG 1216, and RNSG 1430, all with a grade of “C” or 
better; or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 
Corequisites: RNSG 1126 and RNSG 1533, or consent of 
Associate Dean/Director. Major Requirement: AAS - 
Nursing (RN). 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
RNSG 2362 Clinical III – Nursing – Registered 
Nurse Training 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Additionally, the 
course focuses on application of critical reasoning and 
implementation of the nursing process to plan patient-
centered care for patient/client systems with complex 
physiologic and psychosocial health needs/problems 
using evidence-based interventions. Care will include 
 
 
306 
 
measures to meet patient/client systems 
teaching/learning needs to promote and maintain optimal 
health status for the patient/client and their families. 
Course requires communication/documentation of care 
given, clinical reasoning to manage and coordinate 
quality, comprehensive patient-centered care and access 
to health care resources. Prerequisites: RNSG 2361 or 
RNSG 1163; or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 
Prerequisite/Concurrent Enrollment: RNSG 1137 or 
consent of Associate Dean/Director. Corequisite: RNSG 
1538 or consent of Associate Dean/Director. Major 
Requirement: AAS – Nursing (RN) or AAS – Nursing 
(LVN-to-RN Bridge). 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
RNSG 2363 Clinical IV – Nursing – Registered 
Nurse Training 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, clinical reasoning, and concepts. Direct 
supervision is provided by the clinical professional. 
Additionally, the course focuses on transition from 
student nurse to the roles/competencies and 
responsibilities of the professional nurse utilizing the 
nursing process to meet the advanced and integrated 
health needs of the patient/client systems within hospital 
and community. Promotion of healthy lifestyles with 
consideration for preferences of culturally and socially 
diverse patient/client systems in collaboration with the 
interdisciplinary health care team to promote and 
maintain optimal health status. Prerequisites: RNSG 1538 
and RNSG 2362; or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 
Prerequisite/Concurrent Enrollment: RNSG 2138 or 
consent of Associate Dean/Director. 
Corequisite: RNSG 2539 or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. Major Requirement: AAS – Nursing 
(RN) or AAS – Nursing (LVN-to-RN Bridge). 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
RNSG 2539 Health Care Concepts IV 
In-depth coverage of advanced health care concepts with 
nursing application through selected exemplars. Concepts 
include, cognition, immunity, clotting, fluid and 
electrolyte balance, gas exchange, metabolism, nutrition, 
perfusion, tissue integrity, and interpersonal relationships. 
Continuing development of clinical judgment with 
integration of all health care concepts. This course lends 
itself to a concept-based approach. Lab required. 
Prerequisites: RNSG 1538 and RNSG 2362; or consent 
of Associate Dean/Director. Prerequisite/Concurrent 
Enrollment: RNSG 2138 or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. Corequisite: RNSG 2363 or consent of 
Associate Dean/Director. Major Requirement: AAS – 
Nursing (RN) or AAS – Nursing (LVN-to-RN Bridge). 5 
credit hours. (W) 
 
RNSG 2563 Clinical III - Registered 
Nursing/Registered Nurse 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Additionally, this 
course will be a concentrated clinical learning experience 
to prepare the graduating student for transition from the 
LVN role to the role of a registered nurse. Prerequisites: 
RNSG 2162, RNSG 2230 and RNSG 2539. 5 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
RSPT 1160 Clinical I-Respiratory Care Therapist 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Prerequisite: 
Consent of Associate Dean/Director. Major 
Requirement: AAS-Respiratory Care. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
RSPT 1201 Introduction to Respiratory Care 
An introduction to the field of respiratory care. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: Admission to the Respiratory Care 
Program. Corequisites: RSPT 1340 and RSPT 1410. 
Major Requirement: AAS - Respiratory Care. 2 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
RSPT 1213 Respiratory Care Pharmacology 
A study of basic pharmacological principles/practices of 
cardiopulmonary drugs. Emphasis on classification, 
routes of administration, dosages/calculations, and 
physiological interaction. Prerequisites: RSPT 1201, RSPT 
1160, RSPT 1340 and RSPT 1410; all with a grade “C” or 
better. Major Requirement: AAS - Respiratory Care. 2 
credit hours. (W) 
 
RSPT 1237 Basic Dysrhythmia Interpretation 
Study of electrophysiology of the heart and characteristics 
of cardiac dysrhythmias. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
RSPT 1240 Advanced Cardiopulmonary Anatomy 
and Physiology 
Provides an advanced presentation of anatomy and 
physiology of the cardiovascular and pulmonary system. 2 
credit hours. (W) 
 
RSPT 1340 Advanced Cardiopulmonary Anatomy 
and Physiology 
Provides an advanced presentation of anatomy and 
physiology of the cardiovascular and pulmonary system. 
Lab required. Prerequisite: Admission to the Respiratory 
Care Program. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
RSPT 1361 Clinical II-Respiratory Care Therapist 
A health-related, work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
307 
 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Prerequisite: RSPT 
1160 with a grade of “C” or better. Major Requirement: 
AAS - Respiratory Care. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
RSPT 1362 Clinical III-Respiratory Care Therapist 
A health-related, work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Prerequisite: RSPT 
1361 with a grade of “C” or better. Major Requirement: 
AAS - Respiratory Care. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
RSPT 1410 Respiratory Care Procedures I 
Essential knowledge of the equipment and techniques 
used in the treatment of cardiopulmonary disease. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: Admission to the Respiratory Care 
Program. Major Requirement: AAS-Respiratory Care. 4 
credit hours. (W) 
 
RSPT 1411 Respiratory Care Procedures II 
Develops essential knowledge and skills of airway care 
and mechanical ventilation. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
RSPT 1410 with a grade of “C” or better. Major 
Requirement: AAS - Respiratory Care. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
RSPT 2130 Respiratory Care Examination 
Preparation 
Comprehensive review to optimize respiratory care 
credentialing exam success. Lab required. Prerequisites: 
RSPT 2255, RSPT 2353, and RSPT 2360; all with a grade 
of “C” or better. Corequisites: RSPT 2139, RSPT 2147, 
RSPT 2231, and RSPT 2361. Major Requirement: AAS - 
Respiratory Care. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
RSPT 2139 Advanced Cardiac Life Support 
Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS) with an emphasis 
on airway management. Designed to develop skills for 
resuscitation of the adult. Includes strategies for 
managing and stabilizing the cardiopulmonary arrested 
patient. May include certification based on American 
Heart Association standards. Prerequisites: RSPT 2255, 
RSPT 2353 and RSPT 2360; all with a grade of “C” or 
better. Corequisites: RSPT 2130, RSPT 2147, RSPT 2231 
and RSPT 2361. Major Requirement: AAS - Respiratory 
Care. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
RSPT 2147 Specialties in Respiratory Care 
Emerging and specialty practices in respiratory care. 
Additionally, this is an introduction to areas of interest in 
which the Respiratory Therapist may find application 
and/or employment. The depth of instruction will 
provide the indications, expected outcomes, hazards and 
methods for hyperbaric oxygen (HBO), extracorporeal 
membrane oxygenation (ECMO), nitric oxide (NO), sleep 
studies, nutritional assessment, metabolic monitoring, 
exercise/stress testing, and electroencephalographs. Also 
includes home care/rehabilitation, and fluid and 
electrolyte balance. Lab required. Prerequisites: RSPT 
2255, RSPT 2353 and RSPT 2360; all with a grade of “C” 
or better. Major Requirement: AAS - Respiratory Care. 1 
credit hour. (W) 
 
RSPT 2231 Simulations in Respiratory Care 
Theory of clinical simulation examinations. Includes 
construction types, scoring, and mechanics of taking the 
computerized simulation examination. Prerequisite: RSPT 
2255 with a grade of “C” or better. Major Requirement: 
AAS - Respiratory Care. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
RSPT 2255 Critical Care Monitoring 
Advanced monitoring techniques used to assess a patient 
in the critical care setting. Lab required. Prerequisites: 
RSPT 1362 and RSPT 2414; both with a grade of C or 
better. Corequisites: RSPT 2353 and RSPT 2360. Major 
Requirement: AAS - Respiratory Care. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
RSPT 2310 Cardiopulmonary Disease 
Etiology, pathogenesis, pathology, diagnosis, history, 
prognosis, manifestations, treatment, and detection of 
cardiopulmonary diseases. Lab required. Prerequisites: 
RSPT 1160, RSPT 1201, RSPT 1340 and RSPT 1410; all 
with a grade of C or better. Corequisites: RSPT 1361 and 
RSPT 1411. Major Requirement: AAS - Respiratory Care. 
3 credit hours. (W) 
 
RSPT 2353 Neonatal/Pediatric Cardiopulmonary 
Care 
A study of neonatal and pediatric cardiopulmonary care. 
Lab required. Prerequisites: RSPT 1362 and RSPT 2414; 
both with a grade of C or better. Corequisites: RSPT 2255 
and RSPT 2360. Major Requirement: AAS - Respiratory 
Care. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
RSPT 2360 Clinical IV-Respiratory Care Therapist 
A health-related, work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Prerequisite: RSPT 
1362 with a grade of “C” or better. Major Requirement: 
AAS - Respiratory Care. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
RSPT 2361 Clinical V-Respiratory Care Therapist 
A health-related, work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Prerequisite: RSPT 
2360 with a grade of “C” or better. Major Requirement: 
AAS - Respiratory Care. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
RSPT 2414 Mechanical Ventilation 
The study of mechanical ventilation with emphasis on 
ventilator classification, methods, principles, and 
operational characteristics. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
 
 
308 
 
Successful completion of the first two semesters of the 
Respiratory Care Program. Corequisite: RSPT 1362. 
Major Requirement: Admission to the Respiratory Care 
Program. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
RSTO 1301 Beverage Management 
A study of the beverage service of the hospitality industry 
including spirits, wines, beers, and non-alcoholic 
beverages. Topics include purchasing, resource control, 
legislation, marketing, physical plant requirements, 
staffing, service, and the selection of wines to enhance 
foods. Prerequisite / Concurrent Enrollment: HAMG 
1321. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
RSTO 1304 Dining Room Service 
Introduces the principles, concepts, and systems of 
professional table service. Topics include dining room 
organization, scheduling, and management of food 
service personnel. Lab required. Prerequisite/Concurrent 
enrollment: CHEF 1314. 3 credit hours. (W) 
Note: Culinary lab classes require extended periods of time standing 
in place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds), reaching, bending, 
and working around open flames and with cleaning chemicals. 
 
RSTO 1325 Purchasing for Hospitality Operations 
Study of purchasing and inventory management of foods 
and other supplies to include development of purchase 
specifications, determination of order quantities, formal 
and informal price comparisons, proper receiving 
procedures, storage management, and issue procedures. 
Emphasis on product cost analysis, yields, pricing 
formulas, controls, and record keeping at each stage of 
the purchasing cycle. Lab required. Prerequisites / 
Concurrent Enrollment: CHEF 1305 and HAMG 1321. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
RSTO 1364 Practicum (or Field Experience) - 
Restaurant, Culinary, and Catering 
Management/Manager 
Practical, general workplace training supported by an 
individualized learning plan developed by the employer, 
college, and student. Prerequisite / Concurrent 
Enrollment: RSTO 1325. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
RSTO 2307 Catering 
Principles, techniques, and applications for both on-
premises, off-premises, and group marketing of catering 
operations including food preparation, holding, and 
transporting techniques. Lab required. Prerequisite / 
Concurrent Enrollment: HAMG 2301 or consent of 
Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
RTVB 1321 TV/Video Field Production 
Video field camera set up and operation for broadcast 
and digital media. Incorporates basic editing and field 
audio techniques. Lab required. Prerequisites: ARTV 
1351, FLMC 2330, and RTVB 1329. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
RTVB 1325 TV Studio Production 
Basic television studio production including planning, 
directing and applying techniques commonly used with 
video, audio and lighting equipment. Lab required. 
Prerequisites: ARTV 1351 and FLMC 2330. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
RTVB 1329 Scriptwriting 
Writing scripts for digital media. Emphasizes format and 
style for commercials, public service announcements, 
promos, news, and documentaries. Lab required. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
RTVB 2330 Film and Video Editing 
Digital media editing for the preparation and completion 
of shorts, trailers, documentaries, and features. 
Prerequisites: FLMC 1331 and FLMC 2330. Lab required. 
3 credit hours. (W) 
 
RTVB 2337 TV/Video Production Workshop I 
Design and production of video content for location or 
studio shoots adhering to deadline requirements and 
industry standards. Lab required. Prerequisites: RTVB 
1325 and ARTV 2320. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
RTVB 2340 Portfolio Development 
Preparation and presentation of a portfolio suitable for 
employment in the media industry. This course is 
intended to be taken in the last semester. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: Consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
RTVB 2347 Digital Media Business Management 
Analysis of management principles and development of 
business plans for media enterprises. Lab required. 
Prerequisites: ARTV 2320, FLMC 2333, and RTVB 2330. 
3 credit hours. (W) 
 
RUSS 1411 Beginning Russian I 
Introduction to the basic skills of speaking, reading, 
writing, and listening with attention to selected aspects of 
Russian culture; designed for students with little or no 
previous language training. Instruction is enhanced by the 
use of tapes, slides, computer software, and video 
cassettes. Lab required. 4 credit hours. (A) 
 
RUSS 1412 Beginning Russian II 
Continuation of RUSS 1411. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
RUSS 1411 or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 4 
credit hours. (A) 
 
RUSS 2311 Intermediate Russian I 
Intensive review of Russian grammar followed by 
continued development of speaking, listening, reading 
309 
 
and writing skills. Instruction enhanced by slides, tapes, 
and other audio-visual aids. Prerequisite: RUSS 1412 or 
consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
RUSS 2312 Intermediate Russian II 
Continuation of RUSS 2311. Instruction enhanced by 
slides, tapes, and other audio-visual aids. Prerequisite: 
RUSS 2311 or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 
credit hours. (A) 
 
SGNL 1401 Beginning American Sign Language I 
Introduction to American Sign Language, Deaf culture, 
and to a brief history of sign and culture. Includes 
development of expressive and receptive sign skills, 
together with the learning of numbers, sign vocabulary, 
and the manual alphabet. Class is conducted primarily 
without voice. Lab required. 4 credit hours. (A) 
 
SGNL 1402 Beginning American Sign Language II 
Study of sign vocabulary, numbers, fingerspelling and 
Deaf culture. Emphasizes further development of 
receptive skills, expressive skills, application of 
rudimentary syntactical and grammatical structures, and 
an understanding of Deaf and Hearing cultures. Class is 
conducted primarily without voice. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: SGNL 1401 or credit by exam. 4 credit 
hours. (A) 
 
SGNL 2301 Intermediate American Sign Language I 
Introduction to the intermediate skills needed in the 
production and comprehension of American Sign 
Language used in everyday communication. The course 
gives students an overview of the history, values, and 
social norms of the Deaf community in the United States. 
This course integrates and refines expressive and 
receptive skills in American Sign Language, including 
recognition of sociolinguistic variations. Class is 
conducted primarily without voice. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: SGNL 1402 with a grade of "C" or better. 3 
credit hours. (A) 
 
SGNL 2302 Intermediate American Sign Language 
II 
A continuation of SGNL 2301, American Sign Language 
Intermediate II provides a review and application of 
conversational skills in American Sign Language and 
provides intensive practice in interpreting from signing to 
voice as well as from voice to signing, while increasing 
vocabulary. The course provides an introduction to 
American Sign Language literature and folklore. (The 
course includes grammar and vocabularies used in "real 
life" situations.) Lab required. Prerequisite: SGNL 2301 
with a grade of "C" or better. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
SLNG 1207 Intra-lingual Skills Development for 
Interpreters 
Development of intra-lingual (English to English) skills 
necessary for future development of inter-lingual (English 
to American Sign Language [ASL]/ASL to English) skills. 
Focus on linguistic and cognitive skills development in 
areas of paraphrasing, summarizing, main idea 
identification, comprehension, memory, delayed 
repetition, multi-tasking, vocabulary, and cultural literacy. 
Lab required. Offered spring semester only. 2 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
SLNG 1211 Fingerspelling and Numbers 
Development of expressive and receptive skills in 
fingerspelling and numbers. Receptive skills focus on 
whole word phrase recognition and 
fingerspelling/number comprehension in context. 
Expressive skills focus on the development of speed, 
clarity, and fluency. Lab required. Prerequisite: SGNL 
1402. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
SLNG 1215 Visual/Gestural Communication 
Development of skills in non-verbal communications. 
Emphasizes the use and understanding of facial 
expression, gestures, pantomime, and body language. Lab 
required. Offered fall semester only. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
SLNG 1248 Vocabulary Development for Interpreters 
A course in vocabulary building in English and American 
Sign Language for interpreters. Lab required. Offered 
Summer only. Prerequisites: SLNG 2302 and SLNG 
2303, or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 2 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
SLNG 1321 Introduction to the Interpreting 
Profession 
An overview of the field of American Sign Language 
(ASL)/English interpretation. Provides a historical 
framework for the current principles, ethics, roles, 
responsibilities, and standard practices of the interpreting 
profession. Lab required. Prerequisite / Concurrent 
enrollment: SGNL 2301. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
SLNG 1347 Deaf Culture 
Historical and contemporary perspective of American 
Deaf culture using a socio-cultural model. Includes 
cultural identity and awareness, values, group norms, 
communication, language, and significant contributions 
made by D/deaf people to the world. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
SLNG 1350 Sign-to-Voice 
Skill development in interpreting and transliterating from 
American Sign Language and other modes of 
communication to English and analysis of increasingly 
complex tasks utilizing simulated interpreting experiences 
including skills analysis and peer evaluation. Lab required. 
 
 
310 
 
Prerequisite: SLNG 1321. Offered fall semester only. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
SLNG 2186 Internship I - Sign Language 
Interpretation and Translation 
A work-based learning experience that enables the 
student to apply specialized occupational theory, skills 
and concepts. A learning plan is developed by the college 
and the employer. Prerequisites: SLNG 1350 and SLNG 
2301. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
SLNG 2189 ESC Internship - Sign Language 
Interpretation and Translation 
A work-based learning experience that enables the 
student to apply specialized occupational theory, skills 
and concepts. A learning plan is developed by the college 
and the employer. Prerequisite/ Concurrent enrollment: 
SLNG 2371. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
SLNG 2301 Interpreting I 
An overview of the interpreting process and models of 
interpretation. Introduces the skills necessary to achieve 
dynamic message equivalence in interpreting American 
Sign Language (ASL) to English and English to ASL. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: SLNG 1321. Prerequisite / 
Concurrent Enrollment: SGNL 2302. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
SLNG 2302 Interpreting II 
Continued development of discourse analysis and 
interpreting skills for increasingly complex tasks. 
Utilization of consecutive and simultaneous interpreting 
scenarios including monologues and dialogues. 
Emphasizes skill development, self-analysis, and peer 
evaluation. Lab required. Prerequisite/Concurrent 
enrollment: SLNG 2301. Offered spring semester only. 3 
credit hours. (W 
 
SLNG 2303 Transliterating 
A practice-oriented course designed to develop skills 
necessary for rendering spoken English to a signed 
English format and signed English to spoken English. 
Lab required. Prerequisite: SLNG 2301. Offered spring 
semester only. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
SLNG 2311 Interpreting in Specialized Settings 
Overview of interpreting/transliterating with special 
populations (e.g., deaf/blind, high visual, oral) and/or 
special settings (e.g., religious, artistic, medical, legal, 
mental health). Reinforce interpreting theories and 
techniques in relation to special population(s) and/or 
setting(s). Lab required. Prerequisites: SLNG 1350 and 
SLNG 2301. Offered spring semester only. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
SLNG 2331 Interpreting III 
A practice-oriented course to strengthen skills in the 
integration and application of interpreting using complex 
source materials. Continued exposure to simulated 
interpreting/transliterating experiences. Lab required. 
Offered summer semester only. Prerequisite: SLNG 2302 
or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
SLNG 2371 Interpreting in the Medical Setting 
Methods and practice of interpreting skills (consecutive, 
simultaneous, and sign translation) in medical contexts, 
including protocols for managing sessions with patients, 
standards of practice for health care interpreters, roles of 
the health care interpreters, cultural awareness, legislation 
and regulations (ADA, Section 405 or Rehabilitation Act, 
Title VI of Civil Rights Act, HIPAA, HITECH, CLAS), 
legal status (voluntary, POEC, OPC) common specialties 
and medications (including physical and mental health), 
and routine medical equipment. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: HITT 1305. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
SLNG 2387 Internship II – Sign Language 
Interpretation and Translation  
A work-based learning experience that enables the 
student to apply specialized occupational theory, skills 
and concepts. A learning plan is developed by the college 
and the employer. Offered summer semester only. 
Prerequisites: SLNG 2186, SLNG 2302 and SLNG 2303. 
3 credit hours. (W) 
 
SOCI 1301 Introduction to Sociology 
The scientific study of human society, including ways in 
which groups, social institutions, and individuals affect 
each other. Causes of social stability and social change are 
explored through the application of various theoretical 
perspectives, key concepts, and related research methods 
of sociology. Analysis of social issues in their institutional 
context may include topics such as social stratification, 
gender, race/ethnicity, and deviance. Prerequisite: Meet 
TSI college-readiness standard for Reading and Writing; 
or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
SOCI 1306 Social Problems 
Application of sociological principles and theoretical 
perspectives to major social problems in contemporary 
society such as inequality, crime and violence, substance 
abuse, environmental issues, deviance, or family 
problems. Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness 
standard for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit 
hours. (A) 
 
SOCI 2301 Marriage & the Family 
Sociological and theoretical analysis of the structures and 
functions of the family, the varied cultural patterns of the 
American family, and the relationships that exist among 
the individuals within the family, as well as the 
relationships that exist between the family and other 
institutions in society. Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-
311 
 
readiness standard for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 
3 credit hours. (A) 
 
SOCI 2306 Human Sexuality 
This course will provide an overview of the broad field of 
human sexuality. Topics will be covered from various 
perspectives - biological, sociological, anthropological, 
etc., but will focus primarily on the psychological 
perspective. The goal is for each student to learn factual, 
scientifically-based information that will provoke thought 
and contribute to his/her decision-making on sexual 
issues outside of the classroom. Prerequisite: Meet TSI 
college-readiness standard for Reading and Writing; or 
equivalent.  3 credit hours. (A) 
Note: Student may take either PSYC 2306 or SOCI 2306 but 
not both. 
 
SOCI 2319 Minority Studies 
This course studies minority-majority group relations, 
addressing their historical, cultural, social, economic, and 
institutional development in the United States. Both 
sociological and social psychological levels of analysis will 
be employed to discuss issues including experiences of 
minority groups within the context of their cultural 
heritage and tradition, as well as that of the dominant 
culture. Core concepts to be examined include (but are 
not limited to) social inequality, dominance / 
subordination, prejudice, and discrimination. Particular 
minority groups discussed may include those based on 
poverty, race / ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation, age, 
disability, or religion. Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-
readiness standard for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 
3 credit hours. (A) 
 
SOCI 2340 Drug Use and Abuse 
Study of the use and abuse of drugs in today's society. 
Emphasis on the physiological, psychological, and 
sociological factors that contribute to this behavior. 
Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness standard for 
Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
SOCI 2389 Academic Co-op Sociology 
Integrates on-campus study with practical hands-on work 
experience in sociology. In conjunction with class 
seminars, the student will set specific goals and objectives 
in the study of sociology. Contact the Associate 
Dean/Director for more information. Prerequisite: 
Consent of Associate Dean/Director, and meet TSI 
college-readiness standard for Reading and Writing; or 
equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
SOCW 2361 Introduction to Social Work 
An overview of the history, fields, skills, and values of 
social work practice in the United States. Prerequisite: 
Meet TSI college-readiness standard for Reading and 
Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
SOCW 2362 Social Welfare 
This course provides an overview of contemporary social 
welfare including income support services, mental health 
services and services for children and families. It includes 
an examination of social welfare policy and programs. 
Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness standard for 
Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 
Prerequisite/Concurrent enrollment: SOCW 2361. 3 
credit hours. (A) 
 
SOCW 2389 Academic Cooperative 
A supervised experiential learning course designed to 
integrate program study with introductory exposure to 
the field of social work. In conjunction with individual 
study and/or seminars, the student will set specific goals 
and objectives in the study of social work and/or social 
institutions. The academic cooperative is not a social 
work skills-based practice experience, but instead, an 
observational volunteer experience. The course must 
include a minimum of 80 contact hours (48 hours in a 
social service setting). (SOCW 2389 is included in the 
Social Work Field of Study.) Lab required. Prerequisite: 
SOCW 2361. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
SPAN 1411 Beginning Spanish I 
Basic Spanish language skills in listening, speaking, 
reading, and writing within a cultural framework. Students 
will acquire the vocabulary and grammatical structures 
necessary to communicate and comprehend at the 
beginner level. Lab required. 4 credit hours. (A) 
 
SPAN 1412 Beginning Spanish II 
Continued development of basic Spanish language skills 
in listening, speaking, reading, and writing within a 
cultural framework. Students will acquire the vocabulary 
and grammatical structures necessary to communicate 
and comprehend at the high beginner to low intermediate 
level. Lab required. Prerequisite: SPAN 1411 or consent 
of Associate Dean/Director. 4 credit hours. (A) 
 
SPAN 2311 Intermediate Spanish I 
The consolidation of skills acquired at the introductory 
level. Further development of proficiency in listening, 
speaking, reading, and writing. Emphasis on 
comprehension, appreciation, and interpretation of the 
cultures of the Spanish-speaking world. Prerequisite: 
SPAN 1412 or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 
credit hours. (A) 
 
SPAN 2312 Intermediate Spanish II 
The consolidation of skills acquired at the introductory 
level. Further development of proficiency in listening, 
speaking, reading, and writing. Emphasis on 
comprehension, appreciation, and interpretation of the 
 
 
312 
 
cultures of the Spanish-speaking world. Prerequisite: 
SPAN 2311 or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 
credit hours. (A) 
 
SPAN 2313 Spanish for Native/Heritage Speakers I 
Builds upon existing oral proficiencies of heritage 
speakers of Spanish. Enhances proficiencies in the home-
based language by developing a full range of registers 
including public speaking and formal written discourse. 
Emphasis on comprehension, appreciation, and 
interpretation of the cultures of the Spanish-speaking 
world. Prerequisite: SPAN 1412 or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
SPAN 2315 Spanish for Native/Heritage Speakers II 
Builds upon existing oral proficiencies of heritage 
speakers of Spanish. Enhances proficiencies in the home-
based language by developing a full range of registers 
including public speaking and formal written discourse. 
Emphasis on comprehension, appreciation, and 
interpretation of the cultures of the Spanish-speaking 
world. Prerequisite: SPAN 2313 or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
SPCH 1311 Introduction to Speech Communication 
Introduces basic human communication principles and 
theories embedded in a variety of contexts including 
interpersonal, small group, and public speaking. 
Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness standard for 
Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
SPCH 1315 Public Speaking 
Application of communication theory and practice to the 
public speaking context, with emphasis on audience 
analysis, speaker delivery, ethics of communication, 
cultural diversity, and speech organizational techniques to 
develop students' speaking abilities, as well as ability to 
effectively evaluate oral presentations. Additionally, it 
includes student evaluation of speakers and speeches. 
Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness standard for 
Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
SPCH 1318 Interpersonal Communication 
Application of communication theory to interpersonal 
relationship development, maintenance, and termination 
in relationship contexts including friendships, romantic 
partners, families, and relationships with co-workers and 
supervisors. Additionally, this course focuses on 
interpersonal contexts such as gender communication, 
conflict, intercultural communication, and listening. 
Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness standard for 
Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
SPCH 1321 Business and Professional 
Communication 
Study and application of communication within the 
business and professional context. Special emphasis will 
be given to communication competencies in 
presentations, dyads, teams, and technologically mediated 
formats. Additionally, it includes the relationship of 
communication to organizational conflict, management 
and international business; practice in conducting and 
participating in business interviews and presentations. 
Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness standard for 
Reading and Writing; or equivalent.  3 credit hours. (A) 
 
SPCH 2335 Argumentation and Debate 
This course introduces the students to various 
argumentation techniques. The student will learn basic 
research skills and methods of cataloging evidence. The 
student will learn to organize and present ideas in 
effective communication paradigms. Individual debate 
and team formats will be demonstrated. 3 credit hours. 
(A) 
 
SPCH 2389 Academic Co-op Speech 
Integrates on-campus study with practical hands-on work 
experience in speech. In conjunction with class seminars, 
the student will set specific goals and objectives in the 
study of speech. Contact the Associate Dean/Director 
for more information. Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-
readiness standard for Reading and Writing; or equivalent. 
3 credit hours. (A) 
 
SRGT 1171 Transition to Practice for the Surgical 
Technologist 
This course provides surgical technology students with 
information and skills to assist in transition from the role 
of student to the role of a practicing surgical technologist. 
Information gained about high performance work teams 
is applied to the surgical setting. Service quality 
management and diversity concepts are applied to surgical 
settings. Lab required. Prerequisites: HPRS 2300, SRGT 
1441 and SRGT 1461. Corequisites: SRGT 2130 and 
SRGT 2561, or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 
Major Requirement: AAS - Surgical Technology. 1 credit 
hour. (W) 
 
SRGT 1271 Basic Skills of Surgical Technology 
Learn the fundamentals and foundations of Surgical 
Technology; Apply basic skills of Surgical Technology in 
a mock laboratory environment in order to gain the skills 
needed to perform in the healthcare setting. Prerequisite: 
Admission to the Surgical Technology Program. 
Corequisite: SRGT 1409, or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. Major Requirement: AAS - Surgical 
Technology. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
SRGT 1409 Fundamentals of Peri-operative Concepts 
and Techniques 
In-depth coverage of peri-operative concepts such as 
aseptic principles and practices, infectious processes, 
wound healing, and creation and maintenance of the 
sterile field. Lab required. Prerequisite: Admission to the 
313 
 
Surgical Technology Program. Corequisite: SRGT 1271, 
or consent of Associate Dean/Director. Major 
Requirement: AAS - Surgical Technology. 4 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
SRGT 1441 Surgical Procedures I 
Introduction to surgical pathology and its relationship to 
surgical procedures. Emphasis on surgical procedures 
related to the general, OB/GYN, genitourinary, 
otorhinolaryngology, and orthopedic surgical specialties 
incorporating instruments, equipment, and supplies 
required for safe patient care. Lab required. Prerequisites: 
SRGT 1271 and SRGT 1409. Corequisites: HPRS 2300 
and SRGT 1461, or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 
Major Requirement: AAS -Surgical Technology. 4 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
SRGT 1442 Surgical Procedures II 
Introduction to surgical pathology and its relationship to 
surgical procedures. Emphasis on surgical procedures 
related to the cardiothoracic, peripheral vascular, plastic / 
reconstructive, ophthalmology, oral / maxillofacial, and 
neurological surgical specialties incorporating 
instruments, equipment, and supplies required for safe 
patient care. Lab required. Prerequisites: HPRS 2300, 
SRGT 1441, and SRGT 1461. Corequisites: SRGT 1171, 
SRGT 2130 and SRGT 2561, or consent of Associate 
Dean/Director. Major Requirement: AAS -Surgical 
Technology. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
SRGT 1461 Clinical - Surgical Technology I 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Additionally, the 
student is allowed to participate as a member of the 
surgical team under the supervision of the affiliate 
hospital staff or a clinical instructor in an aseptic 
environment. Case assignments will be assigned according 
to specific clinical rotations. Prerequisites: SRGT 1271 
and SRGT 1409. Corequisites: HPRS 2300 and SRGT 
1441, or consent of Associate Dean/Director. Major 
Requirement: AAS -Surgical Technology. 4 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
SRGT 2130 Professional Readiness 
Overview of professional readiness for employment, 
attaining certification, and maintaining certification status. 
Prerequisites: HPRS 2300, SRGT 1441 and SRGT 1461. 
Corequisites: SRGT 1171, SRGT 1442, and SRGT 2561, 
or consent of Associate Dean/Director. Major 
Requirement: AAS -Surgical Technology. 1 credit hour. 
(W) 
 
SRGT 2561 Clinical - Surgical Technology II 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Prerequisites: HPRS 
2300, SRGT 1441 and SRGT 1461. Corequisites: SRGT 
1171, SRGT 1442 and SRGT 2130, or consent of 
Associate Dean/Director. Major Requirement: AAS -
Surgical Technology. 5 credit hours (W) 
 
SUAS 1371 Small Unmanned Aerial Systems (Drones) 
This course is an introduction to Small Unmanned Aerial 
Systems (SUAS), commonly called drones. The course 
will cover the uses of drones, the electronic and 
mechanical systems used by drones, FAA regulations 
related to drones, and drone flight with applications. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness 
standard for Mathematics; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
TECA 1303 Families, School and Community 
A study of the child, family, community, and schools, 
including parent education and involvement, family and 
community lifestyles, child abuse, and current family life 
issues. Course content must be aligned as applicable with 
State Board for Educator Certification Pedagogy and 
Professional Responsibilities standards and coincide with 
the National Association for the Education of Young 
Children position statement related to developmentally 
appropriate practices for children from birth through age 
eight. Requires students to participate in field experiences 
with children from infancy through age 12 in a variety of 
settings with varied and diverse populations. The course 
includes a minimum of 16 hours of field experiences. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: Meet TSI standard for INRW 
0315; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
TECA 1311 Educating Young Children 
An introduction to the education of the young child, 
including developmentally appropriate practices and 
programs, theoretical and historical perspectives, ethical 
and professional responsibilities and current issues. 
Course content must be aligned as applicable with State 
Board for Educator Certification Pedagogy and 
Professional Responsibilities standards and coincide with 
the National Association for the Education of Young 
Children position statement related to developmentally 
appropriate practices for children from birth through age 
eight. Requires students to participate in field experiences 
with children from infancy through age 12 in a variety of 
settings with varied and diverse populations; and the 
course includes a minimum of 16 hours of field 
experiences. Lab required. Prerequisite: Meet TSI 
standard for INRW 0315; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. 
(A) 
 
TECA 1318 Wellness of the Young Child 
A study of the factors that impact the well-being of the 
young child including healthy behavior, food nutrition, 
fitness, and safety practices. Focus on local and national 
 
 
314 
 
standards and legal implications of relevant policies and 
regulations. Course content must be aligned as applicable 
with State Board for Educator Certification Pedagogy and 
Professional Responsibilities standards and coincide with 
the National Association for the Education of Young 
Children position statement related to developmentally 
appropriate practices for children from birth to age eight. 
Requires students to participate in field experiences with 
children from infancy through age 12 in a variety of 
settings with varied and diverse populations. Course 
includes a minimum of 16 hours of field experiences. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: Meet TSI standard for INRW 
0315; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. (A) 
 
TECA 1354 Child Growth and Development 
A study of the physical, emotional, social, language, and 
cognitive factors impacting growth and development of 
children through adolescence. Prerequisite: Meet TSI 
standard for INRW 0315; or equivalent. 3 credit hours. 
(A) 
 
TECM 1343 Technical Algebra and Trigonometry 
Algebraic and trigonometric applications used in 
technical/industrial settings. Lab required. 3 credit hours. 
(W) 
 
TRVM 1327 Special Events Design 
The development of a special event from the conceptual 
stage through completion. Emphasis on industry 
terminology, factors to consider when planning a special 
event, and contingency plans. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
TRVM 1366 Practicum (or Field Experience) - 
Tourism and Travel Services Management 
Practical, general workplace training supported by an 
individualized learning plan developed by the employer, 
college, and student. Prerequisite / Concurrent 
Enrollment: TRVM 2301. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
TRVM 2301 Introduction to Convention/Meeting 
Management 
Overview of the meetings and convention industry and 
the various aspects and skills involved in planning and 
managing meeting, conventions, and expositions. 
Emphasis on types of meetings, markets, industry 
suppliers, budget and program planning, site selection and 
contract negotiations, registration and housing, food and 
beverage requirements, function and meeting room setup, 
and audiovisual requirements. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
TRVM 2341 International Convention/Meeting 
Management 
Apply the principles of convention / meeting 
management in an international setting. Compare the 
differences in planning a domestic versus an international 
meeting; including contract negotiation, foreign currency, 
customs and laws, exposition, marketing, shipping, 
languages, cultures, and how foreign policy affects the 
meeting planning process. Identify resources to assist 
planner in development of an international meeting. 
Prerequisite / Concurrent Enrollment: TRVM 2301. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
TRVM 2355 Exposition and Trade Show Operations 
An overview of trade shows and exhibitions operations. 
Prerequisite / Concurrent Enrollment: TRVM 2301. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
TRVM 2380 Cooperative Education-Tourism and 
Travel Services Management 
Career-related activities encountered in the student's area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and employer, the 
student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Contact the 
Associate Dean/Director for more information. 
Prerequisites: HAMG 1324, HAMG 1340, TRVM 1323, 
TRVM 1327, TRVM 2301, TRVM 2341 and TRVM 
2355; or consent of Associate Dean/Director. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
UXUI 1370 Human Factors and Design Psychology 
This course presents the principles of human/computer 
interaction. Students are expected to gain knowledge and 
expertise to contribute to the design process in computer-
based, user-centered systems in which user and task needs 
are given primary importance. Students also evaluate the 
usability of interactive systems in fulfilling the 
requirements of their users. Lab required. 
Prerequisite/Concurrent Enrollment: ARTC 2371. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
UXUI 1371 Prototyping and Usability Testing I 
Introduction to foundational prototyping and user testing 
methods for use in the design of products. Lab required. 
Prerequisites: UXUI 1370 and ARTC 1359. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
VNSG 1205 NCLEX-PN Review 
Review of nursing knowledge and skills, study skills, 
stress management techniques, and test-taking strategies 
to prepare the graduate vocational nurse (GVN) to take 
the National Licensure Examination-Practical Nurse 
(NCLEX-PN). Lab required. Corequisites: VNSG 1579 
and VNSG 2363. Prerequisites: VNSG 1262, VNSG 
1271, VNSG 1571, and VNSG 1578. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
VNSG 1230 Maternal-Neonatal Nursing 
A study of the biological, psychological, and sociological 
concepts applicable to basic needs of the family during 
childbearing and neonatal care. Utilization of the nursing 
process in the assessment and management of a 
childbearing family. Topics include physiological changes 
315 
 
related to pregnancy, fetal development, and nursing care 
of the family during labor and delivery and the 
puerperium. Lab required. Corequisite: VNSG 1238. 
Prerequisites: VNSG 1261, VNSG 1270, VNSG 1570, 
and VNSG 1577. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
VNSG 1238 Mental Illness 
Study of human behavior with emphasis on emotional 
and mental abnormalities and modes of treatment 
incorporating the nursing process. Corequisite: VNSG 
1230. Prerequisites: VNSG 1261, VNSG 1270, VNSG 
1570, and VNSG 1577. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
VNSG 1261 Clinical I - Licensed 
Practical/Vocational Nurse Training 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Corequisites: BIOL 
2404, VNSG 1270, VNSG 1570, and VNSG 1577. 
Prerequisite: Admission to the Vocational Nursing 
Program. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
VNSG 1262 Clinical II - Licensed 
Practical/Vocational Nurse Training 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Corequisites: VNSG 
1271, VNSG 1571, and VNSG 1578. Prerequisites: BIOL 
2404, VNSG 1261, VNSG 1270, VNSG 1570, and 
VNSG 1577. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
VNSG 1270 Concept-Based Nursing Principles I 
An introduction to concepts essential to the professional 
behavior and safe practice of vocational nursing. 
Concepts include clinical reasoning and judgment, ethical 
& legal practice, teamwork, safety, evidence-based care, 
patient-centered care, cultural and spiritual domains, 
normal human development, family dynamics, 
technology, and therapeutic communication. Corequisites: 
BIOL 2404, VNSG 1261, VNSG 1570, and VNSG 1577. 
Prerequisite: Admission to the Vocational Nursing 
Program. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
VNSG 1271 Concept-Based Nursing Principles II 
A continued exploration of professional nursing concepts 
and related exemplars applied to the role of the 
vocational nurse. Clinical judgment, quality of care, and 
safety education for the nurse’s knowledge, skills and 
attitudes are the basis for role development. Corequisites: 
VNSG 1262, VNSG 1571, and VNSG 1578. 
Prerequisites: BIOL 2404, VNSG 1261, VNSG 1270, 
VNSG 1570, and VNSG 1577. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
VNSG 1570 Concept-Based Skills I 
A conceptual approach to patient-centered foundational 
nursing skills. Focus on performance and understanding 
rationales for non-sterile skill techniques when providing 
patient care, hygiene, infection control, assessment skills, 
identifying/reporting outcomes, patient education, 
nutrition, feeding tubes, elimination, medication 
administration, medical terminology oxygen 
administration. Competent, safe skill mastery is 
determined by written testing and individual skill 
evaluations in lab. Lab required. Corequisites: BIOL 2404, 
VNSG 1261, VNSG 1270, and VNSG 1577. Prerequisite: 
Admission to the Vocational Nursing Program. 5 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
VNSG 1571 Concept-Based Skills II 
A continued study using a conceptual approach for 
intermediate and advanced nursing skills in patient-
centered care. Focus on performance and understanding 
rationales for skill techniques when providing nursing 
care, IV therapy, phlebotomy skills, obtaining a 12 lead 
EKG, basic EKG interpretation, usage of AED, 
colostomy care, tracheostomy care and suction, ambu 
bag, oxygenation, urinary catheterization, maintenance of 
nephrostomy tubes, wound dressings, wound vacs, chest 
tube pleurovac, mechanical ventilation, identifying/ 
reporting outcomes, patient education, hygiene and sterile 
technique. Previous mastered skills will also be 
demonstrated by students to insure continued skill 
proficiency. Competent, safe skill mastery is determined 
by written testing and individual skill evaluations in lab. 
Lab required. Corequisites: VNSG 1262, VNSG 1271, 
and VNSG 1578. Prerequisites: BIOL 2404, VNSG 1261, 
VNSG 1270, VNSG 1570, and VNSG 1577. 5 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
VNSG 1577 Concept-Based Nursing Care I 
This course examines a conceptual approach to nursing 
care for clients experiencing health as well as predictable, 
commonly occurring alterations in health throughout the 
lifespan. Emphasis will be placed on the nursing process 
as well as Tanner’s Model of Clinical Judgment to 
develop the students’ clinical reasoning skills. Lab 
required. Corequisites: BIOL 2404, VNSG 1261, VNSG 
1270, and VNSG 1570. Prerequisite: Admission to the 
Vocational Nursing Program. 5 credit hours. (W) 
 
VNSG 1578 Concept-Based Nursing Care II 
This course examines a conceptual approach to nursing 
care for clients experiencing health as well as predictable, 
commonly occurring alterations in health throughout the 
lifespan. Emphasis will be placed on the nursing process 
as well as Tanner’s Model of Clinical Judgment to 
develop the students’ clinical reasoning skills. Lab 
required. Corequisites: VNSG 1262, VNSG 1271, and 
VNSG 1571. Prerequisites: BIOL 2404, VNSG 1261, 
 
 
316 
 
VNSG, 1270, VNSG 1570, and VNSG 1577. 5 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
VNSG 1579 Concept-Based Nursing Care III 
This course examines a conceptual approach to nursing 
care for clients experiencing health as well as predictable, 
commonly occurring alterations in health throughout the 
lifespan. Emphasis will be placed on the nursing process 
as well as Tanner’s Model of Clinical Judgment to 
develop the students’ clinical reasoning skills. Lab 
required. Corequisites: VNSG 1205, VNSG 1230, VNSG 
1238, and VNSG 2363. Prerequisites: VNSG 1262, 
VNSG 1571, and VNSG 1578. 5 credit hours. (W) 
 
VNSG 2363 Clinical III - Licensed 
Practical/Vocational Nurse Training 
A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Corequisites: VNSG 
1205 and VNSG 1579. Prerequisites: VNSG 1262 and 
VNSG 1578. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
VTHT 1105 Veterinary Medical Terminology 
Introduction to word parts, directional terminology, and 
analysis of veterinary terms. 1 credit hour. (W) 
 
VTHT 1217 Veterinary Office Management 
Practical experience in management of the veterinary 
practice. Emphasis on client relations, record keeping, 
inventory, employment skills, and computer skills in the 
veterinary environment. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
VTHT 1245 Veterinary Radiology 
Presentation of theory and principles and practical 
application of radiology within the field of veterinary 
medicine. Lab required. Prerequisite: VTHT 1313. 2 
credit hours. (W) 
 
VTHT 1271 Veterinary Technician National 
Examination (VTNE) Prep Course 
Preparation for the national licensing exam. Prerequisites: 
VTHT 1245, VTHT 1341, VTHT 2209, and VTHT 2213. 
2 credit hours. (W) 
 
VTHT 1280 Cooperative Education I - 
Veterinary/Animal Health Technology/Technician 
and Veterinary Assistant 
Career-related activities encountered in the student's area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Contact the 
Associate Dean/Director for more information. 
Prerequisite: Departmental Permit. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
VTHT 1301 Introduction to Veterinary Technology 
Survey of the profession of veterinary technology with 
emphasis on basic techniques, handling and care of 
animals, and ethical and professional requirements. Lab 
required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
VTHT 1313 Veterinary Anatomy and Physiology 
Gross anatomy of domestic animals including 
physiological explanations of how each organ system 
functions. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W 
 
VTHT 1341 Anesthesia and Surgical Assistance 
In-depth application of surgical, obstetrical, and 
anesthesia techniques including identification and use of 
instruments and equipment. Lab required. Prerequisites: 
VTHT 1349 and VTHT 2331. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
VTHT 1349 Veterinary Pharmacology 
Fundamentals of pharmacology including recognition, 
calculation, labeling, packaging, and administration of 
veterinary drugs, biologics, and therapeutic agents. 
Discussion of normal and abnormal responses to these 
agents. Lab required. Prerequisite: VTHT 1313. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
VTHT 2201 Canine and Feline Clinical Management 
Survey of feeding, common management practices, and 
care of canines and felines in a clinical setting. Review of 
common diseases of canines and felines encountered in 
the practice of veterinary medicine. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
VTHT 2205 Equine Clinical Management 
Survey of feeding, common management practices, and 
care of equines in a clinical setting. Review of common 
diseases of equines encountered in the practice of 
veterinary medicine. Lab required. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
VTHT 2209 Food Animal Clinical Management 
Survey of feeding, management practices, and care of 
food producing animals in a clinical setting. Review of 
common diseases of food producing animals. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: VTHT 1313. 2 credit hours. (W) 
 
VTHT 2213 Lab Animal Clinical Management 
Survey of feeding, management practices, and care of 
laboratory animals in a clinical setting. Review of 
common diseases of laboratory animals encountered in 
the practice of veterinary medicine. Lab required. 2 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
VTHT 2280 Cooperative Education II - 
Veterinary/Animal Health Technology/Technician 
and Veterinary Assistant 
Career-related activities encountered in the student's area 
317 
 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Contact the 
Associate Dean/Director for more information. 
Prerequisites: VTHT 1280 and VTHT 1341. 2 credit 
hours. (W) 
 
VTHT 2321 Veterinary Parasitology 
Study of parasites common to domestic animals including 
zoonotic diseases. Lab required. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
VTHT 2323 Veterinary Clinical Pathology I 
In-depth study of hematology and blood chemistries with 
emphasis on lab procedures. Lab required. Prerequisites: 
VTHT 2321 and VTHT 1313. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
VTHT 2325 Large Animal Assisting Techniques 
Study of restraint, management, treatment, and 
medication techniques for farm animals. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: VTHT 1313. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
VTHT 2331 Veterinary Clinical Pathology II 
In-depth study of urinalysis and cytology. Survey of 
microbiological techniques. Emphasis on laboratory 
procedures. Lab required. Prerequisite: VTHT 2323. 3 
credit hours. (W) 
 
VTHT 2439 Veterinary Nursing Care 
Capstone course requiring integration of course work in 
the field of veterinary technology. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: VTHT 1341. 4 credit hours. (W) 
 
WLDG 1308 Metal Sculpture 
Techniques and methods of oxy-fuel and electric welding 
and cutting to produce ornamental and functional items. 
Skill development in material forming, welding, brazing, 
and finishing techniques. Includes work ethics, artistic 
styles, and professionalism. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
Departmental Permit. 3 credit hours. (W) 
Note: Welding classes require extended periods of time standing in 
place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds repeatedly), reaching, 
bending, and working around open flames and intense heat for 
extended periods of time. 
 
WLDG 1313 Introduction to Blueprint Reading for 
Welders 
A study of industrial blueprints. Emphasis placed on 
terminology, symbols, graphic description, and welding 
processes. Includes systems of measurement and industry 
standards. Also includes interpretation of plans and 
drawings used by industry to facilitate field application 
and production. Lab required. Prerequisites: WLDG 
1428, WLDG 1430, and WLDG 1434. 3 credit hours. (W) 
Note: Welding classes require extended periods of time standing in 
place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds repeatedly), reaching, 
bending, and working around open flames and intense heat for 
extended periods of time. 
 
WLDG 1317 Introduction to Layout and Fabrication 
A fundamental course in layout and fabrication related to 
the welding industry. Major emphasis on structural shapes 
and use in construction. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
WLDG 1313. 3 credit hours. (W) 
Note: Welding classes require extended periods of time standing in 
place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds repeatedly), reaching, 
bending, and working around open flames and intense heat for 
extended periods of time. 
 
WLDG 1371 Introduction to Metal Casting 
Fundamentals of conceptualizing and producing cast 
items in ferrous and non-ferrous metals. Skill 
development through the casting process to create 
objects from different materials. Includes welding, 
brazing, pattern making, mold making, flask construction 
and casting of ferrous and non-ferrous metals. Lab 
required. Prerequisite: Departmental Permit. 3 credit 
hours. (W) 
Note: Welding classes require extended periods of time standing in 
place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds repeatedly), reaching, 
bending, and working around open flames and intense heat for 
extended periods of time. 
 
WLDG 1401 Metalsmithing 
Basic skill development in hand-forging steel, forge 
welding, scroll-forming, shaping, and joinery utilizing 
hammers, anvils, and coal and gas forges. Emphasis on 
techniques and processes to demonstrate versatility and 
skill. Lab required. Prerequisite: Departmental Permit. 4 
credit hours. (W) 
Note: Welding classes require extended periods of time standing in 
place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds repeatedly), reaching, 
bending, and working around open flames and intense heat for 
extended periods of time. 
 
WLDG 1405 Art Metals 
Fundamentals of producing utilitarian and ornamental 
items in various metals. Skills development through the 
techniques used in fabrication with sheet and/or stock 
materials including various welding and cutting processes. 
Lab required. Prerequisite: Departmental Permit. 4 credit 
hours. (W) 
Note: Welding classes require extended periods of time standing in 
place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds repeatedly), reaching, 
bending, and working around open flames and intense heat for 
extended periods of time. 
 
WLDG 1407 Introduction to Welding Using Multiple 
Processes 
Basic welding techniques using some of the following 
processes: Oxy-fuel welding (OFW) and cutting, shielded 
metal arc welding (SMAW), gas metal arc welding 
(GMAW), flux cored arc welding (FCAW), and gas 
 
 
318 
 
tungsten arc welding (GTAW). Lab required. Prerequisite: 
Departmental Permit. Corequisite: WLDG 1428. 4 credit 
hours. (W) 
Note: Welding classes require extended periods of time standing in 
place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds repeatedly), reaching, 
bending, and working around open flames and intense heat for 
extended periods of time. 
 
WLDG 1428 Introduction to Shielded Metal Arc 
Welding (SMAW) 
An introduction to the shielded metal arc welding 
process. Emphasis placed on power sources, electrode 
selection, and various joint designs. Additionally, 
instruction provided in SMAW fillet welds in various 
positions. Lab required. Prerequisite: Departmental 
Permit. Corequisite: WLDG 1407. 4 credit hours. (W) 
Note: Welding classes require extended periods of time standing in 
place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds repeatedly), reaching, 
bending, and working around open flames and intense heat for 
extended periods of time. 
 
WLDG 1430 Introduction to Gas Metal Arc Welding 
(GMAW) 
Principles of gas metal arc welding, set-up and use of Gas 
Metal Arc Welding (GMAW) equipment, and safe use of 
tools/equipment. Instruction in various joint designs. 
Additionally, this is an overview of terminology, safety 
procedures, and equipment set-up. Practice in performing 
T-joints, lap joints, and butt joints using Flux Cored Arc 
Welding (FCAW) equipment. Lab required. Prerequisites: 
WLDG 1407 and Departmental Permit. 4 credit hours. 
(W) 
Note: Welding classes require extended periods of time standing in 
place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds repeatedly), reaching, 
bending, and working around open flames and intense heat for 
extended periods of time. 
 
WLDG 1434 Introduction to Gas Tungsten Arc 
Welding (GTAW) 
Principles of gas tungsten arc welding (GTAW), including 
set-up, GTAW equipment. Instruction in various 
positions and joint designs. Lab required. Prerequisites: 
WLDG 1407 and Departmental Permit. 4 credit hours. 
(W) 
Note: Welding classes require extended periods of time standing in 
place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds repeatedly), reaching, 
bending, and working around open flames and intense heat for 
extended periods of time 
 
WLDG 1435 Introduction to Pipe Welding 
An introduction to welding of pipe using the shielded 
metal arc welding process (SMAW), including electrode 
selection, equipment setup, and safe shop practices. 
Emphasis on various welding positions and electrodes. 
Lab required. Prerequisite: WLDG 1428. Corequisite: 
WLDG 2443. 4 credit hours. (W) 
Note: Welding classes require extended periods of time standing in 
place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds repeatedly), reaching, 
bending, and working around open flames and intense heat for 
extended periods of time. 
 
WLDG 2371 Advanced Welding in Aerospace 
Applications 
Advanced skill development in repair procedures for 
steel, stainless steel and aluminum materials as applied to 
American Welding Society (AWS) standards for aircraft 
and aerospace welding. Includes the selection and 
application of appropriate methods, materials and 
equipment for welding, brazing and applied robotics 
welding. Lab Required. Prerequisites: WLDG 2447 and 
WLDG 2451. 3 credit hours. (W) 
 
WLDG 2435 Advanced Layout and Fabrication 
An advanced course in layout and fabrication. Includes 
production and fabrication of layout, tools, and processes. 
Emphasis on application of fabrication and layout skills. 
Lab required. Prerequisites: WLDG 1317, WLDG 2447, 
and WLDG 2451. 4 credit hours. (W) 
Note: Welding classes require extended periods of time standing in 
place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds repeatedly), reaching, 
bending, and working around open flames and intense heat for 
extended periods of time. 
 
WLDG 2440 Advanced Metal Sculpture 
Project development in an open-studio atmosphere. 
Individualized instruction to encourage skill combinations 
and experimentation. Topics include portfolio 
preparation and presentation. Lab required. Prerequisites: 
WLDG 1401, WLDG 1405, and WLDG 1408. 4 credit 
hours. (W) 
Note: Welding classes require extended periods of time standing in 
place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds repeatedly), reaching, 
bending, and working around open flames and intense heat for 
extended periods of time. 
 
WLDG 2441 Power Hammer 
Skill development in pneumatic, treadle, and trip hammer 
techniques. Topics include forging various steel alloys and 
larger stock configurations, tool making, machine care, 
and hardware. Projects to create functional esthetic 
objects using power hammers. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
WLDG 1401. 4 credit hours. (W) 
Note: Welding classes require extended periods of time standing in 
place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds repeatedly), reaching, 
bending, and working around open flames and intense heat for 
extended periods of time. 
 
WLDG 2443 Advanced Shielded Metal Arc Welding 
(SMAW) 
Advanced topics based on accepted welding codes. 
Training provided with various electrodes in shielded 
metal arc welding processes with open V-groove joints in 
various positions. Lab required. Prerequisite: WLDG 
1428. Corequisite: WLDG 1435. 4 credit hours. (W) 
319 
 
Note: Welding classes require extended periods of time standing in 
place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds repeatedly), reaching, 
bending, and working around open flames and intense heat for 
extended periods of time. 
 
WLDG 2447 Advanced Gas Metal Arc Welding 
(GMAW) 
Advanced topics in Gas Metal Arc Welding (GMAW). 
Includes welding in various positions. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: WLDG 1430. 4 credit hours. (W) 
Note: Welding classes require extended periods of time standing in 
place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds repeatedly), reaching, 
bending, and working around open flames and intense heat for 
extended periods of time. 
 
WLDG 2451 Advanced Gas Tungsten Arc Welding 
(GTAW) 
Advanced topics in GTAW welding, including welding in 
various positions and directions. Lab required. 
Prerequisite: WLDG 1434. 4 credit hours. (W) 
Note: Welding classes require extended periods of time standing in 
place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds repeatedly), reaching, 
bending, and working around open flames and intense heat for 
extended periods of time. 
 
WLDG 2471 Advanced Metal Casting 
Project development in an open-studio atmosphere. 
Individualized instruction to encourage skill combinations 
and experimentation. Topics include portfolio 
preparation and presentation. Lab required. Prerequisite: 
WLDG 1371. 4 credit hours. (W) 
Note: Welding classes require extended periods of time standing in 
place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds repeatedly), reaching, 
bending, and working around open flames and intense heat for 
extended periods of time. 
 
WLDG 2480 Cooperative Education - Welding 
Technology/Welder 
Career-related activities encountered in the student's area 
of specialization offered through an individualized 
agreement among the college, employer, and student. 
Under the supervision of the college and the employer, 
the student combines classroom learning with work 
experience. Includes a lecture component. Prerequisite: 
Consent of Associate Dean/Director. 4 credit hours. (W) 
Note: Welding classes require extended periods of time standing in 
place, lifting heavy weights (up to 60 pounds repeatedly), reaching, 
bending, and working around open flames and intense heat for 
extended periods of time. 
 
 
