 
ACCT 2301 – Principles of Accounting I. 3 credit hours. This course is an introduction to the fundamental 
concepts of financial accounting as prescribed by U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) 
as applied to transactions and events that affect business organizations. Students will examine the 
procedures and systems to accumulate, analyze, measure, and record financial transactions. Students will 
use recorded financial information to prepare a balance sheet, income statement, statement of cash flows, 
and statement of shareholders’ equity to communicate the business entity’s results of operations and 
financial position to users of financial information who are external to the company. Students will study 
the nature of assets, liabilities and owner’s equity while learning to use reported financial information for 
purposes of making decisions about the company. Students will be exposed to International Financial 
Reporting Standards (IFRS). 48 lecture hours. 
 
ACCT 2302 – Principles of Accounting II. 3 credit hours. A continuation of ACCT 2301. This course is 
an introduction to the fundamental concepts of managerial accounting appropriate for all organizations. 
Students will study information from the entity’s accounting system relevant to decisions made by internal 
managers, as distinguished from information relevant to users who are external to the company. The 
emphasis is on identification and assignment of product costs, operational budgeting and planning, cost 
control, and management decision making. Topics include product costing methodologies, cost behavior, 
operational and capital budgeting, and performance evaluation. Prerequisite: ACCT 2301 or equivalent. 48 
lecture hours.  
 
ACNT 1303 – Introduction to Accounting I. 3 credit hours. A study of analyzing, classifying, and 
recording business transactions in both a manual and a computerized environment. Emphasis is on 
understanding the complete accounting cycle and preparing financial statements, bank reconciliations, and 
payroll. Does not meet requirements for Associate of Science or B.B.A. degree. 48 lecture hours. 
  
ACNT 1311 – Introduction to Computerized Accounting. 3 credit hours. Introduction to utilizing the 
computer in maintaining accounting records, with primary emphasis on a general ledger package. 
Prerequisite: ACCT 2301 or equivalent plus typing skills. 48 lecture hours and 16 lab hours. Lab fee. Taught 
in fall semester only. 
 
ARCE 1452 – Structural Drafting. 4 credit hours. A study of structural systems including concrete 
foundations and frames, wood framing and trusses, and structural steel framing systems. Includes detailing 
of concrete, wood, and steel designed to meet industry standards including the American Institute of Steel 
Construction and the American Concrete Institute, with emphasis on framed and seated connectors, beam 
and column detailing, including units on concrete detailing conforming to the American Concrete Institute. 
32 lecture and 64 lab hours. Lab fee. Prerequisite: DFTG 1409. 
 
ARCE 2452 – Mechanical and Electrical Systems. 4 credit hours. The properties of building materials 
(assemblies), specifications, codes, vendor references and uses of mechanical, plumbing, conveying, and 
electrical systems as they relate to architecture for residential and commercial construction. 32 lecture and 
64 lab hours. Lab fee. Prerequisite: DFTG 1417. 
 
ARTC 1192 – Special Topics in Design and Visual Communication. 1 credit hour. Topics address 
recently identified current events, skills, knowledge, and/or attitudes and behaviors pertinent to the 
technology or occupation and relevant to the professional development of the student. This course was 
designed to be repeated multiple times to improve student proficiency. 32 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
 
 
 
ARTC 1327 – Typography. 3 credit hours. A study of letterforms and typographic concepts as elements 
of graphic communication. Emphasis on developing a current, practical typographic knowledge based on 
industry standards. 32 lecture hours and 64 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
ARTC 1402 – Digital Imaging I. 4 credit hours. Digital imaging using raster image editing and/or image 
creation software: scanning, resolution, file formats, output devices, color systems, and image-acquisitions. 
32 lecture hours and 64 lab hours. Prerequisite: COMM 1318. Lab fee.  A grade of B or better is required 
in this class to enroll in IMED 2266 Practicum (or Field Experience).  Lab fee. 
 
ARTC 1413 – Digital Publishing I. 4 credit hours. The fundamentals of using digital layout as a primary 
publishing tool and the basic concepts and terminology associated with typography and page layout.  
Prerequisite: COMM 1318.  A grade of B or better is required in this class to enroll in IMED 2266 Practicum 
(or field experience).  32 lecture and 64 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
ARTC 2388 – Internship – Commercial & Advertising Art. 3 credit hours. A work-based learning 
experience that enables the student to apply specialized occupational theory, skills and concepts. A learning 
plan is developed by the college and the employer. 144 contact hours. 
 
ARTC 2405 – Digital Imaging II. 4 credit hours. Principals of digital image processing and digital 
painting.  Emphasis on raster-based imaging and the creative aspects of electronic illustration for 
commercial or fine art applications.  Prerequisite: ARTC 1402. A grade of B or better is required in this 
class to enroll in IMED 2266 Field Experience.  32 lecture and 64 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
ARTC 2413 – Digital Publishing II. 4 credit hours. Includes layout procedures from thumbnails and 
roughs to final comprehensive and print output. Emphasis on design principles for the creation of 
advertising and publishing materials, and techniques for efficient planning and documenting projects. 
Prerequisite: ARTC 1413.  A grade of B or better is required in this class to enroll in IMED 2266 Field 
Experience.  32 lecture and 64 lab hours.  Lab fee. 
 
ARTS 1301 – Art Appreciation. 3 credit hours. A general introduction to the visual arts designed to create 
an appreciation of the vocabulary, media, techniques, and purposes of the creative process. Students will 
critically interpret and evaluate works of art within formal, cultural, and historical contexts. 48 lecture 
hours. 
 
ARTS 1303 – Art History I (Prehistoric to the 14th Century). 3 credit hours. A chronological analysis 
of the historical and cultural contexts of the visual arts from prehistoric times to the 14th century. 48 lecture 
hours. 
 
ARTS 1304 – Art History II (14th Century to the Present). 3 credit hours. A chronological analysis of 
the historical and cultural contexts of the visual arts from the 14th century to the present day. 48 lecture 
hours. 
 
ARTS 1311 – Design I (2-Dimensional). 3 credit hours. An introduction to the fundamental terminology, 
concepts, theory, and application of two-dimensional design. 32 lecture hours and 64 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTS 1316 – Drawing I. 3 credit hours. A foundation studio course exploring drawing with emphasis on 
descriptive, expressive, and conceptual approaches. Students will learn to see and interpret a variety of 
subjects while using diverse materials and techniques. Course work will facilitate a dialogue in which 
students will engage in critical analysis and begin to develop their understanding of drawing as a discipline. 
32 lecture and 64 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
ARTS 2316 – Painting I. 3 credit hours.  Exploration of ideas using painting media and techniques.  32 
lecture and 64 lab hours each week.  Prerequisite: ARTS 1311 and 1316 or consent of instructor. Lab fee. 
 
ARTS 2323 – Life Drawing. 3 credit hours.  Basic study of the human form.  32 lecture and 64 lab hours. 
Prerequisite: ARTS 1316 or consent of instructor.  Lab fee. 
 
ARTS 2348 – Digital Arts I. 3 credit hours. Studio course that explores the potential of the computer 
hardware and software medium for their visual, conceptual, and practical uses in the visual arts. 32 lecture 
and 64 lab hours. Prerequisites: ARTS 1316 and ARTS 1311 or instructor approval. Lab fee. 
 
ARTS 2356 – Photography I (Graphic Arts emphasis). 3 credit hours. Introduction to the basics of 
photography, which includes camera operation, techniques, knowledge of chemistry, and presentation 
skills. In addition, emphasis on design, history, and contemporary trends as a means of developing an 
understanding of photographic aesthetics will be discussed. Cross-listed with journalism emphasis as 
COMM 1318.  32 lecture hours and 48 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
ARTS 2366 – Watercolor Painting. 3 credit hours. Exploration of ideas using water-based painting media 
and techniques. Conceptual development through transparent paint; work in transparent and non-
transparent aqua-based media on paper surfaces. 32 lecture and 64 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
ARTV 1351 – Digital Video. 4 credit hours. Producing and editing video and sound for multimedia or 
Web productions. Emphasizes capture, editing, and outputting of video using a desktop digital video 
workstation. 32 lecture and 64 lab hours. Prerequisite: ARTS 2373 or instructor approval. Lab fee. 
 
AUMT 1407 – Automotive Electrical Systems. 4 credit hours. An overview of automotive electrical 
systems including topics in operational theory, testing, diagnosis, and repair of charging and starting 
systems, and electrical accessories. Emphasis on electrical principles schematic diagrams, and service 
manuals. May be taught manufacturer specific. Utilizing appropriate safety measures, the student will 
define basic electrical principles; interpret wiring schematics and symbols; explain operation of batteries, 
starting/charging systems, and automotive circuits; use test equipment; and perform basic electrical repairs. 
Concurrent enrollment in AUMT 1410. 32 lecture and 96 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
AUMT 1410 – Automotive Brake Systems. 4 credit hours. Operation and repair of drum/disc type brake 
systems. Topics include brake theory, diagnosis, and repair of power, manual, and anti-lock brake systems, 
and parking brakes. May be taught manufacturer specific. Utilizing appropriate safety measures, the student 
will explain operation of modern brake systems; and diagnose and repair hydraulic systems, drum/disc 
brake systems, and anti-lock brake systems. Concurrent enrollment in AUMT 1407. 32 lecture and 96 lab 
hours. Lab fee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AUMT 1416 – Suspension and Steering. 4 credit hours. Diagnosis and repair of automotive suspension 
and steering systems including electronically controlled systems. Includes component repair, alignment 
procedures and tire and wheel service. May be taught manufacturer specific. Utilizing appropriate safety 
measures, the student will explain operations of suspension and steering systems; diagnose and repair 
system components including electronically controlled systems; perform wheel alignment procedures; and 
perform tire service and repair. Prerequisite: AUMT 1407. 32 lecture and 96 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
AUMT 1419 – Automotive Engine Repair. 4 credit hours. Fundamentals of engine operation, diagnosis 
and repair. Emphasis on identification, inspection, measurements, disassembly, repair, and reassembly of 
the engine. May be taught manufacturer specific. Utilizing appropriate safety measures, the student will 
explain engine operating principles, demonstrate engine diagnostic procedures: cylinder head, valve train, 
block assembly, lubrication, and cooling systems. 32 lecture and 96 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
AUMT 1445 – Automotive Climate Control Systems. 4 credit hours. Diagnosis and repair of 
manual/electronic climate control systems; includes the refrigeration cycle and EPA guidelines for 
refrigerant handling. May be taught manufacturer specific. The student will use safety procedures including 
proper refrigerant handling; explain the refrigeration cycle; and diagnose and repair systems. Prerequisites: 
AUMT 1407. 32 lecture and 96 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
AUMT 2417 – Engine Performance Analysis I. 4 credit hours. Theory, operation, diagnosis of drivability 
concerns, and repair ignition and fuel delivery systems. Use of current engine performance diagnostic 
equipment. May be taught manufacturer specific. Utilizing appropriate safety measures, the student will 
explain engine dynamics; diagnose and repair ignition system and fuel delivery systems and use current 
engine performance diagnostic equipment. Prerequisite/corequisite: AUMT 1407. 32 lecture and 96 lab 
hours. Lab fee. 
 
AUMT 2425 – Automotive Automatic Transmission and Transaxle. 4 credit hours. A study of the 
operation, hydraulic principles, and electronic controls of modern automatic transmissions, manual 
transmissions and automatic and manual transaxles, transfer cases and differentials. Diagnosis, disassembly 
and assembly procedures with emphasis on the use of special tools and proper repair techniques. May be 
taught manufacturer specific. Utilizing appropriate safety measures, the student will diagnose, service, 
adjust and repair automatic transmissions/transaxles, manual transmissions/transaxles, transfer cases and 
differentials. Prerequisite: AUMT 1407. 32 lecture and 96 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
AUMT 2434 – Automotive Engine Performance Analysis II. 4 credit hours. Diagnosis and repair of 
emission systems, computerized engine performance systems, and advanced ignition and fuel systems. 
Includes use of advanced engine performance diagnostic equipment. May be taught manufacturer specific. 
Utilizing appropriate safety measures, the student will diagnose and repair emission control systems; 
computerized engine performance systems, and advanced ignition and fuel systems; and use of advanced 
engine performance diagnostic equipment. Prerequisite: AUMT 2417. 32 lecture and 96 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AUMT 2480 – Cooperative Education – Automotive Technology. 4 credit hours. Career-related 
activities encountered in the student’s area of specialization offered through an individualized agreement 
among the college, employer and student. Under the supervision of the college and the employer, the student 
combines classroom learning with work experience including a lecture component. The work experience 
consists of approximately three hundred twenty hours of on-the-job training. As outlined in the learning 
plan, apply the theory, concepts, and skills involving specialized materials, tools, equipment, procedures, 
regulations, laws and interactions within and among political, economic, environmental, social, and legal 
systems associated with the occupation and the business/industry and will demonstrate legal and ethical 
behavior, safety practices, interpersonal and teamwork skills and appropriate written and verbal 
communication skills using the terminology of the occupation and the business/industry. Fulltime hours 
each week at a local dealership. Prerequisites: Completion of all AUMT lecture and lab courses with a 
grade of “C” or better. Capstone experience. 
 
BCIS 1305 – Business Computer Applications. 3 credit hours. Introduces and develops foundational 
skills in applying essential and emerging business productivity information technology tools.  The focus of 
this course is on business productivity software applications, including word processing, spreadsheets, 
databases, presentation graphics, data analytics, and business-oriented utilization of the internet. 48 lecture 
and 16 lab hours.  
 
BIOL 1322 – Nutrition & Diet Therapy. 3 credit hours. This course introduces general nutritional 
concepts in health and disease and includes practical applications of that knowledge. Special emphasis is 
given to nutrients and nutritional processes including functions, food sources, digestion, absorption, and 
metabolism. Food safety, availability, and nutritional information including food labels, advertising, and 
nationally established guidelines are addressed (Cross-listed as HECO 1322). 48 lecture hours.  
 
BIOL 1406 – Biology for Science Majors I (Lecture + Lab). 4 credit hours. Fundamental principles of 
living organisms will be studied, including physical and chemical properties of life, organization, function, 
evolutionary adaptation, and classification. Concepts of cytology, reproduction, genetics, and scientific 
reasoning are included. The laboratory portion of the course will reinforce the fundamental principles of 
living organisms, including physical and chemical properties of life, organization, function, evolutionary 
adaptation, and classification. Study and examination of the concepts of cytology, reproduction, genetics, 
and scientific reasoning are included. This course is designed for science or related majors. 48 lecture and 
48 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
BIOL 1407 – Biology for Science Majors II (Lecture + Lab). 4 credit hours. The diversity and 
classification of life will be studied, including animals, plants, protists, fungi, and prokaryotes. Special 
emphasis will be given to anatomy, physiology, ecology, and evolution of plants and animals. The 
laboratory portion of the course will reinforce study of the diversity and classification of life, including 
animals, plants, protists, fungi, and prokaryotes. Special emphasis will be given to anatomy, physiology, 
ecology, and evolution of plants and animals. Recommended prerequisite: BIOL 1406. 48 lecture and 48 
lab hours. Lab fee.  
 
BIOL 1408 – Biology for Non-science Majors I (Lecture + Lab). 4 credit hours. Provides a survey of 
biological principles with an emphasis on humans, including chemistry of life, cells, structure, function, 
and reproduction. The laboratory portion of this course will reinforce a survey of biological principles with 
an emphasis on humans, including chemistry of life, cells, structure, function, and reproduction. THIS 
COURSE IS NOT INTENDED FOR SCIENCE MAJORS. 48 lecture and 48 lab hours. Lab fee.  
 
 
 
 
BIOL 1409 – Biology for Non-science Majors II (Lecture + Lab). 4 credit hours. This course will provide 
a survey of biological principles with an emphasis on humans, including evolution, ecology, plant and 
animal diversity, and physiology. The laboratory portion of this course will reinforce a survey of biological 
principles with an emphasis on humans, including evolution, ecology, plant and animal diversity, and 
physiology. THIS COURSE IS NOT INTENDED FOR SCIENCE MAJORS. 48 lecture and 48 lab hours. 
Lab fee. 
 
BIOL 1411 – General Botany (Lecture + Lab). 4 credit hours. Fundamental biological concepts relevant 
to plant physiology, life cycle, growth and development, structure and function, and cellular and molecular 
metabolism. The role of plants in the environment, evolution, and phylogeny of major plant groups, algae, 
and fungi is also included. The laboratory portion of this course will reinforce fundamental biological 
concepts relevant to plant physiology, life cycle, growth and development, structure and function, and 
cellular and molecular metabolism. The role of plants in the environment, evolution, and phylogeny of 
major plant groups, algae, and fungi is also included. (This course is intended for Science Majors). 48 
lecture and 48 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
BIOL 1413 – General Zoology (Lecture + Lab). 4 credit hours. Fundamental biological concepts relevant 
to animals, including systematics, evolution, structure and function, cellular and molecular metabolism, 
reproduction, development, diversity, phylogeny, and ecology. The laboratory portion of this course will 
reinforce fundamental biological concepts relevant to animals, including systematics, evolution, structure 
and function, cellular and molecular metabolism, reproduction, development, diversity, phylogeny, and 
ecology. (This course is intended for Science Majors). 48 lecture and 48 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
BIOL 2106 – Environmental Biology Laboratory. 1 credit hour. Laboratory activities will reinforce 
principles of environmental systems and ecology, including biogeochemical cycles, energy 
transformations, abiotic interactions, symbiotic relationships, natural resources and their management, 
lifestyle analysis, evolutionary trends, hazards and risks, and approaches to ecological research. 48 lab 
hours. Corequisite: BIOL 2306. Lab fee. 
 
BIOL 2306 – Environmental Biology (Lecture + Lab). 3 credit hours. Principles of environmental 
systems and ecology, including biogeochemical cycles, energy transformations, abiotic interactions, 
symbiotic relationships, natural resources and their management, lifestyle analysis, evolutionary trends, 
hazards and risks, and approaches to ecological research. Corequisite: BIOL 2106. 48 lecture hours. 
 
BIOL 2401 – Anatomy and Physiology I (Lecture + Lab). 4 credit hours Anatomy and Physiology, is 
the first part of a two-course sequence. It is a study of the structure and function of the human body including 
cells, tissues and organs of the following systems: integumentary, skeletal, muscular, nervous and special 
senses. Emphasis is on interrelationships among systems and regulation of physiological functions involved 
in maintaining homeostasis. The lab provides a hands-on learning experience for exploration of human 
system components and basic physiology. Prerequisite: Meet TSI college readiness standards for reading 
and writing. 48 lecture and 48 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BIOL 2402 – Anatomy and Physiology II (Lecture + Lab). 4 credit hours. Anatomy and Physiology II 
is the second part of a two-course sequence. It is a study of the structure and function of the human body 
including the following systems: endocrine, cardiovascular, immune, lymphatic, respiratory, digestive 
(including nutrition), urinary (including fluid and electrolyte balance), and reproductive (including human 
development and genetics). Emphasis is on interrelationships among systems and regulation of 
physiological functions involved in maintaining homeostasis. The lab provides a hands-on learning 
experience for exploration of human system components and basic physiology. 48 lecture and 48 lab hours. 
Prerequisite: Meet TSI college readiness standards for reading and writing; Grade of C or better in BIOL 
2401. Lab fee. 
 
BIOL 2404 – General Anatomy and Physiology (Lecture + Lab). 4 credit hours. Study of the structure 
and function of human anatomy, including the neuroendocrine, integumentary, musculoskeletal, digestive, 
urinary, reproductive, respiratory, and circulatory systems. Prerequisite: Meet TSI college readiness 
standards for reading and writing. 48 lecture and 48 lab hours. Lab fee.  
 
BIOL 2420 – Microbiology for Non-science Majors (Lecture + Lab). 4 credit hours. This course covers 
basic microbiology and immunology and is primarily directed at pre-nursing, pre-allied health, and non-
science majors and covers the basics of microbiology. It provides an introduction to historical concepts of 
the nature of microorganisms, microbial diversity, the importance of microorganisms and acellular agents 
in the biosphere, and their roles in human and animal diseases. Major topics include bacterial structure as 
well as growth, physiology, genetics, and biochemistry of microorganisms. Emphasis is on medical 
microbiology, infectious diseases, and public health. The laboratory portion of this course covers basics of 
culture and identification of bacteria and microbial ecology. Prerequisite: TSIA Complete. Lab fee. 48 
lecture and 48 lab hours. 
 
BIOL 2421 – Microbiology for Science Majors (Lecture + Lab). 4 credit hours. Principles of 
microbiology, including metabolism, structure, function, genetics, and phylogeny of microbes. The course 
will also examine the interactions of microbes with each other, hosts, and the environment. The laboratory 
portion of the course will reinforce principles of microbiology, including metabolism, structure, function, 
genetics, and phylogeny of microbes. The lab will also examine the interactions of microbes with each 
other, hosts, and the environment. Prerequisites: CHEM 1411, BIOL 1406 and BIOL 1407 or BIOL 1411 
and BIOL 1413. 48 lecture and 48 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
BMGT 1301 – Supervision. 3 credit hours. A study of the role of the supervisor. Includes managerial 
functions as applied to leadership, counseling, motivation, and human relations skills are examined. 48 
lecture hours. 
 
BMGT 1327 Principles of Management. 3 credit hours. Concepts, terminology, principles, theories, and 
issues in the field of management.  48 lecture hours.  This is a capstone course.   
 
BMGT 1341 Business Ethics. 3 credit hours. Discussion of ethical issues, the development of moral frame 
of reference, and the need for an awareness of social responsibility in management practices and business 
activities.  Includes ethical corporate responsibility.  48 lecture hours.  
 
BMGT 2303 Problem Solving and Decision Making.  3 credit hours.  Decision-making and problem-
solving processes in organizations utilizing logical and creative problem-solving techniques.  Application 
of theory is provided by experiential activities using managerial decision tools.  48 lecture hours. 
 
 
 
 
BUSG 1191 – Special Topics in Business Administration and Management, General, (SIFE). 1 credit 
hour. Topics address recently identified current events, skills, knowledge, and/or attitudes and behaviors 
pertinent to the technology or occupation and relevant to the professional development of the student. May 
be repeated for credit. 16 lecture hours. 
 
BUSG 1380, 1381 – Cooperative Education I, II, III, & IV – Business/Commerce, General. 3 credit 
hours. Career-related activities encountered in the student’s area of specialization offered through an 
individualized agreement among the college, employer and student. Under the supervision of the college 
and the employer, the student combines classroom learning with work experience. 16 lecture and 224 hours 
on the job.  BUSG 1381 is a capstone course. 
 
BUSG 2309 – Small Business Management. 3 credit hours. Starting, operating, and growing a small 
business. Includes essential management skills, how to prepare a business plan, accounting, financial needs, 
staffing, marketing strategies, and legal issues. 48 lecture hours. 
 
BUSI 1301 – Business Principles. 3 credit hours. This course provides a survey of economic systems, 
forms of business ownership, and considerations for running a business. Students will learn various aspects 
of business, management, and leadership functions; organizational considerations; and decision-making 
processes. Financial topics are introduced, including accounting, money and banking, and securities 
markets. Also included are discussions of business challenges in legal and regulatory environment, business 
ethics, social responsibility, and international business. Emphasized is the dynamic role of business in 
everyday life. 48 lecture hours. 
 
BUSI 2301 – Business Law. 3 credit hours. The course provides the student with foundational information 
about the U.S. legal system and dispute resolution, and their impact on business. The major content areas 
will include general principles of law, the relationship of business and the U.S. Constitution, state and 
federal legal systems, the relationship between law and ethics, contracts, sales, torts, agency law, 
intellectual property, and business law in the global context. Prerequisite: sophomore standing or approval 
of the Dean. 48 lecture hours. 
 
BUSI 2304 – Business Report Writing and Correspondence. 3 credit hours. Theory and applications for 
technical reports and correspondence in business. Includes an oral component. 48 lecture hours. This is a 
capstone course. 
 
BUSI 2305 – Business Statistics. 3 credit hours. Descriptive and inferential statistical techniques for 
business and economic decision-making.  Topics include the collection, description, analysis, and 
summarization of data; probability; discrete and continuous random variables; the binomial and normal 
distributions; sampling distributions; tests of hypotheses; estimation and confidence intervals; linear 
regressions; and correlation analysis.  Statistical software is used to analyze data throughout the course. 
Prerequisite:  MATH 1324 and BCIS 1305.  48 lecture hours. 
 
CDEC 1359 – Children with Special Needs. 3 credit hours. A survey of information regarding children 
with special needs including possible causes and characteristics of exceptionalities, intervention strategies, 
available resources, referral processes, the advocacy role, and legislative issues.  48 lecture hours. 
 
CDEC 1413 – Curriculum Resources for Early Childhood Programs. 4 credit hours. A study of the 
fundamentals of developmentally appropriate curriculum design and implementation in early care and 
 
 
 
education programs for children birth through age eight. The course includes 32 hours of field experiences 
and 48 lecture hours. Lab fee. 
 
CDEC 1417 Child Development Associate Training I. 4 credit hours. Based on the requirements for the 
Child Development Associate credential (CDA). Topics include CDA overview, observation skills, and 
child growth and development. The four functional areas of study are creative, cognitive, physical, and 
communication. The course includes 32 hours of field experiences and 48 lecture hours. Lab fee. 
 
CDEC 1419 – Child Guidance. 4 credit hours. An exploration of guidance strategies for promoting pro-
social behaviors with individual and groups of children. Emphasis on positive guidance principles and 
techniques, family involvement, and cultural influences. The course includes 32 hours of field experiences 
and 48 lecture hours. Lab fee. 
 
CDEC 1421 – The Infant & Toddler. 4 credit hours. A study of appropriate infant and toddler programs 
(birth to age 3), including an overview of development, quality routines, learning environments, materials 
and activities, and teaching/guidance techniques. The course includes 32 hours of field experiences and 48 
lecture hours. Lab fee. 
 
CDEC 1458 – Creative Arts for Early Childhood. 4 credit hours. An exploration of principles, methods, 
and materials for teaching music, movement, visual arts, and dramatic play through process-oriented 
experiences to support divergent thinking for children birth through age eight. The course includes 32 hours 
of field experiences and 48 lecture hours. Lab fee. 
CDEC 2422 – Child Development Associate Training II. 4 credit hours. A continuation of the study of 
the requirements for the Child Development Associate credential (CDA). The six functional areas of study 
include safe, healthy, learning environment, self, social, and guidance. The course includes 32 hours of 
field experiences and 48 lecture hours. Lab fee. 
 
CDEC 2424 – Child Development Associate Training III. 4 credit hours. Continuation of the 
requirements for the Child Development Associate credential (CDA). The three functional areas of study 
include family, program management and professionalism. The course includes 32 hours of field 
experiences and 48 lecture hours. Lab fee. 
 
CDEC 2426 – Administration of Programs for Children I. 4 credit hours. Application of management 
procedures for early care and education programs. Includes planning, operating, supervising, and evaluating 
programs. Topics cover philosophy, types of programs, policies, fiscal management, regulations, staffing, 
evaluation, and communication. The course includes 32 hours of field experiences and 48 lecture hours. 
Lab fee. 
 
CETT 1304 – High Reliability Soldering. 3 credit hours.  High reliability soldering, desoldering, circuitry 
repair, plated-thru-hole repairs, conformal coating removal, industry standards, electrostatic discharge 
(ESD) control, surface mount device (SMD) installation, removal and replacement using hand held systems 
or reflow workstations.  Students will be able to Solder to industry standards; desolder connections; install 
surface mount devices; remove surface mount devices; remove conformal coatings; repair and/or replace 
traces, pads, and eyelets.  32 lecture and 32 lab hours.  Lab fee. 
 
CETT 1321 – Electronic Fabrication. 3 credit hours.  A study of electronic circuit fabrication techniques 
including printed circuit boards, wire wrapping, bread boarding, and various soldering techniques.  Apply 
electronic circuit fabrication techniques to industry standards; document step-by-step procedures; create 
 
 
 
schematic/wiring diagrams; apply circuit description; identify the tools required to produce a printed circuit 
board; and produce soldering connections.  32 lecture and 32 lab hours.  Lab fee.  IPC/WHMA-A-620 
Exam Certification Fee.  
 
CETT 1409 – DC-AC Circuits. 4 credit hours. Fundamentals of DC circuits and AC circuits operation 
including Ohm's law, Kirchhoff's laws, networks, transformers, resonance, phasors, capacitive and 
inductive and circuit analysis techniques. Students will construct and analyze DC and AC circuits from 
simple to complex; perform test measurements; and utilize a multimeter and oscilloscope to differentiate 
between two AC signals with respect to voltage, current, and power. Corequisite: TECM 1301. 48 lecture 
and 32 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
CETT 1425 – Digital Fundamentals.  4 credit hours.  An entry level course in digital electronics to include 
numbering systems, logic gates, Boolean algebra, and combinational logic.  Students will be able to 
construct digital circuits such as combinational logic circuits, clocking and timing circuits, and troubleshoot 
various digital circuits using schematic diagrams.  Students will be able to construct various control systems 
using digital logic and interface circuitry.  Corequisite:  TECM 1301.  32 lecture and 32 lab hours.  Lab fee. 
IPC J-STD-001 Exam Certification Fee.  
 
CETT 1449 – Digital Systems.  4 credit hours.  An entry level course in digital electronics to include 
numbering systems, logic gates, Boolean algebra, and combinational logic.  Students will be able to 
construct digital circuits such as combinational logic circuits, clocking and timing circuits, and troubleshoot 
various digital circuits using schematic diagrams. Students will be able to construct various control systems 
using digital logic and interface circuitry. Prerequisite:  CETT 1425.  32 lecture and 32 lab hours.  Lab fee.   
 
CETT 1457 – Linear Integrated Circuits. 4 credit hours. A study of the characteristics, operations and 
testing of linear integrated circuits. Applications include instrumentation and active filtering. Students will 
construct and troubleshoot circuits containing linear integrated circuits. Prerequisite: CETT 1409. 48 lecture 
and 32 lab hours. Lab Fee. 
 
CETT 2337 – Microcomputer Control. 3 credit hours. A study of microprocessors and microcomputers 
with an emphasis on embedded controllers for industrial and commercial applications. Students will be able 
to interface a microcontroller to monitor and control an industrial application.  32 lecture and 32 lab hours.  
Lab fee. 
 
CETT 2381 – Cooperative Education. 3 credit hours. Career-related activities encountered in the student's 
area of specialization offered through an individualized agreement among the college, employer, and 
student. Under the supervision of the college and the employer, the student combines classroom learning 
with work experience. Includes a lecture component. As outlined in the learning plan, apply the theory, 
concepts, and skills involving specialized materials, tools, equipment, procedures, regulations, laws, and 
interactions within and among political, economic, environmental, social, and legal systems associated with 
the occupation and the business/industry; and will demonstrate legal and ethical behavior, safety practices, 
interpersonal and teamwork skills, and appropriate written and verbal communication skills using the 
terminology of the occupation and the business/industry. 15 lecture and 320 lab hours. Pre-requisite: 
Approval of advisor, and must have a GPA of 3.00 or higher. 
 
CETT 2435 – Advanced Microprocessors. 4 credit hours. An advanced course utilizing the 
microprocessor in control systems and interfacing. Emphasis on microprocessor hardware and 
implementation of peripheral interfacing. Students will be able to design a microprocessor-controlled 
 
 
 
interface; assemble hardware; write program to perform a practical application; explain the operation of a 
programmable interfacing chip; and configure a programmable interfacing chip. Prerequisite: CETT 1349. 
32 lecture and 64 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
CETT 2437 – Microcomputer Control. 4 credit hours. A study of microprocessors and microcomputers 
with an emphasis on embedded controllers for industrial and commercial applications. Students will be able 
to interface a microcontroller to monitor and control an industrial application. Prerequisite: CETT 1409. 32 
lecture and 64 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
CHEM 1105 – Introductory Chemistry Lab I. 1 credit hour. Survey course introducing chemistry. Topics 
may include inorganic, organic, biochemistry, food/physiological chemistry, and environmental/consumer 
chemistry. Designed for non-science and allied health students. 48 lab hours. Prerequisite or corequisite: 
CHEM 1305. Lab fee. 
 
CHEM 1305 – Introductory Chemistry I. 3 credit hours. Survey course introducing chemistry. Topics 
may include inorganic, organic, biochemistry, food/physiological chemistry, and environmental/consumer 
chemistry. Designed for non-science and allied health students. 48 lecture hours. 
 
CHEM 1409 – General Chemistry for Engineering Majors (Lecture + Lab). 4 credit hours. 
Fundamental principles of chemistry for engineering majors; topics include measurements, fundamental 
properties of matter, states of matter, chemical reactions, acid-base concepts, chemical stoichiometry, 
periodicity of elemental properties, atomic structure, chemical bonding, molecular structure, solutions, 
properties of gases, phase-diagrams, introduction to chemical equilibrium, chemical thermodynamics, 
electrochemistry, and an introduction to descriptive inorganic chemistry and organic chemistry. The lab 
includes basic laboratory experiments supporting theoretical principles presented in the lecture; 
introduction of the scientific method, experimental design, chemical instrumentation, data collection and 
analysis, and preparation of laboratory reports. Prerequisite: MATH 1314 College Algebra or equivalent 
academic preparation. 48 lecture and 48 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
CHEM 1411 – General Chemistry I (Lecture + Lab). 4 credit hours. Fundamental principles of chemistry 
for majors in the sciences, health sciences, and engineering; topics include measurements, fundamental 
properties of matter, states of matter, chemical reactions, chemical stoichiometry, periodicity of elemental 
properties, atomic structure, chemical bonding, molecular structure, solutions, properties of gases, and an 
introduction to thermodynamics and descriptive chemistry. Basic laboratory experiments supporting 
theoretical principles presented in the lecture component; introduction of the scientific method, 
experimental design, data collection and analysis, and preparation of laboratory reports. Prerequisite: 
MATH 1314 College Algebra or equivalent academic preparation. 48 lecture and 48 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
CHEM 1412 – General Chemistry II (Lecture + Lab). 4 credit hours. Chemical equilibrium; phase 
diagrams and spectrometry; acid base concepts; thermodynamics; kinetics; electrochemistry; nuclear 
chemistry; an introduction to organic chemistry and descriptive inorganic chemistry. Basic laboratory 
experiments supporting theoretical principles presented in the lecture component; introduction of the 
scientific method, experimental design, chemical instrumentation, data collection and analysis, and 
preparation of laboratory reports. Prerequisite: Must have passed CHEM 1411 General Chemistry I 
(Lecture + Lab) or CHEM 1409 (Lecture + Lab) an equivalent transfer course with a C or better. 48 lecture 
and 48 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
 
 
 
CMSW 1191 – Basic Family Assessment. 1 credit hour. Topics address recently identified current events, 
skills, knowledge, and/or attitudes and behaviors pertinent to the technology or occupation and relevant to 
the professional development of the student. This course was designed to be repeated multiple times to 
improve student proficiency. Learning outcomes/objectives are determined by local occupational need and 
business and industry trends. This course examines assessments commonly used in social services that 
focus on family systems. Corequisite: PMHS 1280 – Cooperative Education I. 16 lecture hours. 
 
CMSW 1309 – Problems of Children and Adolescents. 3 credit hours. Examine common problems and 
evaluate effective prevention and intervention models of at-risk children and youth. Topics include social, 
family, educational systems impact, juvenile delinquency, teen sexuality, and mental health including 
addictive behaviors to promote wellness. Prerequisites: SCWK 1321. 48 lecture hours. 
 
CMSW 1313 – Assessment and Service Delivery. 3 credit hours. A study of interviewing and assessment 
instruments and approaches for working with multicultural populations. Emphasis is on service delivery 
systems in human services. Topics include awareness of commonly used assessments, ethical standards of 
practice, awareness of multicultural issues and competence in service delivery. Students will identify 
commonly used assessments including a psychosocial history; articulate client rights and ethical 
responsibilities; describe limitations of confidentiality; identify community resources; and create alliances 
with multidisciplinary professionals. Students will recommend appropriate services based on hypothetical 
situations. 48 lecture hours. 
 
CMSW 1327 – Treatment Modalities for Special Populations. 3 credit hours. An introduction to 
evidence-based treatment methods with special populations including ethnic minorities, elderly, children, 
youth, alternative lifestyles, persons with addictions or mental health issues. Corequisite: DAAC or PMHS 
2280/2281. Prerequisites: SCWK 1321, CMSW 1313 and DAAC 1311. 48 lecture hours. 
 
CMSW 1353 – Family Intervention Strategies. 3 credit hours. The study of current family intervention 
strategies. The student will distinguish between major theories of assessment, intervention and treatment in 
families. Students will also develop self-awareness as connected to the family system. Prerequisite: SCWK 
1321. 48 lecture hours. 
 
COMM 1316 – News Photography I. 3 credit hours. Problems and practices of photography for 
newspapers.  Includes instruction in camera and equipment operation and maintenance, film and plate 
developing, and printing media.  32 lecture and 48 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
COMM 1318 – Photography I (Journalism emphasis). 3 credit hours. Introduction to the basics of 
photography including techniques and equipment operation.  Cross-listed with graphic arts emphasis, as 
ARTS 2356. 32 lecture and 48 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
COMM 1335 – Introduction to Electronic Media. 3 credit hours.  An overview of the development, 
regulation, economics, social impact, and industry practices in electronic media. Prerequisite: COMM 1307 
and sophomore standing. 48 lecture hours. 
 
COMM 2305 – Editing and Layout. 3 credit hours. Editing and layout processes, with emphasis on 
accuracy and fairness, including the principles and techniques of design. 32 lecture and 32 lab hours. 
 
 
 
 
COMM 2311 – Media Writing. 3 credit hours. Fundamentals of writing for the mass media.  Includes 
instruction in professional methods and techniques for gathering, processing, and delivering content.  48 
lecture and 16 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
COMM 2315 – News Reporting. 3 credit hours. This course focuses on advanced news-gathering and 
writing skills. It concentrates on the three-part process of producing news stories: discovering the news, 
reporting the news, and writing the news in different formats.  16 lecture and 80 lab hours. Prerequisite: 
COMM 2311. Lab fee. 
 
COMM 2332 – Radio/Television/Internet News. 3 credit hours. Preparation and analysis of news styles 
for the electronic media. 32 lecture and 64 lab hours. Prerequisites: COMM 1307 and COMM 2311. Lab 
fee. 
 
COSC 1301 – Introduction to Computing. 3 credit hours. Overview of computer systems-hardware, 
operating systems, and microcomputer application software, including the Internet, word processing, 
spreadsheets, presentation graphics, and databases. Current issues such as the effect of computers on 
society, and the history and use of computers in business, educational, and other modern settings are also 
studied. This course is not intended to count toward a student's major field of study in business or computer 
science. 48 lecture hours. Lab fee.  
 
COSC 1315 – Introduction to Computer Programming. 3 credit hours. Introduction to computer 
programming for solving a variety of problems. This course is intended for non-computer science and non-
computer engineering majors. Emphasis on the fundamentals of design, development, testing, 
implementation, and documentation of computer programs. Includes problem solving with structured 
techniques and algorithms using pseudo code and/or graphical representations. Prerequisite: TSIA 
Complete. Lab fee. 48 lecture hours. 
 
COSC 1336 – Programming Fundamentals I. 3 credit hours. Introduces the fundamental concepts of 
structured programming and provides a comprehensive introduction to programming for computer science 
and technology majors. Topics include software development methodology, data types, control structures, 
functions, arrays, and the mechanics of running, testing, and debugging. This course assumes computer 
literacy. This course is included in the Field of Study Curriculum for Computer Science. 48 lecture and 32 
lab hours. Prerequisite: TSIA Complete. Lab fee. 
 
COSC 1337 - Programming Fundamentals II. 3 credit hours. This course focuses on the object-oriented 
programming paradigm, emphasizing the definition and use of classes along with fundamentals of object-
oriented design. The course includes basic analysis of algorithms, searching and sorting techniques, and an 
introduction to software engineering processes. Students will apply techniques for testing and debugging 
software. (This course is included in the Field of Study Curriculum for Computer Science.) Prerequisite: 
COSC 1336. 
 
COSC 2325 - Computer Organization. 3 credit hours. The organization of computer systems is 
introduced using assembly language. Topics include basic concepts of computer architecture and 
organization, memory hierarchy, data types, computer arithmetic, control structures, interrupt handling, 
instruction sets, performance metrics, and the mechanics of testing and debugging computer systems. 
Embedded systems and device interfacing are introduced. Prerequisite: COSC 1336. 48 lecture hours. 
 
 
 
 
COSC 2336 - Programming Fundamentals III. 3 credit hours. Further applications of programming 
techniques, introducing the fundamental concepts of data structures and algorithms. Topics include data 
structures (including stacks, queues, linked lists, hash tables, trees, and graphs), searching, sorting, 
recursion, and algorithmic analysis. Programs will be implemented in an appropriate object-oriented 
language. (This course is included in the Field of Study Curriculum for Computer Science.) Prerequisite: 
COSC 1337.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
CPMT 1311 – Introduction to Computer Maintenance. 3 credit hours. A study of the information for 
the assembly of a microcomputer system. Emphasis is on the evolution of the microprocessor and 
microprocessor bus structures. The student will identify modules that make up a computer system and its 
operation; identify each type of computer bus structure; and assemble/setup microcomputer systems, 
accessory boards, and install/connect associated peripherals. Textbook must be purchased from Angelina 
College Bookstore. 32 lecture and 32 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
CPMT 2350 – Industry Certification Preparation. 2 credit hours. Overview of the objectives for industry 
specific certification exams. Prepares students to sit for the PC Pro Certification, Comp TIA 220-901 
Certification, and the CompTIA 220-902 Certification. Prerequisite: CPMT 1311. 32 lecture and 32 lab 
hours. Lab Fee. 
 
CRIJ 1301 – Introduction to Criminal Justice. 3 credit hours. This course provides a historical and 
philosophical overview of the American criminal justice system, including the nature, extent, and impact 
of crime; criminal law; and justice agencies and processes. 48 lecture hours. 
 
CRIJ 1306 – Court Systems & Practices. 3 credit hours. This course is a study of the court system as it 
applies to the structures, procedures, practices and sources of law in American courts, using federal and 
Texas statues and case law. 48 lecture hours. 
 
CRIJ 1307 – Crime in America. 3 credit hours. American crime problems in historical perspective, social 
and public policy factors affecting crime, impact and crime trends, social characteristics of specific crimes, 
and prevention of crime. 48 lecture hours.  
 
CRIJ 1310 – Fundamentals of Criminal Law. 3 credit hours. This course is the study of criminal law 
including application of definitions, statutory elements, defenses and penalties using Texas statutes, the 
Model Penal Code, and case law. The course also analyzes the philosophical and historical development of 
criminal law and criminal culpability. 48 lecture hours. 
 
CRIJ 1313 – Juvenile Justice System. 3 credit hours. A study of the juvenile justice process to include 
specialized juvenile law, role of the juvenile law, role of the juvenile courts, role of police agencies, role of 
correctional agencies, and theories concerning delinquency. 48 lecture hours. 
 
CRIJ 2301 – Community Resources in Corrections. 3 credit hours. An introductory study of the role of 
the community in corrections; community programs for adults and juveniles; administration of community 
programs; legal issues; future trends in community treatment. 48 lecture hours. 
 
CRIJ 2313 – Correctional Systems and Practices. 3 credit hours. This course is a survey of institutional 
and non-institutional corrections. Emphasis will be placed on the organization and operation of correctional 
systems; treatment and rehabilitation; populations served; Constitutional issues; and current and future 
issues. 48 lecture hours. 
 
CRIJ 2314 – Criminal Investigation. 3 credit hours. Investigative theory; collection and preservation of 
evidence; sources of information; interview and interrogation; uses of forensic sciences; case and trial 
preparation. 48 lecture hours. 
 
CRIJ 2323 – Legal Aspects of Law Enforcement. 3 credit hours. Police authority; responsibilities; 
constitutional constraints; laws of arrest, search, and seizure; police liability. 48 lecture hours. 
 
 
 
 
CRIJ 2328 – Police Systems and Practices. 3 credit hours. This course examines the establishment, role 
and function of police in a democratic society. It will focus on types of police agencies and their 
organizational structure, police-community interaction, police ethics, and use of authority. 48 lecture hours. 
 
DAAC 1311 – Counseling Theories. 3 credit hours. An examination of the major theories and current 
treatment modalities used in the field of counseling. Students will Identify major counseling theories; define 
and explain techniques relevant to the various theories; and identify major approaches to treatment. Ethics 
and professional standards in counseling will also be examined, along with the student’s development as a 
helper in the Human Services profession. Prerequisites: SCWK 1321 – Basic Counseling Skills. 48 lecture 
hours. 
 
DAAC 1417 – Orientation to Social Services.  4 credit hours. An overview and application of the basic 
counseling skills and techniques, including communication skills necessary to develop an effective helping 
relationship with individuals and families, including diverse clients from special populations. Students will 
identify basic counseling skills and techniques, and practice various counseling techniques in an assigned 
setting. Prerequisite: SCWK 1321, Orientation to Social Services. 64 lecture hours. Includes lab for 
counseling skills practice. 
 
DEMR 1301 –Shop Safety and Procedures. 3 credit hours. A study of shop safety, rules, basic shop tools, 
and test equipment. 32 lecture and 32 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
DEMR 1405 – Basic Electrical Systems. 4 credit hours. Basic principles of electrical systems of diesel-
powered equipment with emphasis on starters, alternators, and batteries. 48 lecture and 32 lab hours. Lab 
fee. 
 
DEMR 1406 – Diesel Engine I. 4 credit hours. An introduction to the basic principles of diesel engines 
and systems. 32 lecture and 64 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
DEMR 1410 – Diesel Engine Testing and Repair I. 4 credit hours. An introduction to testing and repairing 
diesel engines including related systems and specialized tools. 32 lecture and 64 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
DEMR 1413 – Fuel Systems. 4 credit hours. In-depth coverage of fuel injector pumps and injection 
systems. 48 lecture and 32 lab hours. Lab fee.  
 
DEMR 1416 – Basic Hydraulics. 4 credit hours. Fundamentals of hydraulics including components and 
related systems. 48 lecture and 32 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
DEMR 1442 – Power Train Applications I. 4 credit hours. In-depth coverage of the mechanics and theory 
of power trains. Emphasis on disassembly, inspection, and repair of power train components. 48 lecture and 
32 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
DEMR 1449 – Diesel Engine II. 4 credit hours. An in-depth coverage of disassembly, repair, identification, 
evaluation, and reassembly of diesel engines. 32 lecture and 64 lab hours. Prerequisite: DEMR 1406. Lab 
fee. 
 
DEMR 2412 – Diesel Engine Testing and Repair II. 3 credit hours. Continuation of Diesel Engine 
Testing and Repair I. Coverage of testing and repairing diesel engines including related systems and 
 
 
 
specialized tools. 32 lecture and 64 lab hours. Prerequisite: DEMR 1410. Corequisite: DEMR 1416. Lab 
fee. 
 
DEMR 2432 – Electronic Controls. 4 credit hours. Advanced skills in diagnostic and programming 
techniques of electronic control systems. 48 lecture and 32 lab hours. Prerequisite: DEMR 1405. Lab fee. 
 
DEMR 2480 – Cooperative Education. 4 credit hours. Career-related activities encountered in the 
student’s area of specialization offered through an individualized agreement among the college, employer, 
and student. Under supervision of the college and the employer, the student combines classroom learning 
with work experience. Includes a lecture component. 16 lecture and 336 external hours. Prerequisites: 
DEMR 1301, 1405, 1406, 1410, 1413, 1442, 1449, 2432. Corequisite: DEMR 1416. 
 
DFTG 1325 – Blueprint Reading and Sketching. 3 credit hours. An introduction to reading and 
interpreting working drawings for fabrication processes and associated trades. Use of sketching techniques 
to create pictorial and multiple-view drawings. The student will state the meaning of the alphabet of lines, 
pictorial and multiple-view drawings, dimensions, notes and symbols, sections and auxiliary views, and 
working drawings to include detail and assembly drawings. The student will read and interpret drawings, 
create freehand sketches, and use pictorial and orthographic drawing techniques. 48 lecture hours. 
 
DFTG 1405 – Introduction to Technical Drawing. 4 credit hours. Introduction to the principles of 
drafting to include terminology and fundamentals, including size and shape descriptions, projections 
methods, geometric construction, sections, auxiliary views, and reproduction processes. 32 lecture and 64 
lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
DFTG 1409 – Basic Computer-Aided Drafting. 4 credit hours. An introduction to basic computer-aided 
drafting. Emphasis is placed on drawing setup; creating and modifying geometry; storing and retrieving 
predefined shapes; placing, rotating, and scaling objects, adding text and dimensions, using layers, 
coordinating systems, and plot/print to scale; as well as using input and output devices. 32 lecture and 64 
lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
DFTG 1417 – Architectural Drafting – Residential. 4 credit hours. Architectural drafting procedures, 
practices, and symbols, including preparation of detailed working drawings for residential structures with 
emphasis on light frame construction methods. The student will demonstrate a general understanding of 
architectural terms, symbols, use of residential construction materials and processes, and knowledge of 
reference materials. The student will demonstrate the ability to produce a set of residential construction 
drawings to include: site plan, floor plan, elevations, wall sections, schedules, details, and foundation plan. 
32 lecture and 64 lab hours. Prerequisite: DFTG 1409. Lab fee. 
 
DFTG 1430 – Civil Drafting I. 4 credit hours. Interpret field notes; develop documents for a civil project 
related to drainage and utilities infrastructure, to include a comprehension of related calculations. 32 lecture 
and 64 lab hours. Prerequisite: DFTG 1409. Lab fee. 
 
DFTG 1433 – Mechanical Drafting. 4 credit hours. An introductory course covering a study of mechanical 
drawings using dimensioning and tolerances, use of sectioning techniques, orthographic projections, and 
pictorial drawings. Common fasteners, isometrics and oblique drawings, including bill of materials. The 
student will apply tolerance techniques to draw detail, isometric, and oblique drawing and draw common 
fasteners. 32 lecture and 64 lab hours. Prerequisite: DFTG 1409. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DFTG 2366 – Practicum (Field Experience). 3 credit hours. Practical, general workplace training 
supported by an individualized learning plan developed by the employer, college, and student. The plan 
relates the workplace training and experiences to the student’s general and technical course of study. The 
guided external experiences may be for pay or no pay. This course may be repeated if topics and outcomes 
vary. As outlined in the learning plan, the student will master the theory, concepts, and skills involving the 
tools, materials, equipment, procedures, regulations, laws, and interactions within and among political, 
economic, environmental, and legal systems associated with the workplace; demonstrate ethical behavior, 
safety practices, interpersonal and teamwork skills, appropriate verbal and written communications in the 
workplace. Prerequisite: 34 hours of drafting courses. 16 lecture and 256 hours at the workplace. 
 
DFTG 2402 – Machine Drafting. 4 credit hours. Production of detail and assembly drawings of machines, 
threads, gears, cams, tolerances, limit dimensioning, surface finishes, and precision drawings. 32 lecture 
and 64 lab hours. Prerequisite: DFTG 1409 and DFTG 1433. Lab fee. 
 
DFTG 2421 – Topographical Drafting. 4 credit hours. A course in map drafting. Emphasis is given to 
plotting of surveyor’s field notes. Includes plotting and drawing elevations, contour lines, plan and profiles, 
and laying out traverses. 32 lecture and 64 lab hours. Prerequisite: DFTG 1409. 
 
DFTG 2486 – Internship – Drafting. 4 credit hours. A work-based learning experience that enables the 
student to apply specialized occupational theory, skills and concepts. A learning plan is developed by the 
college and the employer. Mentored and supervised by a workplace employee, the student achieves 
objectives that are developed and documented by the college and that are directly related to specific 
occupational outcomes. This may be a paid or non-paid experience. This course may be repeated if topics 
and learning outcomes vary. As outlined in the learning plan, the student will master the theory, concepts, 
and skills involving the tools, materials, equipment, procedures, regulations, laws and interactions within 
and among political, economic, environmental and legal systems associated with the particular occupation 
and the business/industry; demonstrate ethical behaviors, safety practices, interpersonal and teamwork 
skills, communicating in the applicable language of the occupation and the business or industry. 
Prerequisite: Sophomore standing and a 3.0 or better GPA. 16 lecture and 336 hours at the workplace. 
 
DMSO 1210 – Introduction to Sonography. 2 credit hours. An introduction to the profession of 
sonography and the role of the sonographer. Emphasis on medical terminology, ethical/legal aspects, 
written and verbal communication, and professional issues relating to registry, accreditation, professional 
organizations and history of the profession. 32 lecture hours. 
 
DMSO 1266 – Practicum (or Field Experience) - Diagnostic Medical Sonography/Sonographer and 
Ultrasound Technician. 2 credit hours. Practical, general workplace training supported by an 
individualized learning plan developed by the employer, college, and student. 256 clinical hours. 
Prerequisites: DMSO 1210. Corequisite: DMSO 1342, DMSO 1351, and DMSO 1441. Program acceptance 
required.  
 
DMSO 1267 – Practicum (or Field Experience) - Diagnostic Medical Sonography/Sonographer and 
Ultrasound Technician. 2 credit hours. Practical, general workplace training supported by an 
individualized learning plan developed by the employer, college, and student. 256 clinical hours. 
Prerequisites: DMSO 1342, DMSO 1351, DMSO 1266, and DMSO 1441. Corequisites: DMSO 2353, 
DMSO 2405. Program acceptance required.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
DMSO 1342 – Intermediate Ultrasound Physics. 3 credit hours. Continuation of Basic Ultrasound 
Physics. Includes interaction of ultrasound with tissues, the mechanics of ultrasound production and 
display, various transducer designs and construction, quality assurance, bioeffects, and image artifacts. May 
introduce methods of Doppler flow analysis. 48 lecture hours. Prerequisite:  DMSO 1210. Corequisites: 
DMSO 1266, DMSO 1351, and DMSO 1441. Program acceptance required. 
 
DMSO 1351 – Sonographic Sectional Anatomy. 3 credit hours. Sectional anatomy of the male and female 
body. Includes anatomical relationships of organs, vascular structures, and body planes and quadrants. 48 
lecture hours. Prerequisite:  DMSO 1210.  Corequisite: DMSO 1266, DMSO 1342, and DMSO 1441. 
Program acceptance required.   
 
DMSO 1441 –Abdominopelvic Sonography. 4 credit hours. Normal anatomy and physiology of the 
abdominal and pelvic cavities as related to scanning technique, transducer selection, and scanning 
protocols. 48 lecture and 48 lab hours.  Prerequisite:  DMSO 1210.  Corequisites: DMSO 1266, DMSO 
1342, and DMSO 1351. Program acceptance required. Lab fee. 
 
DMSO 1455 – Sonographic Pathophysiology. 4 credit hours. Pathology and pathophysiology of the 
abdominal structures visualized with ultrasound. Includes abdomen and pelvis. 64 lecture hours. 
Prerequisites: DMSO 2342, DMSO 2351, and DMSO 2366. Corequisites: DSVT 1300, DMSO 2230, 
DMSO 2367. Program acceptance required. 
 
DMSO 2230 – Advanced Ultrasound and Review. 2 credit hours. Knowledge, skills, and professional 
values within a legal and ethical framework addressing emerging technologies and professional 
development. 32 lecture hours. Prerequisites: DMSO 2342, DMSO 2351, and DMSO 2366. Corequisites: 
DSVT 1300, DMSO 1455, DMSO 2367. Program acceptance required. 
 
DMSO 2266 – Practicum (or Field Experience) - Diagnostic Medical Sonography/Sonographer and 
Ultrasound Technician. 2 credit hours. Practical, general workplace training supported by an 
individualized learning plan developed by the employer, college, and student. 224 clinical hours. 
Prerequisites: DMSO 1267, DMSO 2353, and DMSO 2405. Program acceptance required.  
 
DMSO 2342 – Sonography of High-Risk Obstetrics. 3 credit hours. Maternal disease and fetal 
abnormalities. Includes scanning techniques, patient history, and laboratory data, transducer selection and 
scanning protocols. 48 lecture hours. Prerequisites: DMSO 2266. Corequisites: DMSO 2351 and DMSO 
2366. Program acceptance required. 
 
DMSO 2351 – Doppler Physics. 3 credit hours. Doppler and hemodynamic principles relating to arterial 
and venous imaging and testing. 32 lecture and 64 lab hours. Prerequisites: DMSO 2266. Corequisites: 
DMSO 2342 and DMSO 2366. Program acceptance required. Lab Fee. 
 
DMSO 2353 – Sonography of Superficial Structures. 3 credit hours. Detailed study of normal and 
pathological superficial structures as related to scanning techniques, patient history and laboratory data, 
transducer selection, and scanning protocols. 48 lecture hours. Prerequisites: DMSO 1342, DMSO 1266, 
DMSO 1351, and DMSO 1441. Corequisites: DMSO 1267, DMSO 2405. Program acceptance required.  
 
DMSO 2366 Practicum (or Field Experience) – Diagnostic Medical Sonography/Sonographer and 
Ultrasound Technician. 3 credit hours. Practical, general workplace training supported by an 
 
 
 
individualized learning plan developed by the employer, college, and student. 384 clinical hours. 
Prerequisites: DMSO 2266. Corequisites: DMSO 2342, DMSO 2351. Program acceptance required. 
 
DMSO 2367 – Practicum (or Field Experience) - Diagnostic Medical Sonography/Sonographer and 
Ultrasound Technician. 3 credit hours. Practical, general workplace training supported by an 
individualized learning plan developed by the employer, college, and student. 384 clinical hours. 
Prerequisites: DMSO 2351, DMSO 2342, and DMSO 2366. Corequisite required: DMSO 2230, DMSO 
1455, and DSVT 1300. Program acceptance required. 
 
DMSO 2405 – Sonography of Obstetrics/ Gynecology. 4 credit hours. Detailed study of the pelvis and 
obstetrics/gynecology as related to scanning techniques, patient history and laboratory data, transducer 
selection, and scanning protocols. 48 lecture and 64 lab hours. Prerequisites: DMSO 1342, DMSO 1266, 
DMSO 1351, and DMSO 1441. Corequisites: DMSO 2353, DMSO 1267. Program acceptance required. 
Lab fee. 
 
DRAM "1120, 1121, 2120, 2121" – Theater Practicum I, II, III, IV. 1-hour credit. Practicum in theater 
open to all students with emphasis on technique and procedures with experience gained in play productions. 
48 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
DRAM 1310 – Theater Appreciation. 3 credit hours. Survey of theater including its history, dramatic 
works, stage techniques, production procedures, and relation to other art forms. Participation in productions 
may be required. 48 lecture hours. 
 
DRAM 1330 – Stagecraft I. 3 credit hours. Study and application of the methods and components of 
theatrical production which may include one or more of the following: theater facilities, scenery 
construction and painting, properties, lighting, costume, makeup, sound, and theatrical management. 32 
lecture and 48 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
DRAM 1341 – Makeup. 3 credit hours. Design and execution of makeup for the purpose of developing 
characters.  Includes basic makeup principles and practical experience of makeup application. 48 lecture 
hours. Lab fee. 
 
DRAM 1342 – Costume Technology. 3 credit hours. Principles and techniques of costume design and 
construction for theatrical productions.  Qualifies as a drama elective for theater majors and as a general 
elective for all non-majors. 32 lecture and 48 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
DRAM 1351 – Acting I. 3 credit hours. An introduction to the fundamental principles and tools of acting 
as used in auditions, rehearsals, and performances. This may include ensemble performing, character and 
script analysis, and basic theater terminology. This exploration will emphasize the development of the 
actor’s instrument: voice, body, and imagination. 32 lecture and 32 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
DRAM 1352 – Acting II. 3 credit hours. Exploration and further training within the basic principles and 
tools of acting, including an emphasis on critical analysis of oneself and others. The tools include ensemble 
performing, character and script analysis, and basic theater terminology. This will continue the exploration 
of the development of the actor’s instrument: voice, body, and imagination. 32 lecture and 32 lab hours. 
Lab fee. 
 
 
 
 
DRAM 2331 – Stagecraft II. 3 credit hours. Continued study and application of the methods and 
components of theatrical production which may include one or more of the following: theater facilities, 
scenery construction and painting, properties, lighting, costume, makeup, sound, and theatrical 
management. 32 lecture and 48 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
DRAM 2336 – Voice for the Actor. 3 credit hours. Application of the performer’s use of the voice as a 
creative instrument of effective communication. Encourages an awareness of the need for vocal proficiency 
and employs techniques designed to improve the performer’s speaking abilities. 48 lecture hours.  
 
DRAM 2361 – History of Theater I. 3 credit hours. Study of the history of the theater from primitive 
times through the Renaissance. 48 lecture hours.   
 
DSVT 1300 – Principles of Vascular Technology. 3 credit hours. Introduction to non-invasive vascular 
technology modalities. Includes 2D imaging, Doppler, plethysmography, and segmental pressures. 
Emphasis on performing basic venous and arterial imaging and non-imaging exams. 32 lecture and 48 lab 
hours. Prerequisites: DMSO 2342, DMSO 2351, and DMSO 2366. Corequisites: DMSO 2230, DMSO 
1455, and DMSO 2367. Program acceptance required. Lab fee. 
 
ECON 2301 – Principles of Macroeconomics. 3 credit hours. An analysis of the economy as a whole 
including measurement and determination of Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply, national income, 
inflation, and unemployment. Other topics include international trade, economic growth, business cycles, 
and fiscal policy and monetary policy. 48 lecture hours. 
 
ECON 2302 – Principles of Microeconomics. 3 credit hours. Analysis of the behavior of individual 
economic agents, including consumer behavior and demand, producer behavior and supply, price and 
output decisions by firms under various market structures, factor markets, market failures, and international 
trade. 48 lecture hours. 
 
EDUC 1300 – Learning Framework. 3 credit hours. A study of the: research and theory in the psychology 
of learning, cognition, and motivation; factors that impact learning, and application of learning strategies. 
Theoretical models of strategic learning, cognition, and motivation serve as the conceptual basis for the 
introduction of college-level student academic strategies. Students use assessment instruments (e.g., 
learning inventories) to help them identify their own strengths and weaknesses as strategic learners. 
Students are ultimately expected to integrate and apply the learning skills discussed across their own 
academic programs and become effective and efficient learners. Students developing these skills should be 
able to continually draw from the theoretical models they have learned. Lab Fee. Cross-listed as PSYC 
1300. The student may register for either EDUC or PSYC but may receive credit for only one of the two. 
48 lecture hours. 
 
EDUC 1301 – Introduction to the Teaching Profession. 3 credit hours. An enriched integrated pre-
service course and content experience that: 1) provides active recruitment and institutional support of 
students interested in a teaching career, especially in high need fields; 2) provides students with 
opportunities to participate in early field observations at all levels of P-12 schools with varied and diverse 
student populations; 3) provides students with support from college and school faculty, preferably in small 
cohort groups, for the purpose of introduction to and analysis of the culture of schooling and classrooms. 
Course content should be aligned as applicable with State Board for Educator Certification Pedagogy and 
Professional Responsibilities standards and includes a minimum of 16 contact hours of field experience in 
P-12 classrooms. Students must comply with state and school regulations in order to participate in P-12 
 
 
 
classroom field experiences, which may include (but may not be limited to): a current negative TB test, an 
acceptable criminal history and central registry background check, fingerprinting and a notarized affidavit 
for applicants. (Please see an advisor for additional information.) 32 lecture and 16 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
EDUC 2301 – Introduction to Special Populations. 3 credit hours. An enriched integrated pre-service 
course and content experience that: 1) provides an overview of schooling and classrooms from the 
perspectives of language, gender, socioeconomic status, ethnic and academic diversity, and equity with an 
emphasis on factors that facilitate learning; 2) provides students with opportunities to participate in early 
field observations of P-12 special populations. The course content must be aligned as applicable with State 
Board for Educator Certification Pedagogy and Professional Responsibilities standards. The course will 
also include a minimum of 16 contact hours of field experience in P-12 classrooms with special populations. 
Prerequisite for this course is EDUC 1301. Students must comply with state and school regulations in order 
to participate in P-12 classroom field experiences, which may include (but may not be limited to): a current 
negative TB test, an acceptable criminal history and central registry background check, fingerprinting and 
a notarized affidavit for applicants. (Please see an advisor for additional information.)  32 lecture and 16 
lab hours. Prerequisite: EDUC 1301. Lab fee. 
 
ELMT 2381 – Cooperative Education. 3 credit hours. Career-related activities encountered in the 
student’s area of specialization offered through an individualized agreement among the college, employer, 
and student. Under the supervision of the college and the employer, the student combines classroom 
learning with work experience. Includes a lecture component. As outlined in the learning plan, apply the 
theory, concepts, and skills involving specialized materials, tools, equipment, procedures, regulations, laws, 
and interactions within and among political, economic, environmental, social, and legal systems associated 
with the occupation and the business/industry; and will demonstrate legal and ethical behavior, safety 
practices, interpersonal and teamwork skills, and appropriate written and verbal communication skills using 
the terminology of the occupation and the business/industry. 16 lecture and 320 field experience hours. 
Students enrolling in this course must have a GPA of 3.00 or higher. 
 
ELPT 1321 – Introduction to Electrical Safety and Tools. 3 credit hours. A comprehensive overview of 
safety rules and regulations and the selection, inspection, use, and maintenance of common tools for 
electricians. The student will explain electrical hazards and how to avoid them in the workplace; discuss 
safety issues concerning lockout/tagout procedures; and demonstrate safe work habits using common hand 
and power tools for electricians. 48 lecture and 16 lab hours. 
 
ELPT 1411 – Basic Electrical Theory. 4 credit hours. Basic theory and practice of electrical circuits. 
Includes calculations as applied to alternating and direct current. Students will be able to explain atomic 
structure and basic values such as voltage, current, resistance, and power; determine electrical values for 
combination circuits in direct current (DC) and alternating current (AC) containing resistance, inductance, 
and capacitance; summarize the principles of magnetism; calculate voltage drop based on conductor length, 
type of material, and size; and utilize electrical measuring instruments. Corequisite: TECM 1301. 48 lecture 
and 32 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
ELPT 1429 – Residential Wiring. 4 credit hours. Wiring methods for single family and multi-family 
dwellings. Includes load calculations, service entrance sizing, proper grounding techniques, and associated 
safety procedures. Students will be able to compute the circuit sizes needed for the installation of branch 
circuits, feeders, and service entrance conductors; explain the proper installation of wiring devices 
according to electrical codes; demonstrate grounding methods; install ground fault circuits; identify 
 
 
 
residential wiring methods; and demonstrate proper safety procedures. Corequisite: TECM 1301. 48 lecture 
and 32 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ELPT 1440 – Master Electrician Exam Review I. 4 credit hours. Electrical theory, code calculations, and 
interpretations applicable to becoming a Master Electrician. Emphasizes residential, commercial, and 
industrial installations using the current edition of the National Electric Code (NEC) and local ordinances. 
Student will be able to use circuit analysis techniques to solve for unknowns in direct current (DC) and 
alternating current (AC) circuits; use the NEC to size conductors, raceways, overcurrent protection, and 
other equipment for branch circuits; use the NEC to size services for single-family dwellings, multi-family 
dwellings, offices, stores, schools, mobile homes, recreational vehicles, commercial cooking equipment, 
and motors; and differentiate the rules and regulations of different cities relating to meeting the 
requirements for taking the Master Electrician's Exam. Prerequisites: Associate of Applied Science in 
Electromechanical Technology. 64 lecture hours. 
 
ELPT 1441 – Motor Control. 4 credit hours. Operating principles of solid-state and conventional controls 
along with their practical applications. Includes braking, jogging, plugging, safety interlocks, wiring, and 
schematic diagram interpretations. Students will be able to identify practical applications of jogging and 
plugging; describe the types of motor braking and their operating principles; explain different starting 
methods for large motors; and demonstrate proper troubleshooting methods on circuits using wiring and 
schematic diagrams. Corequisite:  TECM 1301. 48 lecture and 32 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
ELPT 1445 – Commercial Wiring. 4 credit hours. Commercial wiring methods. Includes over-current 
protection, raceway panel board installation, proper grounding techniques, and associated safety 
procedures. Students will be able to interpret electrical blueprints/drawings; compute the circuit sizes and 
over-current protection needed for the installation of branch circuits, feeders, and service entrance 
conductors; explain the proper installation of wiring devices according to the National Electrical Code 
(NEC) and local electrical codes; demonstrate grounding methods; identify commercial wiring methods 
including conduit bending; and demonstrate proper safety procedures. Corequisite: TECM 1301. 48 lecture 
and 32 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
ELPT 2305 – Motors and Transformers. 4 credit hours. Operation of single- and three-phase motors and 
transformers. Includes transformer banking, power factor correction, and protective devices. Students will 
be able to match the type of single-phase motor with its principles of operation; compare the operating 
characteristics of the three types of three-phase motors; explain the advantages of Wye and Delta 
connections in motor and transit applications; size overcurrent, short circuit, and ground fault protective 
devices; and utilize nameplate information. Prerequisite: ELPT 1411. 32 lecture and 32 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
ELPT 2319 – Programmable Logic Controllers I. 4 credit hours. Fundamental concepts of programmable 
logic controllers, principles of operation, and numbering systems as applied to electrical controls. Students 
will be able to identify and describe digital logic circuits and explain numbering systems; explain the 
operation of programmable logic controllers; convert ladder diagrams into programs; incorporate timers 
and counters utilizing programmable logic controllers; and execute and evaluate programs. Prerequisite: 
ELPT 1411. 32 lecture and 48 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
ELPT 2331 – AC/DC Drives. 3 credit hours. Installation and maintenance of alternating current (AC) and 
direct current (DC) variable speed drives with emphasis on application, operating characteristics, and 
troubleshooting techniques. Students will be able to explain technical terms associated with AC and DC 
drive systems; differentiate between the basic types of control logic and schemes used for AC and DC speed 
control; compare the advantages and disadvantages of AC versus DC drive systems; program AC and DC 
drives for specific applications; and troubleshoot drives to board level. Prerequisite: ELPT 1411. 32 lecture 
and 48 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
 
 
 
ELPT 2355 – Programmable Logic Controllers II. 3 credit hours. Advanced concepts in programmable 
logic controllers and their applications and interfacing to industrial controls. Convert ladder diagrams into 
programs; explain digital/analog devices used with programmable logic controllers; apply advanced 
programming techniques; execute and evaluate control system operation; and implement interfacing and 
networking schemes. 32 lecture and 48 lab hours. Lab fee. Prerequisite: ELPT 2419 Programmable Logic 
Controllers I. Students attempting this course must have a grade of C or higher in ELPT 2419 programmable 
Logic Controllers I. 
 
ELPT 2449 – Industrial Automation. 4 credit hours. Electrical control systems, applications, and 
interfacing utilized in industrial automation. Apply advanced programming techniques utilizing 
programmable logic controllers; implement digital/analog interfacing schemes; explain the operation of 
communication and network methods; devise control system specifications; and explain the operation and 
applications of distributed control systems. 32 lecture and 48 lab hours. Lab fee. Pre-requisite: ELPT 2355 
Programmable Logic Controllers II. Students attempting this course must have a grade of B or higher in 
ELPT 2355 Programmable Logic Controllers II. 
 
EMSP 1160 – Clinical – Emergency Medical Technology/Technician. 1-hour credit. A health-related 
work-based learning experience that enables the student to apply specialized occupational theory, skills, 
and concepts. Direct supervision is provided by the clinical professional. As outlined in the learning plan, 
apply the theory, concepts, and skills involving specialized materials, tools, equipment, procedures, 
regulations, laws and interactions within and among political, economic, environmental, social, and legal 
systems associated with the occupation and the business/industry and will demonstrate legal and ethical 
behavior, safety practices, interpersonal and teamwork skills, and appropriate written and verbal 
communication skills using the terminology of the occupation and the business /industry. 80 clinical hours. 
Prerequisite is a current AHA BLS provider CPR card. Corequisites is EMSP 1501. 
 
EMSP 1261 – Clinical – Emergency Medical Technology/Technician. 2 credit hours. A health-related 
work-based learning experience that enables the student to apply specialized occupational theory, skills, 
and concepts. Direct supervision is provided by the clinical professional. As outlined in the learning plan, 
apply the theory, concepts, and skills involving specialized materials, tools, equipment, procedures, 
regulations, laws and interactions within and among political, economic, environmental, social, and legal 
systems associated with the occupation and the business/industry and will demonstrate legal and ethical 
behavior, safety practices, interpersonal and teamwork skills, and appropriate written and verbal 
communication skills using the terminology of the occupation and the business/industry. 192 clinical hours. 
Prerequisites: EMT Basic and Current AHA BLS Provider CPR card, Corequisites: EMSP 2306, EMSP 
1338, EMSP 1356. 
 
EMSP 1338 – Introduction to Advanced Practice. 4 credit hours. Fundamental elements associated with 
emergency medical services to include preparatory practices, pathophysiology, medication administration, 
and related topics. Describe the roles and responsibilities of advanced EMS personnel within the EMS 
system; apply concepts of pathophysiology and pharmacology to the assessment and management of 
emergency patients; administer medications; employ effective communication; and interpret medical/legal 
issues; demonstrate ethical behaviors; and discuss well-being of the paramedic. 48 lecture and 32 lab hours. 
Prerequisites: EMT Basic and Current AHA BLS Provider CPR card, EMSP 1160, EMSP 1501. 
Corequisites: EMSP 1261, EMSP 1356, EMSP 2306, and EMSP 2160. Lab fee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EMSP 1355 – Trauma Management. 3 credit hours. Knowledge and skills in the assessment and 
management of patients with traumatic injuries. Integrate the pathophysiological principles and assessment 
findings to formulate a field impression; and implement the treatment plan for the trauma patient; and 
integrate multiple determinates of trauma conditions into clinical care. 32 lecture and 32 lab hours. 
Prerequisites: EMT Basic and Current AHA BLS Provider CPR card, EMSP 1160, EMSP 1501, EMSP 
1261, EMSP 1338, EMSP 1356, EMSP 2160, and EMSP 2306. Corequisites: EMSP 2205 and EMSP 2261. 
Lab fee. 
 
EMSP 1356 – Patient Assessment and Airway Management. 3 credit hours. Knowledge and skills 
required to perform patient assessment, airway management, and artificial ventilation. Perform a history 
and comprehensive physical exam on various patient populations; establish and/or maintain a patent airway; 
and demonstrate oxygenation and ventilation of a patient; differentiate respiratory distress, failure and 
arrest; interpret results of monitoring devices. 32 lecture and 32 lab hours. Prerequisites: EMT Basic and 
Current AHA BLS Provider CPR card, EMSP 1160, EMSP 1501. Corequisites: EMSP 1261, EMSP 1338, 
EMSP 2306, and EMSP 2160. Lab fee. 
 
EMSP 1438 – Introduction to Advanced Practice. 4 credit hours. Fundamental elements associated with 
emergency medical services to include preparatory practices, pathophysiology, medication administration, 
and related topics. Describe the roles and responsibilities of advanced EMS personnel within the EMS 
system; apply concepts of pathophysiology and pharmacology to the assessment and management of 
emergency patients; administer medications; employ effective communication; and interpret medical/legal 
issues; demonstrate ethical behaviors; and discuss well-being of the paramedic. 48 lecture and 32 lab hours. 
Prerequisites: EMT Basic and Current Provider CPR card, EMSP 1160, EMSP 1501. Corequisites: EMSP 
1261, EMSP 1355, EMSP 1356 and EMSP 2160. Lab fee. 
 
EMSP 1501 – Emergency Medical Technician – Basic. 5 credit hours. Preparation for certification as an 
Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) Basic. Demonstrate proficiency in cognitive, psychomotor and 
affective domains for the Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) in accordance with the current guidelines 
of the credentialing agency. 48 lecture and 96 lab hours. Prerequisite is a current AHA BLS Provider CPR 
card. Corequisite is EMSP 1160. 
 
EMSP 2160 – Clinical – Emergency Medical Technology/Technician. 1 credit hour. A health-related 
work-based learning experience that enables the student to apply specialized occupational theory, skills, 
and concepts. Direct supervision is provided by the clinical professional. As outlined in the learning plan, 
apply the theory, concepts, and skills involving specialized materials, tools, equipment, procedures, 
regulations, laws and interactions within and among political, economic, environmental, social, and legal 
systems associated with the occupation and the business/industry and will demonstrate legal and ethical 
behavior, safety practices, interpersonal and teamwork skills, and appropriate written and verbal 
communication skills using the terminology of the occupation and the business/industry. 96 clinical hours. 
Prerequisites: EMT Basic and Current AHA BLS Provider CPR card. Corequisites: EMSP 2430, 2434, 
2243 and 2462. 
 
EMSP 2205 – EMS Operations. 2 credit hours. Knowledge and skills to safely manage multi-casualty 
incidents and rescue situations; utilize air medical resources; and identify hazardous materials and other 
specialized incidents. Identify principles of EMS Operations and describe management of routine and 
specialized incidents. 32 lecture and 16 lab hours. Prerequisites: EMT Basic and Current AHA BLS 
Provider CPR card, EMSP 1261, 1338, 1356, 2306, 2160. Corequisites: EMSP 2261 and EMSP 1355. Lab 
fee. 
 
 
 
 
EMSP 2243 – Assessment Based Management. 2 credit hours. A summative experience covering 
comprehensive, assessment-based patient care management for the paramedic level. Integrate 
pathophysiological principles and assessment findings to formulate a field impression; and implement a 
treatment plan at the paramedic level. 16 lecture and 48 lab hours. Prerequisites: EMT Basic and Current 
AHA BLS Provider CPR card, EMSP 2544. Corequisites: EMSP 2462, EMSP 2430, EMSP 2434. Lab fee. 
 
EMSP 2261 – Clinical – Emergency Medical Technology/ Technician. 2 credit hours. A health-related 
work-based learning experience that enables the student to apply specialized occupational theory, skills, 
and concepts. Direct supervision is provided by the clinical professional. As outlined in the learning plan, 
apply the theory, concepts, and skills involving specialized materials, tools, equipment, procedures, 
regulations, laws and interactions within and among political, economic, environmental, social, and legal 
systems associated with the occupation and the business/industry and will demonstrate legal and ethical 
behavior, safety practices, interpersonal and teamwork skills, and appropriate written and verbal 
communication skills using the terminology of the occupation and the business/industry. Course may be 
repeated if topics and learning outcomes vary. 128 clinical hours. Prerequisites: EMT Basic and Current 
AHA BLS Provider CPR card, EMSP 1261, 1338, 1356, 2306, 2160. Corequisites: EMSP 2205, and EMSP 
1355. 
 
EMSP 2306 – Emergency Pharmacology. 3 credit hours. A study of drug classifications, actions, 
therapeutic uses, adverse effects, routes of administration, and calculation of dosages. Categorize the 
classification of drugs, calculate drug dosages; and identify the therapeutic use, routes of administration, 
indications, contraindications, and adverse effects. 32 lecture and 32 lab hours. Prerequisites: EMT Basic 
and Current Provider CPR card. Corequisites: EMSP 1261, EMSP 1355, EMSP 1338, EMSP 1356 and 
EMSP 2160. Lab fee. 
 
EMSP 2430 – Special Populations. 4 credit hours. Knowledge and skills necessary to assess and manage 
ill or injured patients in diverse populations to include neonatology, pediatrics, geriatrics, and other related 
topics. Integrate pathophysiological assessment findings to formulate a field impression; implement a 
treatment plan for diverse patients with special needs, and integrate multiple determinates of such 
conditions into clinical care. 48 lecture and 32 lab hours. Prerequisites: EMT Basic and Current AHA BLS 
Provider CPR card, EMSP 2544. Corequisites: EMSP 2434, 2462 and 2243. Lab fee. 
 
EMSP 2434 – Medical Emergencies. 4 credit hours. Knowledge and skills in the assessment and 
management of patients with medical emergencies, including medical overview, neurology, 
gastroenterology, immunology, pulmonology, urology, hematology, endocrinology, toxicology, and other 
related topics. Integrate pathophysiological assessment findings to formulate a field impression; implement 
a treatment plan for the medical patient; and integrate multiple determinates of medical conditions into 
clinical care. 48 lecture and 48 lab hours. Prerequisites: EMT Basic and Current AHA BLS Provider CPR 
card, EMSP 2544. Corequisites: EMSP 2430, EMSP 2462 and 2243. Lab fee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EMSP 2462 – Clinical – Emergency Medical Technology/Technician. 4 credit hours. A health-related 
work-based learning experience that enables the student to apply specialized occupational theory, skills, 
and concepts. Direct supervision is provided by the clinical professional. As outlined in the learning plan, 
apply the theory, concepts, and skills involving specialized materials, tools, equipment, procedures, 
regulations, laws and interactions within and among political, economic, environmental, social, and legal 
systems associated with the occupation and the business/industry and will demonstrate legal and ethical 
behavior, safety practices, interpersonal and teamwork skills, and appropriate written and verbal 
communication skills using the terminology of the occupation and the business/industry. Course may be 
repeated if topics and learning outcomes vary. 224 clinical hours. Prerequisites: EMT Basic and Current 
AHA BLS Provider CPR card, EMSP 2544. Corequisites: EMSP 2430, 2434, 2243 and 2160. 
 
EMSP 2544 – Cardiology. 5 credit hours. Assessment and management of patients with cardiac 
emergencies. Integrate pathophysiological principles and assessment findings to formulate an impression; 
and implement a treatment plan for the cardiac patient. 64 classroom hours and 32 lab hours. Prerequisites: 
EMT Basic and Current AHA BLS Provider CPR card, EMSP 1355, EMSP 2205, and EMSP 2261. Lab 
fee. 
 
ENGL 0301 – Composition Fundamentals. Intensive study of college-level writing focusing on idea 
generation, essay organization and drafting, essay revision and the utilization of standard English. Review 
of spelling, grammar, punctuation, and fluency. Must be paired with English 1301. ENGL 0301 does not 
count toward the fulfillment of requirements for any associate’s degree at Angelina College, and is not a 
transfer credit course. Placement in this course is determined by an appropriate TSI assessment score. Forty-
eight lecture and sixteen lab hours. 
 
ENGL 1301 – Composition I. 3 credit hours. Intensive study of and practice in writing processes, from 
invention and researching to drafting, revising, and editing, both individually and collaboratively. Emphasis 
on effective rhetorical choices, including audience, purpose, arrangement, and style. Focus on writing the 
academic essay as a vehicle for learning, communicating, and critical analysis. 48 lecture and 16 lab hours. 
Lab fee. 
 
ENGL 1302 – Composition II. 3 credit hours. Intensive study of and practice in the strategies and 
techniques for developing research-based expository and persuasive texts. Emphasis on effective and 
ethical rhetorical inquiry, including primary and secondary research methods; critical reading of verbal, 
visual, and multimedia texts; systematic evaluation, synthesis, and documentation of information sources; 
and critical thinking about evidence and conclusions. 48 lecture hours. Prerequisite: ENGL 1301. 
 
ENGL 2311 – Technical & Business Writing. 3 credit hours. Intensive study of and practice in writing 
for professional settings. Focus on the types of documents necessary to make decisions and take action on 
the job, such as proposals, reports, instructions, policies and procedures, e-mail messages, letters, and 
descriptions of products and services. Practice individual and collaborative processes involved in the 
creation of ethical and efficient documents. Prerequisite: ENGL 1301 or permission of the appropriate 
academic administrator. Lab fee. 48 lecture hours. 
 
ENGL 2322 – British Literature I. 3 credit hours. A survey of the development of British literature from 
the Anglo-Saxon period to the Eighteenth Century. Students will study works of prose, poetry, drama, and 
fiction in relation to their historical, linguistic, and cultural contexts. Texts will be selected from a diverse 
group of authors and traditions. Prerequisite: ENGL 1301. (Confirm with the selected four-year institution 
to determine if both ENGL 1301 and ENGL 1302 are required for transfer.) 48 lecture hours. 
 
 
 
 
ENGL 2323 – British Literature II. 3 credit hours. A survey of the development of British literature from 
the Romantic period to the present. Students will study works of prose, poetry, drama, and fiction in relation 
to their historical and cultural contexts. Texts will be selected from a diverse group of authors and traditions. 
Prerequisite: ENGL 1301. (Confirm with the selected four-year institution to determine if both ENGL 1301 
and ENGL 1302 are required for transfer.) 48 lecture hours.  
 
ENGL 2327 – American Literature I (to 1865). 3 credit hours. A survey of American literature from the 
period of exploration and settlement through the Civil War. Students will study works of prose, poetry, 
drama, and fiction in relation to their historical and cultural contexts. Texts will be selected from among a 
diverse group of authors for what they reflect and reveal about the evolving American experience and 
character. Prerequisite: ENGL 1301. (Confirm with the selected four-year institution to determine if both 
ENGL 1301 and ENGL 1302 are required for transfer.) 48 lecture hours.  
 
ENGL 2328 – American Literature II (from 1865). 3 credit hours. A survey of American literature from 
the Civil War to the present. Students will study works of prose, poetry, drama, and fiction in relation to 
their historical and cultural contexts. Texts will be selected from among a diverse group of authors for what 
they reflect and reveal about the evolving American experience and character. Prerequisite: ENGL 1301. 
(Confirm with the selected four-year institution to determine if both ENGL 1301 and ENGL 1302 are 
required for transfer.) 48 lecture hours. 
 
ENGL 2332 – World Literature I. 3 credit hours. A survey of world literature from the ancient world 
through the sixteenth century. Students will study works of prose, poetry, drama, and fiction in relation to 
their historical and cultural contexts. Texts will be selected from a diverse group of authors and traditions. 
Prerequisite: ENGL 1301. (Confirm with the selected four-year institution to determine if both ENGL 1301 
and ENGL 1302 are required for transfer.) 48 lecture hours. 
 
ENGL 2333 – World Literature II. 3 credit hours. A survey of world literature from the seventeenth 
century to the present. Students will study works of prose, poetry, drama, and fiction in relation to their 
historical and cultural contexts. Texts will be selected from a diverse group of authors and traditions. 
Prerequisite: ENGL 1301. (Confirm with the selected four-year institution to determine if both ENGL 1301 
and ENGL 1302 are required for transfer.) 48 lecture hours. 
 
ENGL 2341 – Forms of Literature. 3 credit hours. The study of one or more literary genres including, but 
not limited to, poetry, fiction, drama, and film. Topics may vary by semester. Prerequisite: ENGL 1301. 
(Confirm with the selected four-year institution to determine if both ENGL 1301 and ENGL 1302 are 
required for transfer.) 48 lecture hours. 
 
ENGL 2351.  Mexican-American Literature.  3 credit hours.  A survey of Mexican American/Chicana 
literature from Mesoamerica to the present. Students will study literary works of fiction, poetry, drama, 
essays, and memoirs in relation to their historical, linguistic, political, regional, gendered, and cultural 
contexts. Texts will be selected from a diverse group of authors, literary movements, and media forms. 
Topics and themes may include the literary performance of identity and culture, aesthetic mediation of 
racialization, struggle and protest, and artistic activism.  Prerequisite: ENGL 1301. (Confirm with the 
selected four-year institution to determine if both ENGL 1301 and ENGL 1302 are required for transfer.)  
48 lecture hours. 
 
 
 
 
ENGR 1201 – Introduction to Engineering. 2 credit hours. An introduction to the engineering profession 
with emphasis on technical communication and team-based engineering design. Prerequisite: MATH 1314 
or 1414 (College Algebra) or equivalent academic preparation.  32 lecture hours. 
 
ENGR 1304 – Engineering Graphics I. 3 credit hours. An introductory course including the use of 
instruments, computer graphics, geometrical construction, orthographic projections, auxiliaries, sections, 
dimensioning, axonometric projection, threads, and descriptive geometry applications. 32 lecture and 64 
lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
ENGR 1305 – Engineering Graphics II. 3 credit hours. A course involving the principles and application 
of orthographic projections, including space relation of points, lines, and planes; true length lines in space, 
intersection and development of space surfaces and curved surfaces; vectors, shades, and shadows. 32 
lecture and 64 lab hours. Prerequisite: ENGR 1304. Lab fee. 
 
ENGR 2301 – Engineering Mechanics: Statics. 3 credit hours. Basic theory of engineering mechanics, 
using calculus, involving the description of forces, moments, and couples acting on stationary engineering 
structures; equilibrium in two and three dimensions; free-body diagrams; friction; centroids; centers of 
gravity; and moments of inertia. 48 lecture hours. Prerequisite: PHYS 2425 University Physics I (Lecture 
& lab) Corequisite or Prerequisite: MATH 2414 Calculus II  
 
ENGR 2302 – Engineering Mechanics: Dynamics. 3 credit hours. Basic theory of engineering mechanics, 
using calculus, involving the motion of particles, rigid bodies, and systems of particles; Newton's Laws; 
work and energy relationships; principles of impulse and momentum; application of kinetics and kinematics 
to the solution of engineering problems. 48 lecture hours. Prerequisite: ENGR 2301 Engineering Mechanics 
- Statics  
 
ENTC 1410 – Fluid Mechanics with Applications. 4 credit hours. Introduces the concepts of fluid power 
systems and components. Emphasizes fluid properties, measurement of pressure, viscosity and density, and 
flow. 48 lecture and 32 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
ENTC 2310 – Machine Design. 3 credit hours. Design considerations for machinery. Includes selection of 
mechanical components and machine construction principles. Students will learn the applications and 
selection processes for various mechanical elements/components within basic power transmission units. 
Students will evaluate suitability of mechanical drive components; construct a mechanical system; establish 
a lubrication plan; establish a maintenance schedule; and evaluate system performance. 32 lecture and 32 
lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
FLMC 1304- Lighting for Film or Video. 3 credit hours. Fundamentals of lighting techniques for film or 
video production with respect to lighting tools, composition and camera motion to support dynamic 
storytelling.  32 lecture and 32 lab hours. 
 
FLMC 1392 – On-Camera Experience. 4 credit hours. An introductory study of on-camera presentation 
techniques. 32 lecture and 64 lab hours.  
 
FLMC 2433 – Cinematography. 3 credit hours. Employ concepts and theory; discuss marketing and 
technology trends; analyze scene and property set camera for correct light exposure; explain differences in 
lighting; evaluate camera lenses; and produce a short video or film. 32 lecture and 64 lab hours. Prerequisite: 
FLMC 1304 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GEOG 1301 – Principles of Geography. 3 credit hours. This course introduces students to the processes 
that drive Earth’s physical systems. Students will explore the relationships among these physical systems, 
with emphasis on weather and climate, water, ecosystems, geologic processes and landform development, 
and human interactions with the physical environment. 48 lecture hours. 
 
GEOG 1303 – World Regional Geography. 3 credit hours. This course is an introduction to the world’s 
major regions seen through their defining physical, social, cultural, political, and economic features. These 
regions are examined in terms of their physical and human characteristics and their interactions. The course 
emphasizes relations among regions on issues such as trade, economic development, conflict, and the role 
of regions in the globalization process. 48 lecture hours. 
 
GEOL 1301 – Earth Sciences for Non-Science Majors I (Lecture). 3 credit hours. Survey of geology, 
meteorology, oceanography, and astronomy. 48 lecture hours. 
 
GEOL 1403 – Physical Geology (Lecture + Lab). 4 credit hours. Introduction to the study of the materials 
and processes that have modified and shaped the surface and interior of Earth over time. These processes 
are described by theories based on experimental data and geologic data gathered from field observations. 
48 lecture and 48 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
GEOL 1404 – Historical Geology (Lecture + Lab). 4 credit hours. A comprehensive survey of the history 
of life and major events in the physical development of Earth as interpreted from rocks and fossils. 48 
lecture and 48 lab hours. Prerequisites: GEOL 1403 Physical Geology. Lab Fee. 
 
GERS 1343 – Psychology of Adult Development and Aging. 3 semester credit hours. Study of the 
cognitive aspects of adult development and aging. Includes common cognitive disorders that affect the 
individual during the aging process, with emphasis on mental health and optimum development. Students 
will identify psychological theories of aging; describe cognitive development of older adults; describe the 
impact of social factors on adult development; assess the individual’s psychological response to aging, 
including a research-based project interviewing an elder; and examine perspectives regarding death and 
dying. Pre-requisites: SCWK 1321. 48 lecture hours. 
 
GERS 1345 – Policies and Programs for Older Adults. 3 credit hours. Students will identify the public 
policies and programs designed to address issues related to older adults, including the identification of the 
least restrictive living environment for elder services. Students will identify services and programs available 
for older adults; identify common themes in public policy related to aging; analyze the impact of public 
policies and programs; and develop strategies to impact the creation of public policy related to older adults. 
Prerequisite:  SCWK 1321. 48 lecture hours. 
 
GISC 1411 – Introduction to Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and Global Positions Systems 
(GPS). 4 credit hours. Introduction to basic concepts of vector GIS using several industry specific software 
programs including nomenclature of cartography and geography. The student will explain basic concepts 
of GIS and GPS including positioning on the earth, mapping the earth in spatial terms, and populating the 
GIS to access data; create and access data in the GIS using an appropriate software package; and develop 
and print maps with industry standard legends. Operate industry standard GIS packages on a personal 
computer; capture positional and attribute information among several coordinate systems; acquire GIS 
information from databases, existing maps, and the Internet; and annotate output for finished maps, 
documents and reports. Prerequisite: DFTG 1409. 32 lecture and 64 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
 
 
 
GOVT 2305 – Federal Government (Federal Constitution and Topics). 3 credit hours. Origin and 
development of the U.S. constitution, structure and powers of national government including the legislative, 
executive, and judicial branches, federalism, political participation, the national election process, public 
policy, civil liberties and civil rights. 48 lecture hours.  
 
GOVT 2306 – Texas Government (Texas Constitution and Topics). 3 credit hours. Origin and 
development of the Texas constitution, structure and powers of state and local government, federalism and 
inter-governmental relations, political participation, the election process, public policy, and the political 
culture of Texas. 48 lecture hours. 
 
GRPH 1459 – Vector Graphics for Production. 4 credit hours.  A study and use of vector graphics for 
production.  32 lecture and 64 lab hours.  Lab fee. 
 
HART 1256 – EPA Recovery Certification Preparation. 2 credit hours. Certification training for HVAC 
refrigerant recovery, recycle, and reclaim. Instruction will provide a review of EPA guidelines for 
refrigerant recovery and recycling during the installation, service, and repair of all HVAC and refrigeration 
systems. 32 lecture hours. 
 
HART 1303 – Air Conditioning Control Principles. 3 credit hours. A basic study of HVAC and 
refrigeration controls; troubleshooting of control components; emphasis on use of wiring diagrams to 
analyze high and low voltage circuits; a review of Ohm’s law as applied to air conditioning controls and 
circuits. The student will test, repair, and/or replace HVAC-related electrical and control components, 
wiring and equipment; read, draw, and interpret high and low voltage control circuits. 32 lecture and 64 lab 
hours. Lab fee. 
 
HART 1310 – HVAC Shop Practices and Tools. 3 credit hours. Tools and instruments used in the HVAC 
industry. Includes proper application, use and care of these tools, and tubing and piping practices. The 
student will demonstrate the use of hand tools, power tools and instruments; construct flares, swages and 
bends using tubing tools; use a torch for brazing and soldering; identify industry safety, and environmental 
regulations; and perform safety procedures. 32 lecture and 42 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
HART 1401 – Basic Electricity for HVAC. 4 credit hours. Principles of electricity as required by HVAC, 
including proper use of test equipment, electrical circuits, and component theory and operation. Student 
will demonstrate knowledge of basic principles of electricity, electrical current, circuitry, and air 
conditioning devices; apply Ohm’s law to electrical calculations; perform electrical continuity, voltage, and 
current tests with appropriate meters; and demonstrate electrical safety. 48 lecture and 48 lab hours. Lab 
fee.      
 
HART 1407 – Refrigeration Principles. 4 credit hours. An introduction to the refrigeration cycle, heat 
transfer theory, temperature/pressure relationship, refrigerant handling, refrigeration components and 
safety. The student will identify refrigeration components; explain operation of the basic refrigeration cycle 
and heat transfer; demonstrate proper application and/or use of tools, test equipment, and safety procedures. 
48 lecture and 48 lab hours. Lab fee.  
 
HART 1441 – Residential Air Conditioning. 4 credit hours. A study of components, applications, and 
installation of mechanical air conditioning systems including operation conditions, troubleshooting, repair, 
and charging of air conditioning systems. Prerequisite: HART 1401 and HART 1407. 48 lecture and 48 lab 
hours. Lab fee. 
 
 
 
 
HART 1445 – Gas and Electric Heating. 4 credit hours. A study of the procedures and principles used in 
servicing heating systems including gas fire furnaces and electric heating systems. The student will identify 
different types of gas furnaces; identify and describe component operation of gas furnaces; service and 
troubleshoot gas furnaces; perform safety inspections on gas and electric heating systems; identify unsafe 
operation of gas furnaces; identify and discuss component operation of electric heating systems; and service 
and troubleshoot electric heating systems. 48 lecture and 48 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
HART 2334 – Advanced Air Conditioning Controls. 4 credit hours. Theory and practical application of 
electrical control devices, electromechanical controls, and/or pneumatic controls. Prerequisite: HART 
1441. 32 lecture and 48 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
HART 2336 – Troubleshooting. 4 credit hours. An advanced course in the application of troubleshooting 
principles and use of test instruments to diagnose air conditioning and refrigeration components and system 
problems including conducting performance tests. The student will test and diagnose components, systems, 
and accessories; complete applicable documentation. Prerequisites: HART 1401, 1303, 1407, and/or 
corequisite HART 1445. 32 lecture and 48 lab hours. Lab fee.  
 
HART 2441 – Commercial Air Conditioning. 4 credit hours. A study of components, applications, and 
installation of air conditioning systems with capacities of 25 tons or less. Prerequisite: HART 1441. 48 
lecture and 48 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
HART 2442 – Commercial Refrigeration. 4 credit hours. Theory and practical application in the 
maintenance of commercial refrigeration; medium, and low temperature applications and ice machines. 
Prerequisite: HART 1401 and HART 1407. 48 lecture and 48 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
HIST 1301 – United States History I. 3 credit hours. A survey of the social, political, economic, cultural, 
and intellectual history of the United States from the pre-Columbian era to the Civil War/Reconstruction 
period. United States History I includes the study of pre-Columbian, colonial, revolutionary, early national, 
slavery and sectionalism, and the Civil War/Reconstruction eras. Themes that may be addressed in United 
States History I include: American settlement and diversity, American culture, religion, civil and human 
rights, technological change, economic change, immigration and migration, and creation of the federal 
government. Required of all students seeking an Associate of Arts or Science degree or who plan to transfer 
to a four-year school. 48 lecture hours. 
 
HIST 1302 – United States History II. 3 credit hours. A survey of the social, political, economic, cultural, 
and intellectual history of the United States from the Civil War/Reconstruction era to the present. United 
States History II examines industrialization, immigration, world wars, the Great Depression, Cold War and 
post-Cold War eras. Themes that may be addressed in United States History II include: American culture, 
religion, civil and human rights, technological change, economic change, immigration and migration, 
urbanization and suburbanization, the expansion of the federal government, and the study of U.S. foreign 
policy. Required of all students seeking an Associate of Arts or Science degree or who plan to transfer to a 
four-year school. 48 lecture hours. 
 
HIST 2301 – Texas History. 3 credit hours. A survey of the political, social, economic, cultural, and 
intellectual history of Texas from the pre-Columbian era to the present. Themes that may be addressed in 
Texas History include: Spanish colonization and Spanish Texas; Mexican Texas; the Republic of Texas; 
 
 
 
statehood and secession; oil, industrialization, and urbanization; civil rights; and modern Texas. 48 lecture 
hours. 
 
HIST 2311 – Western Civilization I. 3 credit hours. A survey of the social, political, economic, cultural, 
religious, and intellectual history of Europe and the Mediterranean world from human origins to the 17th 
century. Themes that should be addressed in Western Civilization I include the cultural legacies of 
Mesopotamia, Egypt, Greece, Rome, Byzantium, Islamic civilizations, and Europe through the Middle 
Ages, Renaissance, and Reformations. 48 lecture hours. 
 
HIST 2312 – Western Civilization II. 3 credit hours. A survey of the social, political, economic, cultural, 
religious, and intellectual history of Europe and the Mediterranean world from the 17th century to the 
modern era. Themes that should be addressed in Western Civilization II include absolutism and 
constitutionalism, growth of nation states, the Enlightenment, revolutions, classical liberalism, 
industrialization, imperialism, global conflict, the Cold War, and globalism. 48 lecture hours. 
 
HITT 1305 – Medical Terminology. 3 credit hours. Study of word origin and structure through the 
introduction of prefixes, suffixes, root words, plurals, abbreviations and symbols. The study of terminology 
related to surgical procedures, medical specialties and diagnostic procedures. 48 lecture hours. 
 
HPRS 1201 – Introduction to Health Professions. 2 credit hours. An overview of roles of various 
members of the health care system, educational requirements, and issues affecting the delivery of health 
care. 32 lecture hours.  
 
HRPO 1311 – Human Relations. 3 credit hours. Practical application of the principles and concepts of the 
behavioral sciences to interpersonal relationships in business and industrial environments. 48 lecture hours. 
 
HRPO 2301 – Human Resources Management. 3 credit hours. Behavioral and legal approaches to the 
management of human resources in organizations. 48 lecture hours. 
 
HYDR 1301 – Rigging and Conveying Systems. 3 credit hours. Introduction to directing and moving 
heavy objects, selecting the appropriate rigging equipment, in conjunction with the suitable hardware and 
lifting devices with an emphasis on inspection, use, and maintenance of rigging equipment. 32 lecture and 
32 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
HYDR 1350 – Hydraulics, Fabrication & Repair. 3 credit hours. Fabrication of hydraulic power units to 
provide fluid power for an industrial or mobile operation. Includes techniques and methods of constructing 
conduits and fittings. The student will demonstrate fabrication of power units; interpret blueprints and 
specifications; demonstrate disassembly, repair, and reassembly of hydraulic components; and analyze 
failed components. 32 lecture and 32 lab hours. Lab fee.  
 
HYDR 1391 – Special Topics in Hydraulics Technology/Technician. 3 credit hours. Topics address 
recently identified current events, skills, knowledge, and/or attitudes and behaviors pertinent to the 
technology or occupation and relevant to the professional development of the student. This course was 
designed to be repeated multiple times to improve student proficiency. The student outcomes/objectives are 
determined by local occupational need and business and industry trends. 48 lecture and lab hours each 
week.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
HYDR 1409 – Basic Fluid Power I (Hydraulics). 4 credit hours. An introduction to the basic principles 
of hydraulic pressure, flow, and system components, including system controls, symbols, and circuits. The 
student will state Pascal’s law and its consequences involving pressure; state the continuity equation and 
explain its application to the flow rate; name the basic hydraulic system components and state the function 
of each; calculate pressure, force, or actuator size given any two parameters; and determine proper 
conductor size given flow and velocity parameters. 48 lecture and 32 lab hours. Lab fee.  
 
HYDR 1415 – Basic Fluid Power II (Pneumatics). 4 credit hours. An introduction to the basic principles 
of pneumatic pressure, flow, and system components, symbols, and circuits. Emphasis on troubleshooting 
techniques, good maintenance procedures, and safety practices. The student will state Pascal’s law and its 
consequences involving pressure; explain the general gas law and its applications; identify the basic 
pneumatic system components; state the function of each component; calculate pressure, force, or actuator 
size given any two parameters; and determine compressor size given flow rate, pressure, and actuator 
requirements. 48 lecture and 32 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
HYDR 2330 – Fluid Power System Design. 3 credit hours. Advanced operation of control valves and their 
controls for open and closed loop systems. Topics include filtration requirements for hydraulic systems; 
operation of hydraulic circuits; design circuits, including hydraulics, pneumatics, electrical/electronic 
controls, and mechanical interface. The student will identify the fluid power symbols for control valves; 
the fluid requirements for control valves; and describe the operation of control valves; contrast open and 
closed loop control; describe symmetrical and nonsymmetrical spools; apply the use of constant torque 
motors; describe the operation of linear velocity displacement transformer (LVDT) in proportional valves; 
and describe digital electrohydraulic devices; and design a fluid power system. Prerequisite/corequisite: 
HYDR 2459. 32 lecture and 48 lab hours. Lab fee.   
 
HYDR 2455 – Hydraulics Proportional & Servo Valves. 4 credit hours. Electronics and instrumentation 
associated with hydraulic proportional and servo valves. The student will identify servo or proportional 
valves for specific applications; demonstrate troubleshooting techniques for proportional and servo valves; 
and systems. Prerequisite/corequisite: HYDR 2459. 48 lecture and 32 lab hours. Lab fee.   
 
HYDR 2459 – Advanced Hydraulics. 4 credit hours. A study of cylinder loading, accumulator volume, 
positive and negative loads and specialty valves. The student will calculate positive and negative loads; 
calculate side load on cylinder rods; calculate the volume of fluid in an accumulator; and utilize specialty 
valves. Prerequisite: HYDR 1409 or HYDR 1415. 48 lecture and 32 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
IMED 1416 – Web Page Design. 4 credit hours. Instruction in Web design and related graphic design 
issues including mark-up languages, websites, and browsers. 32 lecture and 64 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
IMED 2266 – Practicum (or Field Experience) – Web Page, Digital/Multimedia and Information 
Resources Design. 2 credit hours. Practical, general workplace training supported by an individualized 
learning plan developed by the employer, college, and student. This is work-based instruction that provides 
basic career exploration and helps students gain practical experience in the discipline, enhance skills, and 
integrate knowledge. The emphasis is on practical work experience. Indirect supervision is provided by the 
employer. A practicum may be a paid or unpaid learning experience. 96 external hours. This course should 
be taken during the final semester prior to graduation. Prerequisite: To enroll in IMED 2266, students must 
have a B or better in the following four courses, ARTC 1402 Digital Imaging I, ARTC 2405 Digital Imaging 
II, ARTC 1413 Digital Publishing, and ARTC 2413 Digital Publishing II. 
 
 
 
 
IMED 2309 – Internet Commerce. 3 credit hours. An overview of the Internet as a marketing and sales 
tool with emphasis on developing a prototype for electronic commerce. 48 lecture and 16 lab hours. Lab 
Fee. 
 
IMED 2315 – Web Page Design II. 3 credit hours. A study of mark-up language and advanced layout 
techniques for creating web pages. Emphasis on identifying the target audience and producing web sites, 
according to accessibility standards, cultural appearance, and legal issues. 48 lecture and 16 lab hours. 
Prerequisite: IMED 1416. Lab Fee. 
 
IMED 2411 – Portfolio Development. 4 credit hours.  Preparation and enhancement of portfolio to meet 
professional standards, development of presentation skills, and job seeking techniques.  This course should 
be taken the final semester before graduation. 32 lecture and 64 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
INEW 2330 – Comprehensive Software Project: Planning & Design. 3 credit hours. A comprehensive 
application of skills learned in previous courses in a simulated workplace. Covers the development, testing, 
and documenting of a complete software and/or hardware solution. This course may be used as a capstone 
course for a certificate or degree. 48 lecture and 16 lab hours. Lab fee. Prerequisite: ITSE 1350. Lab fee. 
 
INEW 2332 – Comprehensive Software Project: Coding, Testing, and Implementation. 3 credit hours. A 
comprehensive application of skills learned in previous semesters in a simulated workplace. Includes 
coding, testing, maintenance, and documentation of a complete software and/or hardware solution. This 
course may be used as a capstone course for a degree. 48 lecture and 16 lab hours. Lab fee. Prerequisite: 
INEW 2330. Lab fee. 
 
INRW 0420. Integration of critical reading and academic writing skills. The course fulfills TSI 
requirements for reading and/or writing. The INRW cannot be used toward credit for an associate degree 
and is not intended for transfer to a senior college. Eligibility: As per the current TSI Assessment Placement 
Chart; Benefit: complete reading and writing in one semester; Attendance required in lecture and lab hours. 
64 lecture hours. 
 
INTC 1301 – Principles of Industrial Measurements. 3 credit hours. A study of the principles and devices 
for the measurement of control variables such as temperature, pressure, flow, level, and basic control 
functions. The student will demonstrate the fundamentals of tubing layout and bending; apply the principles 
of process instruments and devices; and describe the control loop as applied to control and detection of 
pressure, temperature, level, flow, etc. 48 lecture hours. Prerequisite Associate of Applied Science in 
Electromechanical Technology. 
 
INTC 2359 – Distributed Control Systems. 3 credit hours. Philosophy and application of distributed 
control systems. Includes hardware, firmware, software, configuration, communications and networking 
systems required to implement a distributed control strategy. Corequisite: TECM 1301. 32 lecture and 48 
lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
ITCC 1414 – CCNA: Introduction to Networks. 4 credit hours. This course covers networking 
architecture, structure, security, and functions; introduces the principles and structure of IP addressing and 
the fundamentals of Ethernet concepts, media, and operations to provide a foundation for the curriculum. 
Configure a small network using basic security; perform basic configuration on routers and switches; 
implement IP addressing schemes. 48 lecture and 32 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
 
 
 
ITCC 1444 – CCNA 2: Switching, Routing, and Wireless Essentials. 4 credit hours. Describes the 
architecture, components, and operations of routers and switches in small networks and introduces wireless 
local area networks (WLAN) and security concepts; provides an in-depth understanding of how routers and 
switches operate and are implemented in the LAN environment. Configure, secure, and maintain routers 
and switches; resolve common issues with routing protocols, virtual LANs, and inter-VLAN routing in both 
IPv4 and IPv6 networks; configure WLANs. Prerequisite: ITCC 1414. 48 lecture and 32 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
ITCC 2343 – Network Security. 3 credit hours. Overall security processes with particular emphasis on 
hands-on skills in the following areas: security policy design and management; security technologies; 
products and solutions; firewall and secure router design, installation, configuration, and maintenance; 
AAA and VPN implementation using routers and firewalls. Explain network threats, mitigation techniques, 
and the basics of securing a network; secure administrative access on routers using AAA; implement 
firewall technologies to secure the network perimeter; configure IPS to mitigate attacks on the network; 
implement endpoint and Layer 2 security features; and implement secure virtual private networks. 48 
lecture and 16 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
ITCC 2420 – CCNA 3: Enterprise Networking, Security, and Automation. 4 credit hours. Describes 
the architecture, components, operations, and security to scale for large, complex networks, including wide 
area network (WAN) technologies. Emphasizes network security concepts and introduces network 
virtualization and automation. Configure advanced routing and switching protocols; resolve common issues 
with routing and switching protocols; identify threats and enhance network security; implement IPv4 
Access Control Lists (ACLs); configure Network Address Translation (NAT) services; explain 
virtualization, software defined networking, and automation. Emphasizes network security concepts and 
introduces network virtualization and automation. Prerequisite: ITCC 1444. 48 lecture and 32 lab hours. 
Lab fee. 
 
ITMT 1303 – Querying Microsoft SQL Server with Transact – SQL.  3 credit hours. Introductory 
coverage of the technical skills required to write basic Transact-SQL queries for Microsoft SQL Server. 48 
lecture hours and 16 lab hours. Lab fee.  
 
ITNW 1325 – Fundamentals of Networking Technologies. 3 credit hours. Instruction in networking 
technologies and their implementation. Topics include the OSI reference model, network protocols, 
transmission media, and networking hardware and software. 48 lecture and 16 lab hours. Prerequisites: 
Satisfy School of Business and Technology guidelines. See Dean of Business and Technology. Lab fee. 
 
ITNW 1336 – Cloud Deployment & Infrastructure Management. 3 credit hours. Focus on Cloud 
infrastructure, deployment, security models, and key considerations in migrating to Cloud computing. 
Includes the technologies and processes required to build on-premise and Cloud environments, including 
computation, storage, networking, virtualization, business continuity, security, and management. Assess 
and plan migration from on-premise to Cloud solution environment; identify methods and tools to maintain 
security and protect data; differentiate between the various storage, computing, and networking options; 
identify deployment and management options; deploy available services for scalability, reliability and high 
availability; use Cloud monitoring and auto-scaling services to scale infrastructure up and down. 32 lecture 
and 32 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
ITNW 1408 – Implementing and Supporting Client Operating Systems. 4 credit hours. The 
fundamentals of managing and configuring network clients. Prerequisite: ITNW 1325 or approval of Dean 
of Business and Technology. 64 lecture and 16 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
 
 
 
ITNW 1445 – Implementing Network Directory Services. 4 credit hours. In-depth coverage of the skills 
necessary to install, configure, and administer Network Directory service. Prerequisite: ITNW 1454 or 
approval of Dean of Business and Technology. 64 lecture and 16 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
ITNW 1453 – Supporting Network Server Infrastructure. 4 credit hours. Installing, configuring, 
managing, and supporting a network infrastructure. Install and configure DHCP, DNS, remote access, 
network security using public key infrastructure; integrate network services; and deploy operating systems 
using remote installation services. 48 lecture and 32 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
ITNW 1454 – Implementing and Supporting Servers. 4 credit hours. Implement, administer, and 
troubleshoot information systems that incorporate servers in a networked computing environment. 
Configure peripherals and devices; set up servers; configure directory replication; manage licensing; create 
and manage system policies and profiles; administer remote servers and disk resources; 'create and share 
resources; implement fault-tolerance; configure servers for interoperability; install and configure Remote 
Access Service (RAS); and identify and monitor performance bottlenecks and resolve configuration 
problems. 48 lecture and 32 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
ITNW 2264 – Practicum (or Field Experience). 2 credit hours. Computer Systems Networking and 
Telecommunications. Practical, general workplace training supported by an individualized learning plan 
developed by the employer, college, and student. As outlined in the learning plan, apply the theory, 
concepts, and skills involving specialized materials, tools, equipment, procedures, regulations, laws, and 
interactions within and among political, economic, environmental, social, and legal systems associated with 
the occupation and the business/industry; and will demonstrate legal and ethical behavior, safety practices, 
interpersonal and teamwork skills, and appropriate written and verbal communication skills using the 
terminology of the occupation and the business/industry. 224 hours. 
 
ITNW 2354 – Internet/Intranet Server. 3 credit hours. Advanced concepts in the designing, installing, 
and administration of an Internet/Intranet server. Prerequisite: ITNW 1453 or approval of Dean of Business 
and Technology. 48 lecture and 16 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
ITNW 2405 – Network Administration. 4 credit hours. Topics include network components, user 
accounts and groups, network file systems, file system security, and network printing. Describe a network; 
explain the role of directory services; set up and manage users; distributed print services; and file system 
and directory services security. 48 lecture and 32 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
ITNW 2411 – Implementing Mail Servers. 4 credit hours. An in-depth study of electronic messaging 
using mail servers. Prerequisite: ITNW 1445 or approval of Dean of Business and Technology. 48 lecture 
and 32 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
ITNW 2452 – Administering SQL Server. 4 credit hours. Administering SQL Server is a skills 
development course in the installation, configuration, administration, and troubleshooting of SQL Servers 
client/server database management system version. Prerequisite: ITNW 1445 or approval of Dean of 
Business and Technology. 48 lecture and 32 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
ITSC 1301 – Introduction to Computers. 3 credit hours. Overview of computer information systems. 
Introduces computer hardware, software, procedures, and human resources. 48 lecture and 16 lab hours. 
Lab fee. 
 
 
 
 
ITSC 1305 – Introduction to PC Operating Systems. 3 credit hours. Introduction to personal computer 
operating systems including installation, configuration, file management, memory and storage 
management, control of peripheral devices, and use of utilities. Install, configure, and maintain the 
operating system; perform basic file management operations; organize and allocate primary and secondary 
storage; access and control peripheral devices; and run utilities. 32 lecture and 32 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
ITSC 1307 – Unix Operating System 1. 3 credit hours. Introduction to the UNIX operating system 
including multi-user concepts, terminal emulation, use of system editor, basic UNIX commands, and 
writing script files. Includes introductory systems management concepts. 48 lecture and 16 lab hours. Lab 
fee.  
 
ITSC 1316 – Linux Installation and Configuration. 3 credit hours. Three credit hours. Introduction to 
Linux operating system. Includes Linux installation, basic administration, utilities and commands, 
upgrading, networking, security, and application installation. Emphasizes hands-on setup, administration, 
and management of Linux. Install, administer, and manage a Linux system; demonstrate proficiency with 
Linux utilities, commands, and applications; identify and resolve security-based issues; and integrate a 
Linux system into an existing network. Thirty-two lecture and thirty-two lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
ITSY 1342 – Information Technology Security. 3 credit hours. Three credit hours. Instruction in security 
for network computer hardware, software, virtualization, and data, including physical security; backup 
procedures; relevant tools; encryptions; and protection from viruses. Topics may adapt to changes in 
industry practices. Apply National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) guidelines and other best 
practices; develop backup/recovery procedures to provide for data security; use desktop /device operating 
system features to implement security; identify computer and network threats and vulnerabilities and 
methods to prevent their effects; use tools to enhance network security; and use encryption techniques to 
protect network local and distributed systems data. Thirty-two lecture and thirty-two lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
ITSC 1316 – Linux Installation and Configuration. 3 credit hours. Introduction to Linux operating 
system. Includes Linux installation, basic administration, utilities and commands, upgrading, networking, 
security, and application installation. Emphasizes hands-on setup, administration, and management of 
Linux. Install, administer, and manage a Linux system; demonstrate proficiency with Linux utilities, 
commands, and applications; identify and resolve security-based issues; and integrate a Linux system into 
an existing network. 32 lecture and 32 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
ITSC 2339 – Personal Computer Help Desk Support. 3 credit hours. Diagnosis and solution of user 
hardware and software related problems with on-the-job and/or simulated projects. 16 lecture and 80 lab 
hours. Prerequisite: Sophomore standing and approval of Associate Dean of Instruction. This is a capstone 
experience. Lab Fee.  
 
ITSC 2380 – Cooperative Education, Computer and Information Sciences, General. 3 credit hours. 
Career-related activities encountered in the student's area of specialization offered through an 
individualized agreement among the college, employer, and student. Under the supervision of the college 
and the employer, the student combines classroom learning with work experience. A weekly one-hour 
seminar is held in conjunction with the student’s job. 16 lecture and 224 lab hours. Prerequisite: Sophomore 
standing and approval from the Associate Dean of Instruction. This is a capstone experience. Lab fee. 
 
 
 
 
ITSE 1302 – Computer Programming. 3 credit hours. Introduction to computer programming including 
design, development, testing, implementation, and documentation. 48 lecture and 16 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
ITSE 1307 – Introduction to C++. 3 credit hours. Introduction to computer programming using C++. 
Emphasis on the fundamentals of object-oriented design with development, testing, implementation, and 
documentation. Includes language syntax, data and file structures, input/output devices and files. 48 lecture 
and 16 lab hours. Lab fee. Prerequisite: ITSC 1301. 
 
ITSE 1350 – Systems Analysis and Design. 3 credit hours. Introduction to the planning, design and 
construction of computer information systems using the systems development life cycle and other 
appropriate design tools. 48 lecture and 16 lab hours. Prerequisite: ITSC 1301. Lab fee. 
 
ITSE 2317 – JAVA Programming. 3 credit hours. Introduction to object-oriented Java programming 
including the fundamental syntax and semantics of Java for applications and web applets. 48 lecture and 16 
lab hours. Prerequisite: ITSC 1301. Lab fee.  
 
ITSW 1301 – Intro to Word Processing. 3 credit hours. An overview of the production of documents, 
table, and graphs. Prerequisites: POFT 1429 or advisor approval. 48 lecture and 16 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
ITSW 1304 – Introduction to Spreadsheets. 3 credit hours. Instruction in the concepts, procedures, and 
application of electronic spreadsheets. 48 lecture and 16 lab hours. Lab fee.  
 
ITSW 1307 – Introduction to Database. 3 credit hours. Introduction to database theory and the practical 
applications of a database. 48 lecture and 16 lab hours. Lab fee.  
 
ITSW 1310 – Introduction to Presentation Graphics Software. 3 credit hours. Instruction in the 
utilization of presentation software to produce multimedia presentations. Graphics, text, sound, animation 
and/or video may be used in presentation development. Used as a capstone for the Microcomputer 
certificate. 48 lecture and 16 lab hours. Lab fee.  
 
ITSY 1342 – Information Technology Security. 3 credit hours. Instruction in security for network 
computer hardware, software, virtualization, and data, including physical security; backup procedures; 
relevant tools; encryptions; and protection from viruses. Topics may adapt to changes in industry practices. 
Apply National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) guidelines and other best practices; develop 
backup/recovery procedures to provide for data security; use desktop /device operating system features to 
implement security; identify computer and network threats and vulnerabilities and methods to prevent their 
effects; use tools to enhance network security; and use encryption techniques to protect network local and 
distributed systems data. 32 lecture and 32 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
ITSY 1333 – Mobile Applications Development. 3 credit hours.  An overview of different mobile 
platforms and their development environments.  48 lecture and 16 lab hours.  
 
ITSY 2400 – Operating System Security. 4 credit hours. Safeguard computer operating systems by 
demonstrating server support skills and designing and implementing a security system. Identify security 
threats and monitor network security implementations. Use best practices to configure operating systems 
to industry security standards. 64 lecture and 16 lab hours. Lab fee. Prerequisite: ITNW 1454 or approval 
of Dean of Business and Technology. 
 
 
 
 
ITSY 2430 – Intrusion Detection. 4 credit hours. Computer information systems security monitoring, 
intrusion detection, and crisis management. Includes alarm management, signature configuration, sensor 
configuration, and troubleshooting components. Emphasizes identifying, resolving, and documenting 
network crises and activating the response team. Build IDS sensors and attach them to the network 
(hardware and software); install and manage a secure communication link between all sensors and the 
monitor; install and manage event database(s); analyze an event and trends; install, manage, and interpret 
syslog servers and system logs; identify legal and policy issues associated with system and network 
monitoring; and deploy, implement, and test IDS security plan. 48 lecture and 32 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
LGLA 1119 – Legal Ethics & Professional Responsibility. 1-hour credit. The ethical and legal 
responsibilities and duties that a member of the legal profession owes to the public, the court, clients, and 
other professional colleagues. Includes a review of the canons, codes, and rules of professional 
responsibility. The student will define and properly use terminology related to legal ethics; describe the 
ethical responsibilities of lawyers and law office personnel; recognize breaches of ethical obligations that 
may result in malpractice or disciplinary actions; and demonstrate knowledge of the canons of legal ethics 
governing legal professionals. Prerequisite or concurrent enrollment in LGLA 1307. 16 lecture hours. 
 
LGLA 1303 – Legal Research. 3 credit hours. Law library techniques and computer-assisted legal 
research. The student will locate, read and understand primary and secondary legal authority; design and 
implement effective research strategies; and be familiar with computer-assisted legal research tools and the 
proper role of these tools. Prerequisite: LGLA 1307. 48 lecture hours with extensive outside use of legal 
research resources. 
 
LGLA 1307 – Introduction to Law and the Legal Profession. 3 credit hours. This course provides an 
overview of the law and of legal professions. Topics include legal concepts, systems and terminology; 
ethical obligations and regulations; professional trends and issues with particular emphasis on the paralegal. 
The student will develop a legal vocabulary; explain fundamental legal concepts and systems; explain the 
ethical obligations of the legal profession with particular emphasis on the paralegal’s role; and discuss 
topics relating to the paralegal profession. 48 lecture hours. 
 
LGLA 1345 – Civil Litigation. 3 credit hours. This course presents fundamental concepts and procedures 
of civil litigation with emphasis on the paralegal’s role. Topics include pretrial, trial, and post-trial phases 
of litigation. The student will define and properly use terminology relating to civil litigation; locate, 
describe, and analyze sources of law relating to the civil litigation and applicable court rules; describe and 
analyze other sources of law relating to constitutional law; locate, U.S. Constitution and its amendments. 
Prerequisite or concurrent enrollment in LGLA 1307. 48 lecture hours. 
 
LGLA 1351 – Contracts. 3 credit hours. This course presents fundamental concepts of contract law with 
emphasis on the paralegal’s role. Topics include formation, performance, and enforcement of contracts 
under the common law and the Uniform Commercial Code. The student will define and properly use 
terminology relating to contract law; locate, describe, and analyze sources of law relating to contract law; 
describe the role and ethical obligations of the paralegal relating to contract law; and draft documents 
commonly used in contract law. Prerequisite or concurrent enrollment in LGLA 1307. 48 lecture hours. 
 
LGLA 1353 – Wills, Trusts and Probate Administration. 3 credit hours. This course presents 
fundamental concepts of the law of wills, trusts, and probate administration with emphasis on the 
paralegal’s role. The student will define and properly use terminology relating to wills, trusts, and probate 
administration; locate, describe, and analyze sources of law relating to wills, trusts, and probate 
 
 
 
administration; describe the role and ethical obligations of the paralegal relating to wills, trusts, and probate 
administration; and draft documents commonly used in wills, trusts, and probate administration. 
Prerequisite or concurrent enrollment in LGLA 1307. 48 lecture hours. 
 
LGLA 1355 – Family Law. 3 credit hours. This course presents fundamental concepts of family law with 
emphasis on the paralegal’s role. Topics include formal and informal marriages, divorce, annulment, marital 
property, and the parent-child relationship. The student will define and properly use terminology relating 
to family law; locate, describe, and analyze sources of law relating to family law; describe the role and 
ethical obligations of the paralegal relating to family law; and draft documents commonly used in family 
law. Prerequisite or concurrent enrollment in LGLA 1307. 48 lecture hours. 
 
LGLA 1391 – Special Topics in Paralegal/Legal Assistant. 3 credit hours. Topics address recently 
identified current events, skills, knowledge, and/or attitudes and behaviors pertinent to the technology or 
occupation and relevant to the professional development of the student. This course was designed to be 
repeated multiple times to improve student proficiency. Learning outcomes/objectives are determined by 
local occupational need and business and industry trends. Prerequisites: Completion of 45 hours in the 
program including LGLA 1303 and LGLA 1307. 48 lecture hours.  
 
LGLA 2266 – Practicum (or Field Experience). 2 credit hours. Practical general workplace training 
supported by an individualized learning plan developed by the employer, college and student. As outlined 
in the learning plan, the student will apply the theory, concepts, and skills involving specialized tools, 
materials, equipment, procedures, regulations, laws and interactions within and among political, economic, 
environmental, social and legal systems associated with the occupation and the business/industry and will 
demonstrate legal and ethical behavior, safety practices, interpersonal and teamwork skills, appropriate 
verbal and written communication skills using the terminology of the occupation and the business/industry. 
Prerequisites: LGLA 1303, 1307, 1345, 1351, 2303, 2309 and 2313 or permission of the instructor. 208 
practicum and 16 lecture hours.  
  
LGLA 2303 – Torts and Personal Injury Law. 3 credit hours. This course presents fundamental concepts 
of tort law with emphasis on the paralegal’s role. Topics include intentional torts, negligence, and strict 
liability. The student will define and properly use terminology relating to tort law; locate, describe, and 
analyze sources of law relating to tort law; describe the role and ethical obligations of the paralegal in tort 
law; and draft documents commonly used in tort law. Prerequisite or concurrent enrollment in LGLA 1307. 
48 lecture hours. 
 
LGLA 2305 – Interviewing and Investigating. 3 credit hours. This course is a study of principles, 
methods, and investigative techniques utilized to locate, gather, document and manage information. 
Emphasis on developing interviewing and investigative skills to prepare the paralegal to communicate 
effectively while recognizing ethical problems. The student will conduct effective interviews with clients 
and witnesses in preparation for alternative dispute resolution and litigation processes; utilize multiple 
sources of information; and apply ethical standards in interviewing and investigation. Prerequisite or 
concurrent enrollment in LGLA 1307. 48 lecture hours. 
 
LGLA 2309 – Real Property. 3 credit hours. This course presents fundamental concepts of real property 
law with emphasis on the paralegal’s role. Topics include the nature of real property, rights and duties of 
ownership, land use, voluntary and involuntary conveyances, and the recording of and searching for real 
estate documents. The student will define and properly use terminology relating to real property; locate, 
describe, and analyze sources of law relating to real property; describe the role and ethical obligations of 
 
 
 
the paralegal relating to real property transactions; and draft documents commonly used in real property 
transactions. Prerequisite or concurrent enrollment in LGLA 1307. 48 lecture hours. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LGLA 2313 – Criminal Law and Procedure. 3 credit hours. Procedures from arrest to final disposition, 
principles of federal and state law, and the preparation of pleadings and motions as applied to paralegals. 
The student will define and properly use terminology relating to criminal law; locate and analyze cases and 
statutes relating to criminal law; evaluate the role and ethical obligations of the paralegal relating to criminal 
law; and draft documents commonly used in criminal law. Prerequisite or concurrent enrollment in LGLA 
1307. 48 lecture hours. 
 
LGLA 2331 – Advanced Legal Research and Writing. 3 credit hours. Computerized research techniques 
and preparation of complex legal documents such as briefs, legal office memoranda, and citation forms. 
The student will analyze complex legal issues; apply effective research strategies to resolve those issues 
and report the results in an acceptable written legal format. Prerequisite: LGLA 1307, prerequisite LGLA 
1303 or approval of the instructor. 48 lecture hours.  
 
LGLA 2371 – Advanced Criminal Law and Procedure. 3 credit hours. Advanced concepts of the 
procedural rules of criminal cases in Texas. This class will be focused primarily on Texas criminal 
procedural rules, as opposed to federal criminal procedure. The students will learn how a criminal case 
procedurally goes through the Texas system, including studying criminal investigation (search warrants, 
arrest warrants, etc.), arrests v. investigatory stops, booking, first appearance, bail procedures, examining 
trials, grand jury, indictments, pre-trial matters, motions to suppress, criminal discovery, motions in limine, 
plea bargaining, negotiations and procedures, jury selection, trial proceedings, various rules of evidence 
that apply to Texas criminal cases, appellate procedures, and the paralegal’s role and job opportunities in 
the criminal justice system. Prerequisite or concurrent enrollment in LGLA 1307. 48 lecture hours. 
 
LOTT 1301 – Introduction to Fiber Optics. 3 credit hours. An introductory course in fiber optics and its 
application, including advantages of fiber, light transmission in fiber, types of fiber, sources, detectors, and 
connectors. 32 lecture and 32 lab hours. Lab fee. 

MATH 0420 – Introductory Algebra. The course supports students in developing skills, strategies, and 
reasoning needed to succeed in mathematics, including communication and appropriate use of technology.  
Topics include the study of numeracy and the real number system; algebraic concepts, notation, and 
reasoning; quantitative relationships; mathematical models; and problem solving. This course is designed 
for students who plan to take MATH 1314 or MATH 1324.  This course will not count toward a degree and 
is not intended for transfer.  4 lecture hours each week.  
 
MATH 0425 – Foundations of Mathematical Reasoning. This course surveys a variety of mathematical 
topics needed to prepare students for college level statistics or quantitative reasoning for algebra-based 
courses. Topics include: numeracy with an emphasis on estimation and fluency with large numbers; 
evaluating expressions and formulas; rates, ratios, and proportions; percentages; solving equations; linear 
models; date interpretations including graphs and tables; verbal, algebraic and graphical representations of 
 
 
 
functions; exponential models. This course will not count toward a degree and is not intended for transfer. 
4 lecture hours each week. Successful completion (C or better) will fulfill TSI requirements for non-Algebra 
based courses.    
 
MATH 0330 – Intermediate Algebra. A study of relations and functions, inequalities, algebraic 
expressions and equations (absolute value, polynomial, radical, rational), with a special emphasis on linear 
and quadratic expressions and equations. This course will not count toward a degree and is not intended for 
transfer. 48 lecture hours.  
 
MATH 0342 – Pre-Elementary Statistics. 3 credit hours. This course emphasizes the knowledge and 
skills necessary to succeed in MATH 1342. Topics include the study of numeracy and the real number 
system; algebraic concepts, notation, and reasoning; quantitative relationships; mathematical models; and 
problem solving. 48 lecture hours. Required corequisite: MATH 1342. 
 
MATH 1314 – College Algebra. 3 credit hours. In-depth study and applications of polynomial, rational, 
radical, exponential and logarithmic functions, and systems of equations using matrices. Additional topics 
such as sequences, series, probability, and conics may be included. Prerequisite: Meet TSI college readiness 
standard for Mathematics or co-enroll in MATH 0314 or NCBM 0130. 48 lecture hours. 
 
MATH 1324 – Mathematics for Business & Social Sciences. 3 credit hours. The application of common 
algebraic functions, including polynomial, exponential, logarithmic, and rational, to problems in business, 
economics, and the social sciences are addressed. The applications include mathematics of finance, 
including simple and compound interest and annuities; systems of linear equations; matrices; linear 
programming; and probability, including expected value. Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness standard 
for Mathematics or co-enroll in MATH 0324. 48 lecture hours. 
 
MATH 1325 – Calculus for Business & Social Sciences. 3 credit hours. This course is the basic study of 
limits and continuity, differentiation, optimization and graphing, and integration of elementary functions, 
with emphasis on applications in business, economics, and social sciences. This course is not a substitute 
for MATH 2413, Calculus I. Prerequisite: Must have passed MATH 1324 Mathematics for Business & 
Social Sciences or MATH 1314 College Algebra or an equivalent transfer course with a C or better. 48 
lecture hours. 
 
MATH 1332 – Contemporary Mathematics (Math for Liberal Arts Majors I). 3 credit hours. Intended 
for non-STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) majors. Topics include introductory 
treatments of sets and logic, financial mathematics, probability and statistics with appropriate applications. 
Number sense, proportional reasoning, estimation, technology, and communication should be embedded 
throughout the course. Additional topics may be covered. Prerequisite: Meet TSI college-readiness standard 
for Mathematics or co-enroll in NCBM 0132. 48 lecture hours. 
 
MATH 1342 – Elementary Statistical Methods. 3 credit hours. Collection, analysis, presentation and 
interpretation of data, and probability. Analysis includes descriptive statistics, correlation and regression, 
confidence intervals and hypothesis testing. Use of appropriate technology is recommended.  Prerequisite: 
Meet TSI college readiness standard for Mathematics or co-enroll in MATH 0342. 48 lecture hours. 
 
MATH 1350 –Mathematics for Teachers I. 3 credit hours. This course is intended to build or reinforce a 
foundation in fundamental mathematics concepts and skills. It includes the conceptual development of the 
following: sets, functions, numeration systems, number theory, and properties of the various number 
 
 
 
systems with an emphasis on problem solving and critical thinking. Prerequisite:  MATH 1314/1414 with 
a grade of C or higher. 48 lecture hours. 
 
MATH 1351 – Mathematics for Teachers II. 3 credit hours. This course is intended to build or reinforce 
a foundation in fundamental mathematics concepts and skills. It includes the concepts of geometry, 
measurement, probability, and statistics with an emphasis on problem solving and critical thinking. 
Prerequisite:  MATH 1350 and MATH 1314/1414 with a grade of C or higher. 48 lecture hours. 
 
MATH 1414 – College Algebra (for Science and Engineering Majors). 4 credit hours. In-depth study 
and applications of polynomial, rational, radical, exponential and logarithmic functions, and systems of 
equations using matrices. Additional topics such as sequences, series, probability, and conics will be 
included. This course is intended to prepare students for MATH 2412 – Precalculus. 64 lecture hours. 
 
MATH 2318 – Linear Algebra. 3 credit hours. Introduces and provides models for application of the 
concepts of vector algebra. Topics include finite dimensional vector spaces and their geometric 
significance; representing and solving systems of linear equations using multiple methods, including 
Gaussian elimination and matrix inversion; matrices; determinants; linear transformations; quadratic forms; 
eigenvalues and eigenvector; and applications in science and engineering. Prerequisite: MATH 2414 
(Calculus II). 48 lecture hours. 
 
MATH 2320 – Differential Equations. 3 credit hours. Ordinary differential equations, including linear 
equations, systems of equations, equations with variable coefficients, existence and uniqueness of solutions, 
series solutions, singular points, transform methods, and boundary value problems; application of 
differential equations to real-world problems. 48 lecture hours. Prerequisite: Must have passed MATH 2414 
Calculus II or an equivalent transfer course with a C or better. This course is only offered in the spring.  
 
MATH 2412 – Pre-Calculus Math. 4 credit hours. In-depth combined study of algebra, trigonometry, and 
other topics for calculus readiness. 64 lecture hours. Prerequisite: Must have passed MATH 1314 College 
Algebra or an equivalent transfer course with a C or better. 
 
MATH 2413 – Calculus I. 4 credit hours. Limits and continuity; the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus; 
definition of the derivative of a function and techniques of differentiation; applications of the derivative to 
maximizing or minimizing a function; the chain rule, mean value theorem, and rate of change problems; 
curve sketching; definite and indefinite integration of algebraic, trigonometric, and transcendental 
functions, with an application to calculation of areas. 64 lecture hours Prerequisite: Must have passed 
MATH 2412 Precalculus Math or an equivalent transfer course with a C or better. 
 
MATH 2414 – Calculus II. 4 credit hours. Differentiation and integration of transcendental functions; 
parametric equations and polar coordinates; techniques of integration; sequences and series; improper 
integrals. 64 lecture hours. Prerequisite: Must have passed MATH 2413 Calculus I or an equivalent transfer 
course with a C or better. 
 
MATH 2415 – Calculus III. 4 credit hours. Advanced topics in calculus, including vectors and vector-
valued functions, partial differentiation, Lagrange multipliers, multiple integrals, and Jacobians; application 
of the line integral, including Green's Theorem, the Divergence Theorem, and Stokes' Theorem. 64 lecture 
hours. Prerequisite: Must have passed MATH 2414 Calculus II or an equivalent transfer course with a C or 
better. 
 
 
 
 
MCHN 1190 – Special Topics in Machine Shop Assistant. 1-hour credit. Topics address recently 
identified current events, skills, knowledge, and/or attitudes and behaviors pertinent to the technology or 
occupation and relevant to the professional development of the student. This course was designed to be 
repeated multiple times to improve student proficiency. Must be taken with MCHN 1441.  32 lab hours.  
Lab fee. 
 
MCHN 1191 – Special Topics in Machine Shop Assistant. 1-hour credit. Topics address recently 
identified current events, skills, knowledge, and/or attitudes and behaviors pertinent to the technology or 
occupation and relevant to the professional development of the student. To be repeated once for credit. 
Must be taken with MCHN 1452 and MCHN 1454.  32 lab hours.  Lab fee. 
 
MCHN 1343 – Machine Shop Mathematics. 3 credit hours. Designed to prepare the student with 
technical, applied mathematics skills that will be necessary in future machine shop-related courses. The 
student will define the use of formulas and identify conversion methods of numbering systems; convert 
fractions to decimals and back; use formulas in solving measurement problems; and compute correctly by 
adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing whole numbers, decimals, fractions and mixed numbers. 48 
lecture hours.  Lab fee. 
 
MCHN 1426 – Introduction to CAM. 4 credit hours. A study of Computer-Assisted Manufacturing 
(CAM) systems. Software is used to develop application for manufacturing. Emphasis is on tool geometry, 
tool selection, and the tool library. The student will demonstrate knowledge of Computer-Assisted 
Manufacturing systems, create, download, and machine parts using Computer-Assisted Manufacturing 
software. Prerequisites: DFTG 1325, MCHN 1343, and 1438. 32 lecture and 64 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
MCHN 1438 – Machining I. 4 credit hours. An introduction to machine shop theory, math and 
terminology, basic bench work, and part layout using a variety of common measuring tools. Application of 
basic operation of machine tools, such as handsaws, grinders, drill presses, lathes and mills with common 
hand tools. The student will identify machine parts and their functions; select layout tools and techniques; 
define machine shop terminology; perform basic machine setups; calculate common shop formulas; 
perform semi-precision and precision layout; execute grinding techniques; demonstrate basic machine 
operations; and apply proper measuring tools. 32 lecture and 64 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
MCHN 1441 – Basic Machine Shop II. 4 credit hours. A continuation of Basic Machine Shop I. The 
student will identify machine parts and their function; select layout tools and techniques; define machine 
shop terminology; perform basic machine setups; calculate common shop formulas; perform semi-precision 
layout; execute grinding techniques; demonstrate basic machine operations; and apply proper measuring 
tools. Prerequisite: MCHN 1438. 32 lecture and 64 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
MCHN 1452 – Intermediate Machining I. 4 credit hours. Operation of drills, milling machines, lathes, 
and power saws. Introduction to precision measuring tools. The student will use shop machine tools and 
measuring tools; use shop machinery and tools in a safe manner; and use precision measuring instruments 
to defined tolerances. Corequisite: MCHN 1441. 32 lecture and 64 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
MCHN 1454 – Intermediate Machining II. 4 credit hours. This course provides further instruction in the 
operation of lathes, milling machines, surface grinders to produce more advanced knowledge and projects. 
OD and ID grinding will also be covered. Development of job process plan to include operation of lathes, 
milling machines, drill presses, and power saws. Set-up, layout, and tool maintenance is included. Emphasis 
 
 
 
on shop safety and preventative maintenance. 32 lecture and 64 lab hours. Prerequisite MCHN 1452 Lab 
fee. 
 
MCHN 2431 – Operation of CNC Turning Centers. 4 credit hours. CNC operations with emphasis on 
turning centers, programming, setup, tool selection and machine operation. 48 lecture and 48 lab hours. Lab 
fee. 
 
MCHN 2434 – Operation of CNC Machining Centers. 4 credit hours. CNC operation with an emphasis 
on machining centers. 32 lecture and 64 lab hours. Prerequisite MCHN 2431.  Lab fee. 
 
MCHN 2438 – Advanced Computer-Assisted Manufacturing (CAM). 4 credit hours. Use Computer-
Aided Manufacturing (CAM) software to create multi-axis part programs; transfer programs to the machine 
control unit; and machine parts. 32 lecture and 64 lab hours. Prerequisite MCHN 1426. Lab fee. 
 
MCHN 2441 – Advanced Machining Operations I. 4 credit hours. An advanced study of lathe and milling 
operations. Emphasis is on advanced cutting operations of the lathe and milling machines, including the 
use of carbide insert tooling, special tooling, bench assembly, and materials metallurgy. The student will 
identify and apply special tooling for the lathe and milling machines; interpret advanced operation formulas; 
list machine and work setup procedures; identify and select proper materials for machining of specific 
materials; calculate feeds and speeds; calculate machine movements; perform advanced lathe and milling 
machine setup operations; and perform advanced machining operation to specifications. Prerequisite: 
Associate of Applied Science in Machine Tool Technology. 32 lecture and 64 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
MCHN 2445 – Advanced Machining Operations II. 4 credit hours. Advanced milling, drilling, grinding, 
and lathe operations to close tolerance dimensions. Emphasis is on job planning and advanced uses of 
precision measuring instruments. The student will hold close tolerances on mills, lathes, drills, and grinders; 
and make complicated setup on lathes, mills, grinders, and drills. Prerequisite: MCHN 2441. 32 lecture and 
64 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
MRKG 1311 – Principles of Marketing. 3 credit hours. Introduction to the marketing mix functions and 
process. Includes identification of consumer and organizational needs and explanation of environmental 
issues. 48 lecture hours. 
 
MRKG 2333 – Principles of Selling. 3 credit hours. Overview of the selling process. Identification of the 
elements of the communication process between buyers and sellers. Examination of the legal and ethical 
issues of organizations which affect salespeople. 48 lecture hours. 

MUEN 1121 – Jazz Band. 1-hour credit. The Swinging Roadrunner is an ensemble group
open to all college instrumentalists by audition, regardless of their major field. Repertoire consists of music
selected from all stylistic periods of jazz. Includes a study of basic improvisation and general jazz history.
Students participate in concerts at Angelina College and in the surrounding community. 48 lab hours. Lab
fee.

MUEN 1122 – Jazz Band. 1-hour credit. The Swinging Roadrunner is an ensemble group
open to all college instrumentalists by audition, regardless of their major field. Repertoire consists of music
selected from all stylistic periods of jazz. Includes a study of basic improvisation and general jazz history.
Students participate in concerts at Angelina College and in the surrounding community. 48 lab hours. Lab
fee.

MUEN 2121 – Jazz Band. 1-hour credit. The Swinging Roadrunner is an ensemble group
open to all college instrumentalists by audition, regardless of their major field. Repertoire consists of music
selected from all stylistic periods of jazz. Includes a study of basic improvisation and general jazz history.
Students participate in concerts at Angelina College and in the surrounding community. 48 lab hours. Lab
fee.

MUEN 2122 – Jazz Band. 1-hour credit. The Swinging Roadrunner is an ensemble group
open to all college instrumentalists by audition, regardless of their major field. Repertoire consists of music
selected from all stylistic periods of jazz. Includes a study of basic improvisation and general jazz history.
Students participate in concerts at Angelina College and in the surrounding community. 48 lab hours. Lab
fee.

MUEN 1123 – Concert Band. 1-hour credit. An ensemble course open to the general
student with high school or other previous band experience. The group performs a variety of band literature
including marches, overtures, and arrangements of contemporary music. 48 lab hours. Lab fee.

MUEN 1124 – Concert Band. 1-hour credit. An ensemble course open to the general
student with high school or other previous band experience. The group performs a variety of band literature
including marches, overtures, and arrangements of contemporary music. 48 lab hours. Lab fee.

MUEN 2123 – Concert Band. 1-hour credit. An ensemble course open to the general
student with high school or other previous band experience. The group performs a variety of band literature
including marches, overtures, and arrangements of contemporary music. 48 lab hours. Lab fee.

MUEN 2124 – Concert Band. 1-hour credit. An ensemble course open to the general
student with high school or other previous band experience. The group performs a variety of band literature
including marches, overtures, and arrangements of contemporary music. 48 lab hours. Lab fee.

MUEN 1131 – Guitar Ensemble. 1-hour credit. May be taken four successive semesters
for credit. The study of duo, trio, and quartet literature as applied in performance settings. Students will
participate in recitals at Angelina College and in the surrounding community. 48 lab hours. Prerequisite:
Successful completion of MUSI 1303 or consent of instructor through audition. Concurrent enrollment:
Applied Guitar class. Lab fee.

MUEN 1132 – Guitar Ensemble. 1-hour credit. May be taken four successive semesters
for credit. The study of duo, trio, and quartet literature as applied in performance settings. Students will
participate in recitals at Angelina College and in the surrounding community. 48 lab hours. Prerequisite:
Successful completion of MUSI 1303 or consent of instructor through audition. Concurrent enrollment:
Applied Guitar class. Lab fee.

MUEN 2131 – Guitar Ensemble. 1-hour credit. May be taken four successive semesters
for credit. The study of duo, trio, and quartet literature as applied in performance settings. Students will
participate in recitals at Angelina College and in the surrounding community. 48 lab hours. Prerequisite:
Successful completion of MUSI 1303 or consent of instructor through audition. Concurrent enrollment:
Applied Guitar class. Lab fee.

MUEN 2132 – Guitar Ensemble. 1-hour credit. May be taken four successive semesters
for credit. The study of duo, trio, and quartet literature as applied in performance settings. Students will
participate in recitals at Angelina College and in the surrounding community. 48 lab hours. Prerequisite:
Successful completion of MUSI 1303 or consent of instructor through audition. Concurrent enrollment:
Applied Guitar class. Lab fee.

MUEN 1141 – Chorale. 1-hour credit. Open to all students. An ensemble course
designed to acquaint members with the best in classical and modern choral music. The general development
of choral music is surveyed through the study of some major choral works. Choral techniques and group
vocal problems are discussed. In order to obtain credit, the student is required to attend all called rehearsals
and all public performances. 48 lab hours. Lab fee.

MUEN 1142 – Chorale. 1-hour credit. Open to all students. An ensemble course
designed to acquaint members with the best in classical and modern choral music. The general development
of choral music is surveyed through the study of some major choral works. Choral techniques and group
vocal problems are discussed. In order to obtain credit, the student is required to attend all called rehearsals
and all public performances. 48 lab hours. Lab fee.

MUEN 2141 – Chorale. 1-hour credit. Open to all students. An ensemble course
designed to acquaint members with the best in classical and modern choral music. The general development
of choral music is surveyed through the study of some major choral works. Choral techniques and group
vocal problems are discussed. In order to obtain credit, the student is required to attend all called rehearsals
and all public performances. 48 lab hours. Lab fee.

MUEN 2142 – Chorale. 1-hour credit. Open to all students. An ensemble course
designed to acquaint members with the best in classical and modern choral music. The general development
of choral music is surveyed through the study of some major choral works. Choral techniques and group
vocal problems are discussed. In order to obtain credit, the student is required to attend all called rehearsals
and all public performances. 48 lab hours. Lab fee.

MUEN 1151 – AC Singers. 1-hour credit. An ensemble course designed for students
interested in popular, swing and jazz styles. 48 lab hours. Open to students by audition. Concurrent
Enrollment: PHED 2104 and MUSI 1141. Lab fee.

MUEN 1152 – AC Singers. 1-hour credit. An ensemble course designed for students
interested in popular, swing and jazz styles. 48 lab hours. Open to students by audition. Concurrent
Enrollment: PHED 2104 and MUSI 1141. Lab fee.

MUEN 2151 – AC Singers. 1-hour credit. An ensemble course designed for students
interested in popular, swing and jazz styles. 48 lab hours. Open to students by audition. Concurrent
Enrollment: PHED 2104 and MUSI 1141. Lab fee.

MUEN 2152 – AC Singers. 1-hour credit. An ensemble course designed for students
interested in popular, swing and jazz styles. 48 lab hours. Open to students by audition. Concurrent
Enrollment: PHED 2104 and MUSI 1141. Lab fee.

MUSB 1305 – Survey of the Music Business. 3 credit hours. An overview of the music industry including 
songwriting, live performance, the record industry, music merchandising, contracts and licenses, and career 
opportunities. Includes the role of the producer in session planning, communication, budgeting, business 
aspects, technical considerations, and music markets. Topics to be covered include publishing, copyright 
laws, licensing, record company operation, management as well as marketing and publicity. 48 lecture 
hours. Prerequisite: MUSC 2347 or consent of instructor. 
 
MUSC 1327 – Introduction to Audio Engineering I. 3 credit hours. The tools, personnel, and standard 
workflow of a recording studio. Topics include fundamentals of sound and overview of tracking, editing, 
and mixing audio. 48 lecture and 16 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
MUSC 1335 – Commercial Music Software. 3 credit hours. Specialized training in commercial music 
software applications. 32 lecture and 64 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
MUSC 2101 – Audio Engineering Practices. 1 credit hour. Application of the concepts and techniques 
presented in Audio Engineering I and II. A companion lab class to be taken concurrently with MUSC 2427. 
32 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MUSC 2286 – Internship – Recording Arts Technology/Technician. 2 credit hours. A work-based 
learning experience that enables the student to apply specialized occupational theory, skills, and concepts 
involving specialized materials, tools, equipment, procedures, regulations, laws, and interactions within and 
among political, economic, environmental, social, and legal systems associated with the occupation and the 
business/industry and will demonstrate legal and ethical behavior, safety practices, interpersonal and 
teamwork skills, and appropriate written and verbal communication skills using the terminology of the 
occupation and the business/industry. A learning plan is developed by the college and the employer. 96 lab 
hours. Prerequisite: Previous or concurrent enrollment in MUSB 1305. Lab fee. 
 
MUSC 2347 – Audio Engineering III. 3 credit hours.  Advanced techniques in recording and manipulation 
of audio. Includes digital audio editing, recording techniques, and signal processing. 48 lecture and 16 lab 
hours.  Prerequisite: MUSC 2427. Lab fee.  
 
MUSC 2427 – Audio Engineering II. Audio Engineering II. 4 credit hours. Implementation of the 
recording process, including microphones, audio console, multi-track recorder, and signal processing 
devices.  48 lecture and 32 lab hours. Prerequisite: MUSC 1327. Lab fee. 
 
MUSI 1116 – Sight Singing and Ear Training I. 1 credit hour. Singing tonal music in treble and bass 
clefs, and aural study of elements of music, such as scales, intervals and chords, and dictation of basic 
rhythm, melody and diatonic harmony. Required of all music majors in the first semester of the freshman 
year. Prerequisite or concurrent enrollment: MUSI 1311. 32 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
MUSI 1117 – Sight Singing and Ear Training II. 1 credit hour. Singing tonal music in various clefs, 
continued aural study of the elements of music, and dictation of intermediate rhythm, melody and diatonic 
harmony. Required of all music majors in the second semester of the freshman year.  Prerequisite: MUSI 
1116 with a grade of C or better and concurrent of previous enrollment in MUSI 1312. 32 lab hours. Lab 
fee. 
 
MUSI 1181 –Class Piano I. 1 credit hour. Beginning class instruction in the fundamentals of keyboard 
technique. Open to all students but will not count toward a major in Piano.  Group instruction format. For 
music majors or by permission of instructor. 48 lab hours. Lab fee. For Music Majors or by permission of 
instructor. 
 
MUSI 1182 –Class Piano II. 1 credit hour. Advanced beginning class instruction in the fundamentals of 
keyboard technique. Prerequisite: consent of instructor by audition or MUSI 1181 with a grade of C or 
better.  48 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
MUSI 1183 – Voice Class. 1 credit hour. Class instruction in the fundamentals of singing including 
breathing, tone production, and diction. Designed for students with little or no previous voice training. Does 
not apply to a music major degree. The course will fulfill a need for beginning voice students.  48 lab hours. 
Lab fee. 
 
MUSI 1192 – Guitar Class. 1 credit hour. Class instruction in fundamental guitar playing, including 
technique, music-reading, fretboard theory, melodic and harmonic realizations. 48 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
MUSI 1303 – Fundamentals of Music. 3 credit hours. Introduction to the basic elements of music theory, 
including scales, intervals, keys, triads, elementary ear training, notation, meter and rhythm. Course does 
not apply to a music major degree. 48 lab hours. 
 
 
 
 
MUSI 1306 – Music Appreciation. 3 credit hours. Understanding music through the study of cultural 
periods, major composers, and musical elements. Illustrated with audio recordings and live performances. 
(Does not apply to a music major degree.) 48 lecture hours. 
 
MUSI 1307 – Music Literature. 3 credit hours. A survey of the styles and forms of music as it developed 
from the Middle Ages to the present. This course will familiarize the student with cultural context, 
terminology, genres, and notation. 48 lecture hours. 
 
MUSI 1310 – American Music. 3 credit hours. A general survey of various styles of music of the 
Americas, including but not limited to jazz, folk, rock, and contemporary music.  48 lecture hours. 
 
MUSI 1311 – Music Theory I. 3 credit hours. The study of analysis and writing of tonal melody and 
diatonic harmony, including fundamental music concepts, scales, intervals, chords, 7th chords, and early 
four-part writing. Analysis of small compositional forms. Optional correlated study at the keyboard. 
Required of all music majors in the first semester of the freshman year.  Prerequisite or concurrent 
enrollment: MUSI 1116.  Prerequisite: MUSI 1301 or equivalent preparation as demonstrated by a 
placement exam. 48 lecture hours. 
 
MUSI 1312 – Music Theory II. 3 credit hours. The study of analysis and writing of tonal melody and 
diatonic harmony, including all diatonic chords and seventh chords in root position and inversions, non-
chord tones, and functional harmony. Introduction to more complex topics, such as modulation, may occur. 
Optional correlated study at the keyboard. Required of all music majors in the second semester of the 
freshman year. Prerequisite or concurrent enrollment: MUSI 1117. Prerequisite: MUSI 1311 with a grade 
of C or equivalent preparation as demonstrated by a placement exam.  48 lecture hours. 
 
MUSI 2116 – Sight Singing and Ear Training III. 1 credit hour.  Singing more difficult tonal music in 
various clefs, aural study including dictation of more complex rhythm, melody, chromatic harmony, and 
extended tertian structures. Prerequisite: MUSI 1117 with a minimum grade of C and concurrent or previous 
enrollment in MUSI 2311.  32 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
MUSI 2117 – Sight Singing and Ear Training IV. 1 credit hour. Singing advanced tonal music and 
introduction of modal and post-tonal melodies. Aural study including dictation of advanced rhythm, 
melody, and harmony. Prerequisite: MUSI 2116 with a minimum grade of C and concurrent or previous 
enrollment in MUSI 2312.  32 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
MUSI 2181 –Class Piano III. 1 credit hour. Intermediate class instruction of keyboard technique. 
Prerequisite: Consent of the instructor by audition or MUSI 1182 with a grade of C or better.  48 lecture 
hours. Lab fee. 
 
MUSI 2182 –Class Piano IV. 1 credit hour. Advanced class instruction of keyboard technique. Consent of 
instructor by audition or MUSI 2181 with a grade of at least “C”.  48 lecture hours. Lab fee. 
 
MUSI 2311 – Music Theory III. 3 credit hours.  Advanced harmony voice leading, score analysis and 
writing of more advanced tonal harmony including chromaticism and extended-tertian structures. Optional 
correlated study at the keyboard. Required of all music majors in the first semester of the sophomore year. 
Prerequisite: MUSI 1312 with a minimum grade of C and concurrent or previous enrollment in MUSI 2116. 
48 lecture hours. 
 
 
 
 
MUSI 2312 – Theory Music IV. 3 credit hours.  Continuation of advanced chromaticism and survey of 
analytical and compositional procedures in post-tonal music. Optional correlated study at the keyboard. 
Required of all music majors in the second semester of the sophomore year. Prerequisite:  MUSI 2311 with 
a minimum grade of C and concurrent or previous enrollment in MUSI 2117. 48 lecture hours. 
 
NCBE 0130 or NCBE 0230. 2 credit hours. Development of college-level writing focusing on idea 
generation, drafting, organization, revision and utilization of Standard English. The course much be part of 
a student’s co-enrollment (co-requisite) enrollment. The NCBE cannot be used toward credit for an 
associate degree and is not intended for transfer to a senior college. Eligibility: As per the current TSI 
Assessment Placement Chart. Benefit: paired with ENGL 1301 with required course grade of a C or better, 
credit earned can be used in an associate degree; Attendance required in lecture and lab hours.  32 lecture 
hours. 
 
NCBE 0220 – BASE Non-Course Competency-Based English.  2 credit hours. Development of college-
level writing focusing on idea generation, drafting, organization, revision and utilization of Standard 
English. The course must be part of a student’s co-enrollment (co-requisite) with an INRW 0320 course. 
The NCBE cannot be used toward credit for an associate degree and is not intended for transfer to a senior 
college. 32 lecture hours. 
 
NCBM 0125 – Non-Course Competency-Based Math Foundations. The BASE NCBM supports 
students in developing skills, strategies, and reasoning needed to succeed in mathematics, including 
communication and appropriate use of technology. Topics include the study of numeracy and the real 
number system; algebraic concepts, notation, and reasoning; quantitative relationships; mathematical 
models; and problem solving. The NCBM cannot be used as credit toward an associate degree and is not 
intended for transfer. Corequisite:  MATH 0325. 16 lecture hours. 
 
NCBM 0130 – Non-Course Competency-Based Algebra. The NCBM supports students in developing 
skills, strategies, and reasoning needed to succeed in mathematics, including communication and 
appropriate use of technology.  Topics include the study of numeracy and the real number system; algebraic 
concepts, notation, and reasoning; quantitative relationships; mathematical models; and problem solving. 
The NCBM cannot be used as credit toward an associate degree and is not intended for transfer.  
Corequisite: MATH 1314. 16 lecture hours. 
 
NCBM 0132 – Pre-Contemporary Mathematics.  1-hour credit. The NCBM supports students in 
developing skills, strategies, and reasoning needed to succeed in mathematics, including communication 
and appropriate use of technology.  Topics include the study of numeracy and the real number system; 
algebraic concepts, notation, and reasoning; quantitative relationships; mathematical models; and problem 
solving. The NCBM cannot be used as credit toward an associate degree and is not intended for transfer.  
Corequisite: MATH 1332. 16 lecture hours. 
 
NCBM 0142 – NCB Statistics Foundations.  1-hour credit. The NCBM supports students developing 
knowledge and skills necessary to succeed in MATH 1342, statistics, including communication and 
appropriate use of technology. Topics include the study of numeracy and the real number system; algebraic 
concepts, notation, and reasoning; quantitative relationships; mathematical models; and problem solving. 
16 lecture hours. Required co-requisite MATH 1342.  
 
 
 
 
NCBM 0202 – Non-Algebra Base Course. 2 credit hours. The NCBM supports students in developing 
skills, strategies, and reasoning needed to succeed in mathematics, including communication and 
appropriate use of technology. Topics include the study of numeracy and the real number system; algebraic 
concepts, notation, and reasoning; quantitative relationship; mathematical models; and problem solving. 
This course is for students who were unsuccessful in the co-requisite courses MATH 0332 and MATH 1332 
or MATH 0342 and MATH 1342. The course will consist of modules containing mathematical concepts 
needed for success in MATH 1332 and MATH 1342. The course cannot be used toward credit for an 
associate degree and is not intended for transfer to senior college. Upon successful completion of this 
course, the student will be TSI-Non-Algebra complete and may enroll in MATH 1332 or MATH 1342. 32 
lecture hours.  
 
NCBM 0204 - Algebra Base Course. 2 credit hours. A study of relations and functions, inequalities, 
algebraic expressions and equations (absolute value, polynomial, radical, rational), with a special emphasis 
on linear and quadratic expressions and equations. This course is for students who were unsuccessful in the 
co-requisite courses MATH 0314 and MATH 1314 or MATH 0324 and MATH 1324. The course will 
consist of modules containing mathematical concepts needed for success in MATH 1314 and MATH 1324. 
The course cannot be used toward credit for an associate degree and is not intended for transfer to a senior 
college. Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be TSI Algebra complete and may 
enroll in MATH 1314 or MATH 1324. 32 lecture hours.  
 
NCBM 0214 - Non-Course Competency-Based Pre-College Algebra.  2 credit hours.  The NCBM 
supports students developing knowledge and skills necessary to succeed in MATH 1314, College Algebra.  
Topics include the study of relations and functions, inequalities, algebraic expressions and equations 
(absolute value, polynomial, radical, rational), with a special emphasis on linear and quadratic expressions 
and equations.  Required co-requisite MATH 1314.  32 lecture hours. 
 
NCBM 0224 - Non-Course Competency-Based Pre-Business Math.  2 credit hours.  This course 
emphasizes the knowledge and skills necessary to succeed in MATH 1324.  A study of relations and 
functions, inequalities, algebraic expressions and equations (absolute value, polynomial, radical, rational), 
with a special emphasis on linear and quadratic expressions and equations.  2 lecture hours each week.  
Required co-requisite MATH 1324.  32 lecture hours. 
 
NCBR 0130 - NULL. 1-hour credit. Development of reading and higher order thinking skills necessary for college 
readiness with a grade of B or better. The NCBR cannot be used toward credit for an associate degree and 
is not intended for transfer to a four-year college. Eligibility: As per the current TSI Assessment Placement 
Chart; Benefit: paired with SOCI 1301 or PSYC 2301 with required course grade of a C or better, credit 
earned can be used in an associate degree; attendance required in lecture and lab hours.  16 lecture hours.  
 
NCBR 0220 – BASE Non-Course Competency-Based Reading.  2 credit hours. Development of reading 
and higher order thinking skills necessary for college readiness. The course must be part of a student’s co-
enrollment (co-requisite) with an INRW 0320 course. The NCBR cannot be used toward credit for an 
associate degree and is not intended for transfer to a four-year college. 32 lecture hours. 
 
PHED 1100 – Fundamentals of Fitness. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and 
recreational activities. Students will learn wellness and fitness principles and apply them to a healthy 
lifestyle by engaging in appropriate wellness activities. Students will also learn to assess and evaluate 
personal fitness level. Internet instruction only. Purchase of e-book required. Not accepted for physical 
activity credit at Texas A&M (College Station campus). Special fee. 48 lecture hours. 
 
 
 
 
PHED 1101 – Exercise and Conditioning I. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and 
recreational activities. Students will warm-up with stretching and large muscle activities, engage in jogging 
or walking for aerobic fitness, and finish with stretching and cool down. Emphasis will be on health 
enhancement. 48 lecture hours. Lab fee. 
 
PHED 1102 – Swimming I. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and recreational 
activities. (Physical Fitness and Sport majors may have the option of 8 credits.) This course is designed to 
teach the basic techniques of swimming and water safety. Students will learn basic concepts of 
cardiovascular fitness and flexibility. 48 lecture hours. Special fee. 
PHED 1103 – Bowling I. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and recreational activities. 
(Physical Fitness and Sport majors may have the option of 8 credits.) This course is designed to teach basic 
concepts of bowling. The student will learn the 4-step approach to delivery, proper release of the ball, 
release timing, scoring (including calculating average and handicap), and terminology. The student will 
participate in competition during the course. 48 lecture hours. Special fee. 
 
PHED 1104 – Dance I. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and recreational activities. 
(Physical Fitness and Sport majors may have the option of 8 credits.) Participation and instruction in 
Zumba, Hip-Hop, Folk, Modern, Ballet, Tap and/or other dance activities. 48 lecture hours. Lab fee. 
 
PHED 1105 – Western Dance. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and recreational 
activities. (Physical Fitness and Sport majors may have the option of 8 credits.) Students will analyze 
rhythms of music and basic movements associated with various social dances such as waltz, 2-step, polka, 
schottische, cotton-eyed Joe, etc. 48 lecture hours. Lab fee. 
 
PHED 1106 – Racquetball I. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and recreational 
activities. (Physical Fitness and Sport majors may have the option of 8 credits.) This course is designed to 
teach the basic skills used in racquetball. Basic skills will include grip, serve, offensive strokes and 
defensive strokes. Practice drills will be utilized to bring the ability of the class to the level that the game 
can be played for recreational purposes. 48 lecture hours. Special fee. 
 
PHED 1107 – Tennis I. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and recreational activities. 
(Physical Fitness and Sport majors may have the option of 8 credits.) This course is designed to teach basic 
skills of tennis. Basic skills will include grip, serve, offensive strokes and defensive strokes. Practice drills 
will be utilized to bring the ability of the class to the level that the game can be played for recreational 
purposes. 48 lecture hours. Special fee. 
 
PHED 1108 – Weight Training & Conditioning I. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical 
and recreational activities. (Physical Fitness and Sport majors may have the option of 8 credits.) Weight 
training is concerned with the development of flexibility and increased physical capacity. Stress is on 
muscle strength, endurance, power and speed of movement. 48 lecture hours. Lab fee. 
 
PHED 1109 – Basketball I. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and recreational 
activities. (Physical Fitness and Sport majors may have the option of 8 credits.) Basic skills in dribbling, 
shooting, and passing will be taught. Practice drills will be utilized to bring the ability of the class to the 
level that the game can be played for recreational purposes. 48 lecture hours. Lab fee. 
 
 
 
 
PHED 1110 – Aerobics I. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and recreational activities. 
(Physical Fitness and Sport majors may have the option of 8 credits.) This course is designed to utilize 
various rhythmic aerobic routines including Zumba dance and step aerobics as well as kick-boxing. The 
workout will include warm-ups, aerobic exercise bouts, cool-downs and heart rate assessments. 48 lecture 
hours. Lab fee. 
 
PHED 1111 – Golf I. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and recreational activities. 
(Physical Fitness and Sport majors may have the option of 8 credits.) This course is designed to teach the 
basic skills used in golf to the level that the game could be played for recreational purposes. 48 lecture 
hours. Special fee. 
 
PHED 1112 – Introduction to Strength & Cardiovascular Fitness. 1-hour credit. Instruction and 
participation in physical and recreational activities. (Physical Fitness and Sport majors may have the option 
of 8 credits.) Students will develop/maintain a fitness regimen designed to improve and maintain 
cardiovascular fitness, muscular fitness, and flexibility. Students will maintain a daily activity log. 48 
lecture hours. Lab fee. 
 
PHED 1113 – Team Sports I. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and recreational 
activities. (Physical Fitness and Sport majors may have the option of 8 credits.) Students will learn basic 
skills, techniques, and strategies in selected team sports. Specific sport will be determined by location and 
instructor and will be identified in the schedule of classes. Potential team sports include but are not limited 
to: soccer, softball, football, field hockey, etc. 48 lecture hours. Lab fee. 
 
PHED 1114 – Low-Impact Muscle Conditioning. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical 
and recreational activities. (Physical Fitness and Sport majors may have the option of 8 credits.) Students 
will tone various muscle groups using principles and movement concepts from yoga, Pilates, and tai chi as 
well as traditional sculpting exercises using exercise tubes, gliders, stability balls, dumbbells, etc. 48 lecture 
hours. Lab fee. 
 
PHED 1115 – Advanced Sports I. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and recreational 
activities. (Physical Fitness and Sport majors may have the option of 8 credits. Must have prior 
administrative approval.) This course is designed for first year, first semester players who are competing 
on a collegiate level. Lab fee. 48 lecture hours 
 
PHED 1116 – Advanced Sports I. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and recreational 
activities. (Physical Fitness and Sport majors may have the option of 8 credits. Must have prior 
administrative approval.) This course is designed for first year, second semester players who are competing 
on a collegiate level. Lab fee. 48 lecture hours 
 
PHED 1117 – Advanced Weight Training I. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and 
recreational activities. (Physical Fitness and Sport majors may have the option of 8 credits. Must have prior 
administrative approval.) Designed as an in-season weight training class for athletic competitors. Emphasis 
is placed on maintenance of strength and endurance for students during the season of competition, as well 
as for injury prevention and flexibility. 48 lecture hours. Lab fee. 
 
PHED 1118 – Advanced Weight Training I. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and 
recreational activities. (Physical Fitness and Sport majors may have the option of 8 credits. Must have prior 
administrative approval.) Designed as an in-season weight training class for athletic competitors. Emphasis 
 
 
 
is placed on maintenance of strength and endurance for students during the season of competition, as well 
as for injury prevention and flexibility. 48 lecture hours. Lab fee. 
 
PHED 1119 – Volleyball I. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and recreational 
activities. Basic offensive and defensive skills in volleyball will be taught. Practice drills will be utilized to 
bring the ability of the class to the level that the game of volleyball can be played for recreational purposes. 
48 lecture hours. Lab fee. 
 
PHED 1121 – Outdoor Recreation I. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and 
recreational activities. Students will learn the rules and strategies of a variety of lifetime activities which 
may include, but is not limited to: croquet, horseshoes, disc golf, washers, and shuffleboard. 48 lecture 
hours. Lab fee. 
 
PHED 1122 – Martial Arts I. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and recreational 
activities. (Physical Fitness and Sport majors may have the option of 8 credits.) Students will learn basic 
skills, rules, strategies, safety practices, self-defense, and/or combat tactics in any of the Asian sports 
considered to be martial arts. Students will be working toward lower-level competencies/ranking. 
Prerequisite: minimum level of fitness required to enroll in this class and/or consent of instructor. 48 lecture 
hours. Lab fee. 
 
PHED 1123 – Archery I. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and recreational activities. 
A beginning class in target archery, this course requires no prior knowledge or experience. All equipment 
is provided. The emphasis is on target archery shooting technique, safety, and the history of archery. 
Grading is based on shooting skill, proper form, and knowledge of the sport. 48 lecture hours. Lab fee. 
 
PHED 1124 – Scuba Diving I. 1-hour credit. Participation and instruction in advanced aquatic activities. 
Minimal required swimming skills. This course is designed to provide the student with the knowledge and 
skills to safely scuba dive for recreational purposes. Upon satisfactory completion of the course, the student 
will be eligible to earn PADI Open Water Certification. 48 lecture hours. Special fee pays for all needed 
equipment and rental fees except mask, fins, and snorkel. Special fee. 
 
PHED 1125 – Scuba Diving II. 1-hour credit. Participation and instruction in advanced aquatic activities. 
Minimal required swimming skills. This course is designed to provide the student with the knowledge and 
skills to perform specialty dives toward PADI Advanced Open Water Certification under supervision. 48 
lecture hours. Special fee pays for all needed equipment and rental fees except mask, fins, and snorkel. 
Prerequisite: PHED 1151 or consent of the instructor. Special fee. 
 
PHED 1126 – High Intensity Interval Training I. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical 
and recreational activities. (Kinesiology majors may have the option of 8 credits.) Students will engage in 
interval exercise alternating short periods of intense anaerobic exercise with less intense recovery periods. 
48 lecture hours. Special fee.  
 
PHED 1164 – Introduction to Physical Fitness and Wellness. 1-hour credit. This course will provide an 
overview of the lifestyle necessary for fitness and health. Students will participate in physical activities and 
assess their fitness status. Student will be introduced to proper nutrition, weight management, 
cardiovascular health, flexibility, and strength training. 16 lecture and 16 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
 
 
 
PHED 1301 – Foundations of Kinesiology. 3 credit hours. The purpose of this course is to provide students 
with an introduction to human movement that includes the historical development of physical education, 
exercise science, and sport. This course offers the student both an introduction to the knowledge base, as 
well as, information on expanding career opportunities. (This course will not satisfy the 1-hour activity core 
course requirement.) 48 lecture hours. 
 
PHED 1304 – Personal and Community Health. 3 credit hours. This course provides an introduction to 
the fundamentals, concepts, strategies, applications, and contemporary trends related to understanding 
personal and community health issues. This course also focuses on empowering various populations with 
the ability to practice healthy living, promote healthy lifestyles, and enhance individual well-being. (This 
course will not satisfy the 1-hour activity core course requirement.) 48 lecture hours. 
 
PHED 1306 – First Aid. 3 credit hours. Instruction and practice for emergency care. Designed to enable 
students to recognize and avoid hazards within their environment, to render intelligent assistance in case of 
accident or sudden illness, and to development skills necessary for the immediate and temporary care of 
the victim. Successful completion of the course may enable the student to receive a certificate from a 
nationally-recognized agency. (This course will not satisfy the 1-hour activity core course requirement.) 48 
lecture hours. 
 
PHED 1308 –Sports Officiating. 3 credit hours. The purpose of the course is to study officiating 
requirements for sports and games with an emphasis on mechanics, rule interpretation, and enforcement. 
(This course will not satisfy the 1-hour activity core course requirement.) 48 lecture hours.  
 
PHED 1321 – Coaching/Sports/Athletics. 3 credit hours. Study of the history, theories, philosophies, 
rules, and terminology of competitive sports. Includes coaching techniques. This course will not satisfy the 
1-hour activity core course requirement. 48 lecture hours. 
 
PHED 1331 – Physical Education for Elementary Education Majors. 3 credit hours. An overview of 
the program of activities in elementary school physical education. Includes the study and practice of 
activities and principles that promote physical fitness with an emphasis on historical development, 
philosophical implications, physical fitness, and kinesiology. Recommended by the State Department of 
Education for classroom teachers. (This course will not satisfy the 1-hour activity core course requirement.) 
48 lecture hours.  
 
PHED 1338 – Concepts of Physical Fitness. 3 credit hours. This course is designed to familiarize students 
with knowledge, understanding, and values of health-related fitness and its influence on the quality of life 
emphasizing the development and implementation of fitness programs. (This course will not satisfy the 1-
hour activity core course requirement.) 48 lecture hours. 
 
PHED 1346 – Drug Use and Abuse. 3 credit hours. Study of the use, misuse, and abuse of drugs and other 
harmful substances in today's society. Physiological, sociological, and psychological factors will be 
emphasized. (This course will not satisfy the 1-hour activity core course requirement.) 48 lecture hours. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PHED 2101 – Exercise and Conditioning II. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and 
recreational activities. (Physical Fitness and Sport majors may have the option of 8 credits.) This course is 
designed to utilize various aerobic exercise equipment and facilities that will raise the student’s 
cardiovascular fitness level. The workouts will include warm-ups, aerobic exercise bouts, cool-downs and 
heart rate assessments. 48 lecture hours. Prerequisite: PHED 1101. Lab fee. 
 
PHED 2102 – Swimming II. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and recreational 
activities. (Physical Fitness and Sport majors may have the option of 8 credits.) Course is designed to 
provide the individual with the skills and knowledge of water safety techniques and basic rescue that may 
be used in the event of an emergency. Upon satisfactory completion of course requirements, the appropriate 
Red Cross Certification is issued. 48 lecture hours. Prerequisite: PHED 1102 or permission of instructor. 
Special fee. 
 
PHED 2103 – Bowling II. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and recreational 
activities. This course is designed to teach continued improvement of bowling skills including different 
releases for various shots, how to “spot” bowl using lane arrows, and choosing equipment to improve your 
game. Students will participate in competition and be introduced to league bowling. 48 lecture hours. 
Prerequisite: PHED 1103 or consent of instructor. Special fee. 
 
PHED 2104 – Dance II. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and recreational activities. 
Instruction in various types of dance that may be incorporated into stage performances. 48 lecture hours. 
Lab fee. 
 
PHED 2105 – Ballet I. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and recreational activities. 
This is an introductory course to ballet. Students will learn basic technique, body placement, movement 
theory, and terminology. Progressive barre and floor work will be included. Students must provide their 
own ballet shoes. Prerequisite: successful completion of any freshman-level activity course (11xx). 48 
lecture hours. Lab fee. 
 
PHED 2106 – Racquetball II. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and recreational 
activities. Advanced skills in racquetball. Course emphasis is on continued development of form, skills, 
systems of play, and consistency. 48 lecture hours. Prerequisite: PHED 1106. Special fee. 
 
PHED 2107 – Tennis II. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and recreational activities. 
Advanced skills in tennis. Course includes the development of form, skills, systems of play and consistency. 
48 lecture hours. Prerequisite: PHED 1107. Special fee. 
 
PHED 2108 – Weight Training & Conditioning II. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical 
and recreational activities. Course is concerned with the development of flexibility and increased physical 
capacity. Stress is on the improvement of muscle strength, endurance power, and speed of movement. 
Individualized instruction is utilized. 48 lecture hours. Prerequisite: PHED 1108. Lab fee. 
 
PHED 2109 – Basketball II. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and recreational 
activities. Advanced skills in basketball. Course emphasis is on continued development of form, skills, 
systems of play, and consistency. 48 lecture hours. Prerequisite: Consent of instructor. Lab fee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PHED 2110 – Aerobics II. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and recreational 
activities. This course is designed to utilize various advanced aerobic routines that will maintain a higher 
cardiovascular fitness level. The workouts will include warm-ups, aerobic exercise bouts, cool-downs and 
heart rate assessments. 48 lecture hours. Prerequisite: PHED 1110 or consent of instructor. Lab fee. 
 
PHED 2111 – Golf II. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and recreational activities. 
Advanced skills in golf. Form, improvement, and consistency of skill are stressed. 48 lecture hours. 
Prerequisite: PHED 1111. Special fee. 
 
PHED 2112 – Racquet Sports. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and recreational 
activities. Students will learn basic rules and strategies of multiple activities that require use of a racquet, 
such as: tennis, badminton, and/or table tennis (ping pong). Prerequisite: successful completion of any 
freshman-level activity course (11xx) except Racquetball I (PHED 1106) or Tennis I (PHED 1107). 48 
lecture hours. Lab fee. 
 
PHED 2113 – Team Sports II. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and recreational 
activities. (Physical Fitness and Sport majors may have the option of 8 credits.) Students will learn basic 
skills and strategies in selected team sports. Specific sport will be determined by location and instructor and 
will be identified in the schedule of classes. Potential team sports include but are not limited to: soccer, 
softball, football, field hockey, etc. This course is considered a second-semester course – not an advanced 
course. 48 lecture hours. Lab fee. 
 
PHED 2115 – Advanced Sports II. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and recreational 
activities. (Physical Fitness and Sport majors may have the option of 8 credits.) Must have prior 
administrative approval. This course is designed for second year, first semester players who are competing 
on a collegiate level. 48 lecture hours. Lab fee.  
 
PHED 2116 – Advanced Sports II. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and recreational 
activities. (Physical Fitness and Sport majors may have the option of 8 credits.) Must have prior 
administrative approval. This course is designed for second year, second semester players who are 
competing on a collegiate level. 48 lecture hours. Lab fee. 
 
PHED 2117 – Advanced Weight Training II. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and 
recreational activities. (Physical Fitness and Sport majors may have the option of 8 credits.) Must have 
prior administrative approval. Designed as an advanced course in-season weight training class for athletic 
competitors. Students will focus on strength and flexibility specific to their roles in competition. 48 lecture 
hours. Lab fee. 
 
PHED 2118 – Advanced Weight Training II. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and 
recreational activities. (Physical Fitness and Sport majors may have the option of 8 credits.) Must have 
prior administrative approval. Designed as an advanced course in-season weight training class for athletic 
competitors. Students will focus on strength and flexibility specific to their roles in competition. 48 lecture 
hours. Lab fee. 
 
PHED 2119 – Volleyball II. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and recreational 
activities. Advanced skills in volleyball. Course includes the development of form skills, and systems of 
play. 48 lecture hours.  Prerequisite: PHED 1100. Lab fee. 
 
 
 
 
 
PHED 2121 – Outdoor Recreation II. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and 
recreational activities. (Physical Fitness and Sport majors may have the option of 8 credits.) Students will 
learn and practice basic elements and safety principles of a lifetime outdoor sport or activity. Specific 
activity will be determined by semester and instructor and will be identified in the schedule of classes. 
Potential activities include, but are not limited to: camping, hiking, fishing, hunting, geocaching, etc. 
Prerequisite: successful completion of any freshman-level activity course (11xx). 48 lecture hours. Lab fee. 
 
PHED 2122 – Martial Arts II. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and recreational 
activities. (Physical Fitness and Sport majors may have the option of 8 credits.) Students will learn advanced 
skills, rules, strategies, safety practices, self-defense, and combat tactics in any of the Asian sports 
considered to be martial arts. Students will be working toward higher level competencies/ranking. 
Prerequisite: successful completion of PHED 1122 in the style being taught and/or consent of instructor. 
48 lecture hours. Lab fee. 
 
PHED 2123 – Archery II. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and recreational 
activities. This course assumes the student has knowledge and experience in target archery and includes 
advanced shooting technique, bow tuning, craft construction and tournament preparation. Some equipment 
purchase is necessary with a cost of approximately $20. Grading is based on shooting skill, proper form, 
and knowledge of the sport. 48 lecture hours. Lab fee. 
 
PHED 2124 – Scuba Diving III. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical and recreational 
activities. This course is designed to provide students with instruction and experience in preparation for 
PADI Rescue Diver and Emergency First Response certification. Intermediate level of swimming skills 
required. SCUBA I (or O/W certification) and SCUBA II (or Advanced O/W certification) required. 
Students will apply navigation and search and rescue/recovery skills learned in the SCUBA II course to 
assess and respond to emergency dive situations. Also, students will learn CPR and First Aid skills that are 
applicable to emergency dive situations. 48 lecture hours. Special fee. 
 
PHED 2126 – High Intensity Interval Training II. 1-hour credit. Instruction and participation in physical 
and recreational activities. (Kinesiology majors may have the option of 8 credits.) Students will engage in 
interval exercise alternating short periods of intense anaerobic exercise with less intense recovery periods. 
48 lecture hours. Special fee. 
 
PHED 2225 – Scuba Diving IV. 2 credit hours. Instruction and participation in physical and recreational 
activities. This course is designed to provide students with instruction and experience in preparation for 
PADI Rescue Divemaster certification. Intermediate to advanced level of swimming skills required. 
SCUBA I (or O/W certification), SCUBA II (or Advanced O/W certification), SCUBA III (or EFR & 
Rescue Diver certifications), and 40 logged dives are required. 48 lecture hours. Special fee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PHED 2356 – Care and Prevention of Athletic Injuries. 3 credit hours. Prevention and care of athletic 
injuries with emphasis on qualities of a good athletic trainer, avoiding accidents and injuries, recognizing 
signs and symptoms of specific sports injuries and conditions, immediate and long-term care of injuries, 
and administration procedures in athletic training. (This course will not satisfy the 1-hour core activity 
course requirement.) 48 lecture hours.  
 
PHRA 1102 – Pharmacy Law. 1-hour credit. Overview of federal and state laws governing the practice 
of pharmacy. The role of the pharmacy technician and the pharmacist and their associated responsibilities. 
Includes Code of Ethics, patient confidentiality, and a comparison of legal and ethical aspects. 16 lecture 
hours. Prerequisite:  BIOL 2404.  Corequisites: PHRA 1313, 1305, and 1266. 
 
PHRA 1240 – Pharmacy Third Party Payment. 2 credit hours. Overview of third-party payment and its 
impact on health care. Includes the principles and practices of managed care pharmacy, Medicaid and 
Medicare, payment plans, reimbursement methods, and formularies. 32 lecture hours. 
 
PHRA 1243 – Pharmacy Technician Certification Review. 2 credit hours. A review of major topics 
covered on the national Pharmacy Technician Certification Examination (PTCE), Exam for the 
Certification of Pharmacy Technicians (ExCPT). 32 lecture hours. Prerequisites: BIOL 2404, PHRA 1102, 
1301, 1305, 1309, 1313, 1266. Corequisites: PHRA 1345, 1349, 1441, 2366. 
 
PHRA 1266 – Practicum I – Pharmacy Technician/Assistant. 2 credit hours. Practical, general 
workplace training supported by an individualized learning plan developed by the employer, college and 
student. A health practicum is an unpaid learning experience. 320 contact hours. Prerequisite: BIOL 2404. 
Corequisites: PHRA 1102, 1313, and 1305. 
 
PHRA 1301 – Introduction to Pharmacy. 3 credit hours. An overview of the qualifications, operational 
guidelines, and job duties of a pharmacy technician. 48 lecture hours.  
 
PHRA 1305 – Drug Classification. 3 credit hours. A study of pharmaceutical drugs, abbreviations, 
classifications, indications, dosages, side effects, and routes of administration. 48 lecture hours. 
Prerequisite:  BIOL 2404.  Corequisites: PHRA 1102, 1313 and 1266.  
 
PHRA 1309 – Pharmaceutical Mathematics I. 3 credit hours. Solving pharmaceutical calculation 
problems encountered in the preparation and distribution of drugs. 48 lecture hours.  
 
PHRA 1313 – Community Pharmacy Practice. 3 credit hours. Introduction to the skills necessary to 
process, prepare, label, and maintain records of prescriptions in a community pharmacy to include customer 
service, count and pour techniques, prescription calculations, drug selection and preparation, over-the-
counter drugs, inventory management and legal parameters. 32 lecture and 32 lab hours. Prerequisite: BIOL 
2404. Corequisites: PHRA 1102, 1305, and 1266. Lab fee. 
 
PHRA 1345 – Compounding Sterile Preparations. 3 credit hours. The process of compounding sterile 
preparations and aseptic technique within legal and regulatory guidelines specified by USP standards. 32 
lecture and 32 lab hours. Prerequisites: PHRA 1102, 1313, 1305, 1301, 1266, 1309, and BIOL 2404. 
Corequisites: PHRA 1243, 1349, 1441 and 2366. Lab fee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PHRA 1349 – Institutional Pharmacy Practice. 3 credit hours. Fundamentals of the diverse roles and 
practice of pharmacy technicians in an institutional pharmacy setting. In-depth coverage of hospital 
pharmacy organization, work flow and personnel, safety techniques, data entry, packaging and labeling 
operations, inpatient drug distribution systems including investigational drugs, continuous quality 
improvement, and inventory control. 48 lecture hours. Prerequisites: PHRA 1102, 1313, 1305, 1301, 1266, 
1309 and BIOL 2404. Corequisites: PHRA 1243, 1345, 1441, and 2366. 
 
PHRA 1441 – Pharmacy Drug Therapy and Treatment. 4 credit hours. Study of therapeutic agents, their 
classifications, properties, actions, and effects on the human body and their role in the management of 
disease. 48 lecture and 32 lab hours. Prerequisites: PHRA 1102, 1301, 1305, 1309, 1313, 1266, and BIOL 
2404. Corequisites: PHRA 1243, 1345, 1349, and 2366. Lab fee. 
 
PHRA 2366 – Practicum II – Pharmacy Technician/Assistant. 3 credit hours. Practical, general 
workplace training supported by an individualized learning plan developed by the employer, college and 
student. 360 practicum hours. Prerequisites: PHRA 1102, 1305, 1301, 1266, 1309, 1313, and BIOL 2404. 
Corequisites: PHRA 1243, 1345, 1349, and 1441. 
 
PHYS 1105 – Elementary Physics Laboratory. 1 credit hour. Laboratory experiences to supplement 
PHYS 1305. 48 lab hours. Corequisite: PHYS 1305. Lab fee. 
 
PHYS 1115 – Physical Science Laboratory. 1 credit hour. Laboratory experiences to supplement PHYS 
1315. 32 lab hours. Lab fee. Corequisite: PHYS 1315. Lab fee. 
 
PHYS 1305 – Elementary Physics (Lecture). 3 credit hours. Conceptual level survey of topics in physics 
intended for liberal arts and other non-science majors. May or may not include a laboratory. 48 lecture 
hours. 
 
PHYS 1315 – Physical Science I (Lecture). 3 credit hours. Course designed for non-science majors that 
surveys topics from physics, chemistry, geology, astronomy, and meteorology. May or may not include a 
laboratory. 48 lecture hours. 
 
PHYS 1401 – College Physics I (Lecture + Lab). 4 credit hours. Fundamental principles of physics, using 
algebra and trigonometry; the principles and applications of classical mechanics and thermodynamics, 
including harmonic motion, mechanical waves and sound, physical systems, Newton’s Laws of Motion, 
and gravitation and other fundamental forces; with emphasis on problem solving. Laboratory activities will 
reinforce fundamental principles presented in lecture. Three lecture and three lab hours each week. 
Prerequisite:  MATH 1314 College Algebra and Math 1316 Plane Trigonometry or MATH 2312 Pre-
Calculus Math (MATH 2412 Pre-Calculus may substitute for 2312) or with the permission of the dean or 
instructor. Lab fee. 
 
PHYS 1402 – College Physics II (Lecture + Lab). 4 credit hours. Fundamental principles of physics, 
using algebra and trigonometry; the principles and applications of electricity and magnetism, including 
circuits, electrostatics, electromagnetism, waves, sound, light, optics, and modern physics topics; with 
emphasis on problem solving. Laboratory activities will reinforce fundamental principles presented in 
lecture. Three lecture and three lab hours each week. Prerequisite: PHYS 1301 College Physics I (lecture) 
or PHYS 1401 College Physics I (lecture + lab). Lab fee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PHYS 2425 – University Physics I (Lecture + Lab). 4 credit hours. Fundamental principles of physics, 
using calculus, for science, computer science, and engineering majors; the principles and applications of 
classical mechanics, including harmonic motion, physical systems and thermodynamics; and emphasis on 
problem solving. Basic laboratory experiments support theoretical principles presented in lecture involving 
the principles and applications of classical mechanics, including harmonic motion and physical systems; 
experimental design, data collection and analysis, and preparation of laboratory reports. 48 lecture and 48 
lab hours. Prerequisite: MATH 2413 Calculus I. Lab fee. 
 
PHYS 2426 – University Physics II (Lecture + Lab). 4 credit hours. Principles of physics for science, 
computer science, and engineering majors, using calculus, involving the principles of electricity and 
magnetism, including circuits, electromagnetism, waves, sound, light, and optics. Laboratory experiments 
support theoretical principles presented in lecture involving the principles of electricity and magnetism, 
including circuits, electromagnetism, waves, sound, light, and optics: experimental design, data collection 
and analysis, and preparation of laboratory reports. 48 lecture and 48 lab hours. Prerequisite: MATH 2414 
(Calculus II) and a grade of C or better in PHYS 2425 (University Physics I). Lab fee. 
 
 
PMHS 1280 – Cooperative Education I – Psychiatric/Mental Health Services Technician. 2 semester 
credit hours. Career related activities in the student’s area of specialization are offered through an 
individualized agreement among the college, employer (state, regional and local human services agencies), 
and student. Under supervision of the college and the employer, the student combines classroom learning 
with work experience. Includes a lecture component. As outlined in the learning plan, the student will apply 
the theory, concepts, and skills involving specialized materials, tools, equipment, procedures, regulations, 
laws, and interactions within and among political, economic, environmental, social, and legal systems 
associated with the occupation and the business/industry and will demonstrate legal and ethical behavior, 
safety practices, interpersonal and teamwork skills, and appropriate written and verbal communication 
skills using the terminology of the occupation and the business/industry. Students will complete a research 
project based on their assigned placement agencies. Prerequisite: SCWK 1321 – Orientation to Social 
Services; Corequisite CMSW 1191 – Basic Family Assessment. 2 semester credit hours. 32 lecture hours 
and 100 clock hours of field experience required.  
 
PMHS 2280 - Cooperative Education II - Psychiatric/Mental Health Services Technician. 2 semester 
credit hours. Career related activities in the student’s area of specialization are offered through an 
individualized agreement among the college, employer (state, regional and local human services agencies), 
and student. Under supervision of the college and the employer, the student combines classroom learning 
with work experience. Includes a lecture component. As outlined in the learning plan, the student will apply 
the theory, concepts, and skills involving specialized materials, tools, equipment, procedures, regulations, 
laws, and interactions within and among political, economic, environmental, social, and legal systems 
associated with the occupation and the business/industry and will demonstrate legal and ethical behavior, 
safety practices, interpersonal and teamwork skills, and appropriate written and verbal communication 
skills using the terminology of the occupation and the business/industry. Students will complete a research 
project reflecting counseling theories practiced at their placement agencies. Prerequisite: SCWK 1321 and 
PMHS 1280. Corequisite: PSYT 2301 – Psychology of Group Dynamics, or CMSW 1327-Treatment 
Modalities of Special Populations. 2 semester credit hours. 32 lecture hours and 100 clock hours of field 
experience required. 
 
PMHS 2281 – Cooperative Education III - Psychiatric/Mental Health Services Technician. 2 semester 
credit hours. Career related activities in the student’s area of specialization are offered through an 
individualized agreement among the college, employer (state, regional and local human services agencies), 
 
 
 
and student. Under supervision of the college and the employer, the student combines classroom learning 
with work experience. Includes a lecture component. As outlined in the learning plan, the student will apply 
the theory, concepts, and skills involving specialized materials, tools, equipment, procedures, regulations, 
laws, and interactions within and among political, economic, environmental, social, and legal systems 
associated with the occupation and the business/industry and will demonstrate legal and ethical behavior, 
safety practices, interpersonal and teamwork skills, and appropriate written and verbal communication 
skills using the terminology of the occupation and the business/industry. Students will complete a research 
project to prepare for entering the workforce in human services. Prerequisite:  DAAC 1311, PSYT 2321 
and PMHS 2280. Corequisite: PSYT 2301 – Psychology of Group Dynamics, or CMSW 1327-Treatment 
Modalities of Special Populations. 2 semester credit hours. 32 lecture and 100 clock hours of field 
experience required. 
 
POFI 1301 – Computer Applications I. 3 credit hours. Overview of computer office applications 
including current terminology and technology. Introduction to computer hardware, software applications, 
and procedures. This course is designed to be repeated multiple times to improve student proficiency. 48 
lecture and 16 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
POFT 1301 – Business English. 3 credit hours. Introduction to a practical application of basic language 
usage skills with emphasis on fundamentals of writing and editing for business. 48 lecture hours. Lab fee. 
 
POFT 1309 – Administrative Office Procedures I. 3 credit hours. Study of current office procedures, 
duties, and responsibilities applicable to an office environment. Prerequisite: POFT 1429 or advisor 
approval. 48 lecture hours.  
 
POFT 1319 – Records and Information Management I. 3 credit hours. Introduction to basic records 
information management filing systems, including manual and electronic filing. 48 lecture hours. Lab fee. 
 
POFT 1321 – Business Math. 3 credit hours. Fundamentals of business mathematics including analytical 
and critical thinking skills. 48 lecture hours. 
 
POFT 1429 – Beginning Keyboarding. 4 credit hours. Skill development in keyboarding techniques. 
Emphasis on development of acceptable speed and accuracy levels and formatting basic documents. 64 
lecture hours. Lab fee. 
 
POFT 2364 – Practicum – Administrative Assistant/ Secretarial Science. 3 credit hours. Practical 
general workplace training supported by an individualized learning plan developed by the employer, 
college, and student. The college with the employer develops and documents an individualized plan for the 
student. The plan relates the workplace training and experiences to the student’s general and technical 
course of study. The guided external experiences may be for pay or no pay. A participatory online seminar 
is held in conjunction with student’s job. Offered only during Spring semester. Prerequisite: An 
accumulation of 30 hours of coursework toward the A.A.S. degree in Office Administration or permission 
of the instructor. This is a capstone course.  Three hundred 52 field experience hours. 
 
PSYC 1300 – Learning Framework. 3 credit hours. A study of the 1) research and theory in the 
psychology of learning, cognition, and motivation, 2) factors that impact learning, and 3) application of 
learning strategies. Theoretical models of strategic learning, cognition, and motivation serve as the 
conceptual basis for the introduction of college-level student academic strategies. Students use assessment 
instruments (e.g., learning inventories) to help them identify their own strengths and weaknesses as strategic 
 
 
 
learners. Students are ultimately expected to integrate and apply the learning skills discussed across their 
own academic programs and become effective and efficient learners. Students developing these skills 
should be able to continually draw from the theoretical models they have learned. (Cross listed as EDUC 
1300) 3 lecture/lab hours. Lab Fee. Cross-listed as EDUC 1300. The student may register for either EDUC 
or PSYC but may receive credit for only one of the two. 48 lecture hours. 
 
PSYC 2301 – General Psychology. 3 credit hours. Survey of major topics psychological topics, theories 
and approaches to scientific study of behavior and mental processes. 48 lecture hours. 
 
PSYC 2308 – Child Psychology. 3 credit hours. This course will address psychological development from 
conception through middle childhood with references to physical, cognitive, social and personality changes. 
Students will examine the interplay of biological factors, human interaction, social structures and cultural 
forces in development. 48 lecture hours. 
 
PSYC 2314 – Lifespan Growth and Development. 3 credit hours. Life-Span Growth and Development 
is a study of social, emotional, cognitive and physical factors and influences of a developing human from 
conception to death. 48 lecture hours. 
 
PSYC 2315 – Psychology of Adjustment. 3 credit hours. Study of the processes involved in adjustment 
of individuals to their personal and social environments. 48 lecture hours. 
 
PSYC 2319 – Social Psychology.  3 credit hours.  Study of individual behavior within the social 
environment.  Topics may include sociopsychological processes, attitude formation and change, 
interpersonal relations, group processes, self, social cognition, and research methods.  (PSYC 2319 is 
included in the Psychology Field of Study.) Prerequisite:  PSYC 2301.  48 lecture hours. 
 
PSYT 2301 – Psychology of Group Dynamics. 3 credit hours. Exploration of group counseling skills, 
techniques, stages of group development, confidentiality and ethics; and group leader roles, leadership and 
facilitation. Students will differentiate between types of groups; describe the basic stages of the group 
process; participate in development of group leadership skills; cite examples of client documentation and 
use of record keeping skills; and identify issues of confidentiality. Corequisite:  PMHS 2280 or 2281 – 
Cooperative Education II or III. Prerequisites: PMHS 1280 and DAAC 1311. 48 lecture hours. Lab included 
for practice of group leadership skills. 
 
PSYT 2321 – Crisis Intervention. 3 credit hours. Examination of crisis management and intervention 
theories in assisting clients in crisis situations. Topics include coping skills to increase emotional or 
behavioral stability through resolution of crisis and suicide assessment and intervention. Students will apply 
principles and theories of crisis intervention and demonstrate crisis intervention skills in a practice 
environment. Prerequisite: SCWK 1321. 48 lecture hours.  
 
PSYT 2331 – Abnormal Psychology. 3 semester credit hours. Examination and assessment of the 
symptoms, etiology, and treatment procedures of mental, emotional, and behavioral disorders. Study will 
focus on clinical disorders, including mood and anxiety disorders. Students will analyze symptomatic 
disorders; and design treatment plans and strategies. Prerequisite:  SCWK 1321, Basic Counseling Skills 
and DAAC 1311, Counseling Theories. 48 lecture hours. 
 
RADR 1201 – Introduction to Radiography. 2 credit hours. An overview of the historical development 
of radiography, basic radiation protection, an introduction to medical terminology, ethical and legal issues 
 
 
 
for health care professionals, and an orientation to the profession and the health care system. 32 lecture 
hours. Corequisites: RADR 1203.  
 
RADR 1203 – Patient Care. 2 credit hours. An introduction in patient assessment, infection control 
procedures, emergency and safety procedures, communication and patient interaction skills, and basic 
pharmacology. 32 lecture hours. Corequisite: RADR 1201.  
 
RADR 1266 – Practicum – Radiologic Technology/ Science – Radiographer. 2 credit hours. Practical, 
general workplace training supported by an individualized learning plan developed by the employer, 
college, and student. 224 clinical hours. Prerequisites: RADR 1201 and 1203. Program acceptance required. 
 
RADR 1267 – Practicum - Radiologic Technology/ Science-Radiographer. 2 credit hours. Practical, 
general workplace training supported by an individualized learning plan developed by the employer, 
college, and student. 224 clinical hours. Prerequisites: RADR 1266, 1411, 1313 and 2309. Program 
acceptance required. 
 
RADR 1302 –Radiographic Image Evaluation I. 3 credit hours. Scientific process of radiographic image 
evaluation. 48 lecture hours. Prerequisites: RADR 2266. 
 
RADR 1313 – Principles of Radiographic Imaging I. 3 credit hours. Radiographic image quality and the 
effects of exposure variables. 48 lecture hours. Prerequisites: RADR 1201 and 1203. Corequisite: RADR 
1411 and RADR 2309. Program acceptance required. 
 
RADR 1391 – Special Topics in Medical Radiologic Technology/Technician. 3 credit hours. Topics 
address recently identified current events, skills, knowledge, and/or attitudes and behaviors pertinent to the 
technology or occupation and relevant to the professional development of the student. This course was 
designed to be repeated multiple times to improve student proficiency. 48 lecture hours. Prerequisites: 
RADR 2313, 1302, and 2366. Corequisite: RADR 2335. Program acceptance required. 
 
RADR 1411 – Basic Radiographic Procedures. 4 credit hours. An introduction to radiographic 
positioning terminology, manipulation of equipment, positioning and alignment of the anatomic structure 
and equipment, and evaluation of images for demonstration of basic anatomy. 48 lecture and 64 lab hours. 
Prerequisites: RADR 1201 and 1203. Lab fee. Program acceptance required. Lab fee. 
 
RADR 2266 - Practicum - Radiologic Technology/ Science-Radiographer. 2 credit hours. Practical, 
general workplace training supported by an individualized learning plan developed by the employer, 
college, and student. 224 clinical hours. Prerequisites: RADR 1267, 2401, 2305 and 2333. Program 
acceptance required. 
 
RADR 2305 – Principles of Radiographic Imaging II. 3 credit hours. Radiographic image quality and 
the effects of exposure variables, and the synthesis of all variables in image production. 48 lecture hours. 
Prerequisites: RADR 1313, 1411, and 2309. Program acceptance required. 
 
RADR 2309 – Radiographic Imaging Equipment. 3 credit hours. Equipment and physics of x-ray 
production. Includes basic x-ray circuits. Also examines the relationship of conventional and digital 
equipment components to the imaging process. 48 lecture hours. Prerequisites: RADR 1201 and 1203. 
Corequisites: RADR 1411 and RADR 1313. Program acceptance required 
 
 
 
 
RADR 2313 – Radiation Biology and Protection. 3 credit hours. Effects of radiation exposure on 
biological systems. Includes typical medical exposure levels, methods for measuring and monitoring 
radiation, and methods for protecting personnel and patients from excessive exposure. 48 lecture hours. 
Prerequisites: RADR 1313, 2266, 2305, 2309, 2333, and 2401. Program acceptance required. 
 
RADR 2333 – Advanced Medical Imaging. 3 credit hours. An exploration of specialized imaging 
modalities. 48 lecture hours. Prerequisite: RADR 1313, 1411, and 2309. Program acceptance required. 
 
RADR 2335 – Radiologic Technology Seminar. 3 credit hours. A capstone course focusing on the 
synthesis of professional knowledge, skills, and attitudes in preparation for professional employment and 
lifelong learning. 48 lecture hours. Prerequisites: RADR 2313, 1302 and 2366. Corequisite: RADR 1391. 
Program acceptance required. 
 
RADR 2366 – Practicum – Radiologic Technology/ Science – Radiographer. 3 credit hours. Practical, 
general workplace training supported by an individualized learning plan developed by the employer, 
college, and student. 384 clinical hours. Prerequisite: RADR 2266. Program acceptance required. 
 
RADR 2367 – Practicum – Radiologic Technology/Science – Radiographer. 3 credit hours. Practical, 
general workplace training supported by an individualized learning plan developed by the employer, 
college, and student. 384 clinical hours. Prerequisite: RADR 2366. Program acceptance required. 
 
RADR 2401 – Intermediate Radiographic Procedures. 4 credit hours. A continuation of the study of the 
manipulation of radiographic equipment, positioning and alignment of the anatomic structure and 
equipment, and evaluation of images for demonstration of anatomy. 48 lecture and 64 lab hours. 
Prerequisite: RADR 1201, 1266, 1313, 1411, and 2309. Program acceptance required. Lab fee. 
 
RELE 1200 – Contract Forms and Addenda. 2 credit hours. Promulgated Contract Forms, shall include 
but is not limited to unauthorized practice of law, broker-lawyer committee, current promulgated and 
approved forms, commission rules governing use forms and case studies involving use of forms. 32 lecture 
hours. 
 
RELE 1201 – Principles of Real Estate I. 2 credit hours. A beginning overview of licensing as a real 
estate broker or salesperson. Includes ethics of practice as a license holder; titles to and conveyance of real 
estate, legal descriptions, deeds, encumbrances and liens, distinctions between personal and real property, 
appraisal, finance and regulations, closing procedures, and real estate mathematics. Covers at least three 
hours of classroom instruction on federal, state and local laws relating to housing discrimination, housing 
credit discrimination, and community reinvestment. Fulfills at least 30 to 60 hours of required instruction 
for salesperson license. 32 lecture hours. Required for TREC exam. 
 
RELE 1211 – Law of Contracts. Two credit hours. Elements of a contract, offer and acceptance, statute 
of frauds, specific performance and remedies for breach, unauthorized practice of law, commission rules 
relating to use of adopted forms and owner disclosure requirements. Forty-eight lecture hours. Required for 
TREC exam. 
 
RELE 1221 – Real Estate Marketing. 2 credit hours. Real estate professionalism and ethics; 
characteristics of successful salespersons, time management; psychology of marketing; listing procedures; 
advertising; negotiating and closing financing; and the Deceptive Trade Practices Consumer Protection Act. 
48 lecture hours. Recommended for TREC exam. 
 
 
 
 
RELE 1238 – Principles of Real Estate II. 2 credit hours. A continuing overview of licensing as a real 
estate broker or salesperson. Includes ethics of practice as a license holder; titles to and conveyance of real 
estate; legal descriptions, deeds, encumbrances and liens; distinctions between personal and real property; 
appraisals; finance and regulations; closing procedures; and real estate mathematics. Covers at least three 
hours of classroom instruction on federal, state, and local laws relating to housing discrimination, housing 
credit discrimination, and community reinvestment. Fulfills at least 30 to 60 hours of required instruction 
for salesperson license. 32 lecture hours. Required for TREC exam. 
 
RELE 1303 – Real Estate Appraisal. 3 credit hours. The central purposes and functions of an appraisal, 
social and economic determinants of value, appraisal case studies, cost, market data and income approaches 
to value estimates, final correlations, and reporting. 48 lecture hours. 
 
RELE 1309 – Real Estate Law. 3 credit hours. Legal concepts of real estate, land description, real property 
rights, estates in land, contracts, conveyances, encumbrances, foreclosures, recording procedures, and 
evidence of title. 48 lecture hours. 
 
RELE 1319 – Real Estate Finance. 3 credit hours. Monetary systems, primary and secondary money 
markets, sources of mortgage loans, federal government programs, loan applications, processes and 
procedures, closing costs, alternative financial instruments, equal credit opportunity laws affecting 
mortgage lending. Community Reinvestment Act and the state housing agency. 48 lecture hours. 
 
RELE 1325 – Real Estate Mathematics. 3 credit hours. Basic arithmetic skills including mathematical 
logic, percentages, interest, time, value of money, depreciation, amortization, proration, and estimation of 
closing statements. Recommended for TREC exam. 48 lecture hours. 
 
RELE 2201 – Law of Agency. 2 credit hours. Law of agency, including principal-agent and master-servant 
relationships, the authority of an agent, the termination of an agent’s authority, the fiduciary and other duties 
of the agent, employment law, deceptive trade practices, listing or buying representation procedures, and 
the disclosure of an agency. 32 lecture hours. Required for TREC exam. 
 
RELE 2331 – Real Estate Brokerage. 3 credit hours. A study of law of agency, planning and organization, 
operational policies and procedures, recruiting, selection and training of personnel, records and control, and 
real estate firm analysis and expansion criteria. 48 lecture hours. 
 
RNSG 1193 – Special Topics in Registered Nursing/Registered Nurse. 1 credit hour. Topics address 
recently identified current events, skills, knowledges, and/or attitudes and behavior pertinent to the 
technology or occupation and relevant to the professional development of the student. This course was 
designed to be repeated multiples times to improve student proficiency. 16 lecture hours. Lab fee. 
 
RNSG 1205 – Nursing Skills. 2 credit hours. Study of the concepts and principles necessary to perform 
basic nursing skills for the adult patient; and demonstrate competence in the performance of nursing 
procedures. Content includes knowledge, judgment, skills, and professional values within a legal/ethical 
framework. 16 lecture and 64 lab hours. Prerequisites: BIOL 2401 and 2402, RNSG 1208, ENGL 1301, 
PSYC 2301 or 2314, and BIOL 2420.  Corequisite: RNSG 1215, 1309, and 1262.  Lab fee. 
 
RNSG 1208 – Dosage Calculations for Nursing. 2 credit hours. Read, interpret, and solve dosage 
calculation problems. 32 lecture and 16 lab hours. Prerequisite: TSI complete or MATH 0325. 
 
 
 
 
RNSG 1215 – Health Assessment. 2 credit hours. Development of skills and techniques required for a 
comprehensive nursing health assessment within a legal/ethical framework. 16 lecture and 48 lab hours. 
Prerequisites: BIOL 2401 and 2402, RNSG 1208, ENGL 1301, PSYC 2301 or 2314, and BIOL 2420. 
Corequisite: RNSG 1205, 1262, and 1309. Lab fee. 
 
RNSG 1260 – Clinical Nursing-Transitions. 2 credit hours. A health-related work-based learning 
experience that enables the student to apply specialized occupational theory, skills, and concepts. Direct 
supervision is provided by the clinical professional. 144 clinical hours. Prerequisites: BIOL 2401, 2402, 
and 2420, RNSG 1208, ENGL 1301, PSYC 2314, and a current CPR card. Corequisite: RNSG 1327. Lab 
fee. 
 
RNSG 1262 – Clinical Nursing (Fundamentals, Nursing Skills, Physical Assessment). 2 credit hours. 
A health-related work-based learning experience that enables the student to apply specialized occupational 
theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is provided by the clinical professional. Placement in first 
year nursing curriculum during the fall semester is required. 192 clinical hours. Prerequisites: BIOL 2401 
and 2402, RNSG 1208, ENGL 1301, PSYC 2301 or 2314, BIOL 2420, and a current CPR card. Corequisite: 
RNSG 1205, 1215, and 1309.  Lab fee. 
 
RNSG 1293 – Special Topics in Registered Nursing/Registered Nurse. 2 credit hours. Topics address 
recently identified current events, skills, knowledge, and/or attitudes and behavior pertinent to the 
technology or occupation and relevant to the professional development of the student. This course was 
designed to be repeated multiples times to improve student proficiency. 32 lecture hours. Lab fee. 
 
RNSG 1301 – Pharmacology. 3 credit hours. Introduction to the science of pharmacology with emphasis 
on the actions, interactions, adverse effects, and nursing implications of each drug classification. Content 
includes the roles and responsibilities of the nurse in safe administration of medications within a 
legal/ethical framework. 48 lecture hours. Prerequisites: completion of all nursing prerequisite courses, 
RNSG 1205, 1215, 1309. 1262, and BIOL 2420. Corequisites:  RNSG 1363 and 1341. Lab and Specialty 
exam fees. 
 
RNSG 1309 – Introduction to Nursing. 3 credit hours. Overview of nursing and the role of the 
professional nurse as a provider in patient-centered care, patient safety advocate, member of health care 
team, and member of the profession. Content includes knowledge, judgment, skills, and professional values 
with a legal/ethical framework. 48 lecture hours. Prerequisites: BIOL 2401 and 2402, RNSG 1208, ENGL 
1301, PSYC 2301 or 2314, and BIOL 2420.  Corequisites: RNSG 1205, 1215, 1262. Lab and specialty 
exam fees. 
 
RNSG 1327 – Transition from Vocational to Professional Nursing. 3 credit hours. Content includes 
health promotion, expanded assessment, analysis of data, critical reasoning processes and clinical 
judgement, pharmacology, interdisciplinary teamwork, communication, and applicable competencies in 
knowledge, judgment, skills, and professional values within a legal/ethical framework throughout the life 
span. 48 lecture hours. Prerequisites: BIOL 2401, 2402 and 2420, RNSG 1208, ENGL 1301, PSYC 2301 
or 2314. Corequisite: RNSG 1260. Lab fee. 
 
RNSG 1341 – Common Concepts of Adult Health. 3 credit hours. Basic integration of the role of the 
professional nurse as a provider of patient-centered care, patient safety advocate, member of health care 
team, and member of the profession. Study of the common concepts of caring for adult patients and families 
 
 
 
with medical-surgical health care needs related to body systems, emphasizing knowledge, judgment, skills, 
and professional values within a legal/ethical framework. 48 lecture hours. Prerequisites: RNSG 1205, 
1215, 1309 and 1262, BIOL 2420. Corequisites: RNSG 1301, 1262, and 1363. 
 
RNSG 1343 – Complex Concepts of Adult Health. 3 credit hours. Integration of previous knowledge and 
skills related to common adult health needs into the continued development of the professional nurse as a 
provider of patient-centered care, patient safety advocate, member of health care team, and member of the 
profession in the care of adult patients and families with complex medical-surgical health care needs 
associated with body systems. Emphasis on complex knowledge, judgement, skills, and professional values 
within a legal/ ethical framework. 48 lecture hours. Prerequisites: RNSG 1341, 1363, and 1301, Psych 2314. 
Corequisite: RNSG 2360. Specialty exam fees. 
 
RNSG 1363 – Clinical Nursing (Common Concepts of Adult Health). 3 credit hours. A health-related 
work-based learning experience that enables the student to apply specialized occupational theory, skills, 
and concepts. Direct supervision is provided by the clinical professional. Placement in first year nursing 
curriculum during the spring semester is required. 288 clinical hours. Prerequisite: RNSG 1205, 1215, 1262, 
1309, and current CPR card. Corequisite: RNSG 1301, and 1341, PSYC 2314. Lab fee. 
 
RNSG 1412 – Nursing Care of the Childbearing and Childrearing Families. 4 credit hours. Study of 
the concepts related to the provision of nursing care for childbearing and childrearing families. Application 
of clinical reasoning processes and clinical judgement including a focus on the childbearing family during 
the prenatal, perinatal, postnatal periods and the childrearing family from birth through adolescence; and 
competency in knowledge, judgement, skill and professional values within a legal/ ethical framework. 80 
lecture and 16 lab hours. Prerequisites: RNSG 1262, 1341, 1301, 1363 Corequisites: RNSG 1343 and 2360. 
Specialty exam fees. 
 
RNSG 2130 – Professional Nursing Review and Licensure Preparation. (Capstone Course) 1-hour 
credit. Review of concepts required for licensure examination and entry into the practice of professional 
nursing. Includes application of National Council Licensure Examination for Registered Nurses (NCLEX-
RN) test plan, assessment of knowledge deficits, and remediation. 16 lecture hours. Prerequisites: RNSG 
1343, 1412, 2360. Corequisite: 2213, 2331, and 2363. Specialty exam fees. 
 
RNSG 2213 – Mental Health Nursing. 2 credit hours. Principles and concepts of mental health, 
psychopathology, and treatment modalities related to the nursing care of patients and their families. 48 
lecture hours. Prerequisites: RNSG 1343, 1412, and 2360. Corequisite: RNSG 2130, 2213, and 2363. 
Specialty exam fees. 
 
RNSG 2331 – Advanced Concepts of Adult Health. 3 credit hours. Application of advanced concepts 
and skills for the development of the professional nurse’s roles in caring for adult patients and families. 
Emphasis on advanced knowledge, judgment, skills, and professional values within a legal/ethical 
framework. 48 lecture hours. Prerequisites: RNSG 1343, 1412, and 2360. Corequisites: RNSG 2130, 2213, 
and 2363. Specialty exam fees. 
 
RNSG 2360 – Clinical Nursing. 3 credit hours. A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Placement in second year nursing curriculum during the fall semester 
is required. 288 clinical hours. Prerequisites: RNSG 1341, 1363, 1301, and a current CPR card. Co-
requisites: RNSG 1343 and 1412. Lab fee. 
 
 
 
 
RNSG 2363 – Clinical Nursing (Advanced Concepts of Adult Health/Mental Health Nursing). 3 credit 
hours. A health-related work-based learning experience that enables the student to apply specialized 
occupational theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is provided by the clinical professional. 
Placement in second year nursing curriculum during the spring semester is required. 288 clinical hours. 
Prerequisites: RNSG 1412, 1343, 2360, and a current CPR card. Corequisite: RNSG 2130, 2331, and 2313. 
Lab fee. 
 
RSPT 1137 - Basic Dysrhythmia Interpretation. 1-hour credit. Study of electrophysiology of the heart 
and characteristics of cardiac dysrhythmias. 16 lecture hours. Prerequisites: RSPT 2317, 2353. 
Corequisites: RSPT 2325, 2255. 
 
RSPT 1201 – Introduction to Respiratory Care. 2 credit hours. An introduction to the field of respiratory 
care. 16 lecture hours and 32 lab hours.   
 
RSPT 1227 - Applied Physics for Respiratory Care. 2 credit hours. Review of the theoretical and 
practical applications of mathematics physics and chemistry with focus on the applicability and clinical 
utility of the modalities, techniques, procedures, equipment, and diagnostic tests utilized in respiratory care. 
32 lecture hours. Prerequisite: RSPT 1201. Corequisites: RSPT 1340, 1410, and 1266. 
 
RSPT 1261 – Respiratory Care Clinical III. 2 credit hours. A health-related work-based learning 
experience that enables the student to apply specialized occupational theory, skills, and concepts. Direct 
supervision is provided by the clinical professional. 96 clinical hours. Prerequisites: RSPT 1361, and 1362. 
Corequisites: RSPT 2353 and 2317. Lab fee.  
 
RSPT 1266 – Respiratory Care Therapy Practicum I. 2 credit hours. Practical, general workplace 
training supported by an individualized learning plan developed by the employer, college, and student. 256 
lab hours. Corequisites:  RSPT 1227, 1340, and 1410. Lab fee.  
 
RSPT 1267 – Respiratory Care Therapy Practicum II. 2 credit hours. Practical, general workplace 
training supported by an individualized learning plan developed by the employer, college, and student. 256 
lab hours. Corequisites:  RSPT 2210, 1411, and 2314. Lab fee.  
 
RSPT 1340 – Advanced Cardiopulmonary Anatomy and Physiology. 3 credit hours. Provides an 
advanced presentation of anatomy and physiology of the cardiovascular and pulmonary systems. 48 lecture 
hours. Corequisites: RSPT 2317, 1410, and 1266. 
 
RSPT 1410 – Respiratory Care Procedures I. 4 credit hours. Essential knowledge of the equipment and 
techniques used in the treatment of pulmonary disease. 48 lecture and 48 lab hours. Corequisites: RSPT 
1227, 1340 and 1266. Lab fee. 
 
RSPT 1411 – Respiratory Care Procedures II. 4 credit hours. Develops essential knowledge and skills 
of airway care and mechanical ventilation. 48 lecture and 48 lab hours. Prerequisites: RSPT 1227, 1340, 
1410, and 1266. Corequisites: RSPT 2210, 2314, and 1267. Lab fee. 
 
RSPT 2210 – Cardiopulmonary Disease. 2 credit hours. Etiology, pathogenesis, pathology, diagnosis, 
history, prognosis, manifestations, treatment, and detection of cardiopulmonary diseases. 32 lecture hours. 
Prerequisites: RSPT 1227, 1340, 1410, and 1266. Corequisites: RSPT 2314, 1411 and 1267. 
 
 
 
 
RSPT 2230 – Respiratory Care Examination Preparation. 2 credit hours. A comprehensive review to 
optimize respiratory care credentialing exam success. 32 lecture hours. Perquisites: RSPT 1137, 2255, 2267 
and 2266, Corequisites RSPT 2231 and 2267. 
 
RSPT 2231 –Simulations in Respiratory Care. 2 credit hours. Theory of clinical simulation 
examinations. 32 lecture hours. Prerequisites: RSPT 1137, 2255, 2325 and 2266. Corequisites: RSPT 2230, 
and 2267. 
 
RSPT 2255 – Critical Care Monitoring. 2 credit hours. Advanced monitoring techniques used to assess 
a patient in the critical care setting. 32 lecture hours. Prerequisites: RSPT 2353 and 1261. Corequisites: 
RSPT 2267 and 2325. 
 
RSPT 2266 – Respiratory Care Therapy Practicum IV. 2 credit hours. Practical, general workplace 
training supported by an individualized learning plan developed by the employer, college, and student. 256 
lab hours. Prerequisites: RSPT 2353 and 1261. Corequisites:  RSPT 2255 and 2325. Lab fee. 
 
RSPT 2267 – Respiratory Care Therapy Practicum V. 2 credit hours. Practical, general workplace 
training supported by an individualized learning plan developed by the employer, college, and student. 256 
lab hours. Prerequisites: RSPT 1137, 2255, 2325, and 2266. Corequisites:  RSPT 2231 and 2230. Lab fee. 
 
RSPT 2314 – Mechanical Ventilation. 3 credit hours. The study of mechanical ventilation with emphasis 
on ventilator classification, methods, principles, and operational characteristics. 48 lecture and 16 lab hours. 
Prerequisites: RSPT 2317, 1340, 1410, and 1266. Corequisites: RSPT 2210, 1411, and 1267. Lab fee. 
 
RSPT 2317 – Respiratory Care Pharmacology. 3 credit hours. A study of drugs that affect 
cardiopulmonary systems. Emphasis on classification, route of administration, dosages/calculations, and 
physiological interactions. 48 lecture hours. Prerequisites RSPT 2210, 2314, 1411 and 1267. Corequisites: 
RSPT 2353 and 1261. 
 
RSPT 2325 – Cardiopulmonary Diagnostics. 3 credit hours. A study of physical, radiological, 
hemodynamic, laboratory, nutritional, and cardiopulmonary diagnostic assessments. 32 lecture and 32 lab 
hours. Prerequisites: RSPT 2317, 2353, and 1261. Corequisites: RSPT 1137, 2255, and 2266. Lab fee. 
 
RSPT 2353 – Neonatal/Pediatric Cardiopulmonary Care. 3 credit hours. A study of neonatal/pediatric 
cardiopulmonary care. 48 lecture hours. Prerequisites: RSPT 2210, 2314, 1411 and 1267. Corequisite: 
RSPT 2317 and 1261. 
 
RTVB 1321 – TV Field Production. 4 credit hours. Pre-production, production, and post-production 
process involved in field television production. Topics include field camera setup and operation, field audio, 
television directing, and in-camera or basic continuity editing with an emphasis on underlying principles of 
video technology. 32 lecture and 32 lab hours. 
 
RTVB 1329 Script Writing. 4 credit hours. Writing scripts for film and electronic media. Emphasizes 
format and style for commercials, public service announcements, promos, news, and documentaries. 48 
lecture hours. Prerequisite: ENGL 1301. 
 
 
 
 
SCWK 1321 – Orientation to Social Services. 3 credit hours. Introduction to the basic concepts, 
information, and practices within the field of social services. Topics include a survey of the historical 
development of social services; populations served by social service workers; and review of current 
treatment and/or services. Students will describe the historical development of social services; discuss 
terminology used by social service providers; assess client needs to determine eligibility for social service 
programs; compare and contrast the populations served including treatments and resources and utilize 
ethical principles. Prerequisite: None. 48 lecture hours. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SCWK 2301- Assessment and Case Management. 3 credit hours. Exploration of procedures to identify 
and evaluate an individual’s and/or family’s strengths, weaknesses, problems, and needs in order to develop 
an effective plan of action. Topics include oral and written communications essential for screening, 
assessment, and case management to determine the need for prevention, intervention and/or referral and 
probable case management needs for at-risk populations. Students will describe the steps in screening, 
assessment, and case management; gather relevant information from client and secondary sources; and 
apply knowledge of assessment skills of special population clients. Prerequisites: CMSW 1313, Assessment 
and Service Delivery, DAAC 1311, Counseling Theories, and PSYT 2321, Crisis Intervention. 48 lecture 
hours. 
 
SOCI 1301 – Introduction to Sociology. 3 credit hours. The scientific study of human society, including 
ways in which groups, social institutions, and individuals affect each other. Causes of social stability and 
social change are explored through the application of various theoretical perspectives, key concepts, and 
related research methods of sociology. Analysis of social issues in their institutional context may include 
topics such as social stratification, gender, race/ethnicity, and deviance. 48 lecture hours. 
 
SOCI 1306 – Social Problems. 3 credit hours. Application of sociological principles and theoretical 
perspectives to major social problems in contemporary society such as inequality, crime and violence, 
substance abuse, environmental issues, deviance, or family problems. 48 lecture hours. 
 
SOCI 2301 – Marriage and the Family. 3 credit hours. Sociological and theoretical analysis of the 
structures and functions of the family, the varied cultural patterns of the American family, and the 
relationships that exist among the individuals within the family, as well as the relationships that exist 
between the family and other institutions in society. 48 lecture hours. 
 
SOCW 2361 – Introduction to Social Work – 3 credit hours. An overview of the history and development 
of social work as a profession.  The course is designed to foster a philosophical, historical, and critical 
understanding of the social work profession, including social work values, ethics, and areas of practice 
utilized under a Generalist Intervention Model.  (SOCW 2361 is included in the Social Work Field of 
Study.) 
 
SPAN 1411 – Beginning Spanish I. 4 credit hours. Basic Spanish language skills in listening, speaking, 
reading, and writing within a cultural framework. Students will acquire the vocabulary and grammatical 
structures necessary to communicate and comprehend at the beginner level. 48 lecture and 32 lab hours. 
Lab fee. 
 
SPAN 1412 – Beginning Spanish II. 4 credit hours. Continued development of basic Spanish language 
skills in listening, speaking, reading, and writing within a cultural framework. Students acquire the 
vocabulary and grammatical structures necessary to communicate and comprehend at the high beginner to 
low intermediate level. Prerequisite: SPAN 1411. 48 lecture and 32 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
SPAN 2311 –Intermediate Spanish I. 3 credit hours. The consolidation of skills acquired at the 
introductory level. Further development of proficiency in listening, speaking, reading and writing. 
Emphasis on comprehension, appreciation, and interpretation of the cultures of the Spanish-speaking world. 
Prerequisites: SPAN 1411 and 1412 or 2 years of Spanish from an accredited high school. 48 lecture hours. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SPAN 2312 – Intermediate Spanish II. 3 credit hours. The consolidation of skills acquired at the 
introductory level. Further development of proficiency in listening, speaking, reading and writing. 
Emphasis on comprehension, appreciation, and interpretation of the cultures of the Spanish-speaking world. 
Prerequisite: SPAN 2311 or equivalent. 48 lecture hours. 
 
SPCH 1315 – Public Speaking. 3 credit hours. Application of communication theory and practice to the 
public speaking context, with emphasis on audience analysis, speaker delivery, ethics of communication, 
cultural diversity, and speech organizational techniques to develop students’ speaking abilities, as well as 
ability to effectively evaluate oral presentations. 48 lecture hours. 
 
SPCH 1318 – Interpersonal Communication. 3 credit hours. Application of communication theory to 
interpersonal relationship development, maintenance, and termination in relationship contexts including 
friendships romantic partners, families, and relationships with co-workers and supervisors. 48 lecture hours. 
SPCH 1321 – Business and Professional Communication. 3 credit hours. Study and application of 
communication within the business and professional context. Special emphasis will be given to 
communication competencies in presentations, dyads, teams and technologically mediated formats. 48 
lecture hours. 
 
SRGT 1260 – Clinical-Surgical Technology/ Technologist I. 2 credit hours. A health-related work-based 
learning experience that enables the student to apply specialized occupational theory, skills, and concepts. 
Direct supervision is provided by the clinical professional. 96 clinical hours. Prerequisite: SRGT 1405. 
Corequisites: SRGT 1409.  
 
SRGT 1360 – Clinical-Surgical Technology/ Technologist II. 3 credit hours. A health-related work-based 
learning experience that enables the student to apply specialized occupational theory, skills, and concepts. 
Direct supervision is provided by the clinical professional. 256 clinical hours. Prerequisites: SRGT 1260 
and SRGT 1409. Corequisites: SRGT 1541 and SRGT 1542.  
 
SRGT 1405 – Introduction to Surgical Technology. 4 credit hours. Introduction to surgical technology 
theory, surgical pharmacology and anesthesia, technological sciences, and patient care concepts. 48 lecture 
and 48 lab hours. Prerequisites: BIOL 2401, BIOL 2402, HITT 1305, STSU 0X00, ENGL 1301, MATH 
1314 or 1332, PSYC 2301 or 2314, RNSG 1208, and creative arts core. Optional corequisite: BIOL 2420. 
Lab fee. 
 
SRGT 1409 – Fundamental of Perioperative Concepts and Techniques. 4 credit hours. In-depth 
coverage of perioperative concepts such as aseptic/sterile principles and practices, infectious processes, 
wound healing, and creation and maintenance of the sterile field. 64 lecture hours. Pre-requisites: SRGT 
1405. Co-requisites: SRGT 1260 
 
SRGT 1460 – Clinical-Surgical Technology/ Technologist II. 4 credit hours. A health-related work-based 
learning experience that enables the student to apply specialized occupational theory, skills, and concepts. 
The clinical professional provides direct supervision. 192 clinical hours. Prerequisites:  SRGT 1542 and 
SRGT 1360. Corequisites: SRGT 2130. 
 
SRGT 1541 – Surgical Procedures I. 5 credit hours. Introduction to surgical procedures and related 
pathologies. Emphasis on surgical procedures related to general, obstetrics/gynecology, genitourinary, 
otorhinolaryngology and orthopedic surgical specialties incorporating instruments, equipment, and supplies 
 
 
 
required for perioperative patient care. 64 lecture and 48 lab hours. Prerequisites: SRGT 1409 and SRGT 
1260. Corequisite: SRGT 1360. Lab fee. 
 
SRGT 1542 – Surgical Procedures II. 5 credit hours. Introduction to surgical procedures and related 
pathologies. 
Emphasis 
on 
surgical 
procedures 
related 
to 
thoracic, 
peripheral 
vascular, 
plastic/reconstructive, ophthalmology, cardiac, and neurological surgical specialties incorporating 
instruments, equipment, and supplies required for perioperative patient care. 64 lecture and 48 lab hours. 
Prerequisite:  SRGT 1541. Corequisites: SRGT 1360. Lab fee. 
 
SRGT 2130 – Professional Readiness. 1-hour credit. Transition into the professional role of the surgical 
technologist. Includes professional readiness for employment, attaining certification, and maintaining 
certification status. A capstone experience. 16 lecture hours. Prerequisites: SRGT 1542 and SRGT 1360. 
Corequisites: SRGT 1460 and SRGT 2360. 
 
SRGT 2360 – Clinical-Surgical Technology/Technologist III. 3 credit hours. A health-related work-
based learning experience that enables the student to apply specialized occupational theory, skills, and 
concepts. The clinical professional provides direct supervision. 288 clinical hours. Prerequisite:  SRGT 
1460. Corequisite: SRGT 2130. 
 
STSU 0300 – Student Success. Institutional credit. Psychology of learning and success. Examines factors 
that underlie learning, success, and personal development in higher education. Topics covered include 
information processing, memory, strategic learning, self-regulation, goal setting, motivation, educational 
and career planning, and learning styles. Techniques of study such as time management, listening and note 
taking, text marking, library and research skills, preparing for examinations, and utilizing learning resources 
are covered. Includes courses in college orientation and developments of students’ academic skills that 
apply to all disciplines. It is a course designed to introduce critical thinking concepts and to provide 
opportunities for the student to acquire learning strategies for academic success. This course will cluster 
students into teaching modules according to their TSI requirement deficiencies in all three sections of TSI 
Assessment (reading, writing and math). Also, can be relevant for survival skills course. 32 lecture and 16 
lab hours. Lab fee.
 
TECA 1303 – Families, School, and Community. 3 credit hours. A study of the child, family, community, 
and schools, including parent education and involvement, family and community lifestyles, child abuse, 
and current family life issues. Course content must be aligned as applicable with State Board for Educator 
Certification Pedagogy and Professional Responsibilities standards and coincide with the National 
Association for the Education of Young Children position statement related to developmentally appropriate 
practices for children from birth through age eight. Requires students to participate in field experiences 
with children from infancy through age 12 in a variety of settings with varied and diverse populations. The 
course includes 32 hours of field experiences and 32 lecture hours each week. 2 lab field experience hours 
must be conducted weekly to equal 32 hours for the semester. Lab fee. 
 
TECA 1311 – Educating Young Children. 3 credit hours. An introduction to the education of the young 
child, including developmentally appropriate practices and programs, theoretical and historical 
perspectives, ethical and professional responsibilities, and current issues. Course content must be aligned 
as applicable with State Board for Educator Certification Pedagogy and Professional Responsibilities 
standards and coincide with the National Association for the Education of Young Children position 
statement related to developmentally appropriate practices for children from birth through age eight. 
Requires students to participate in field experiences with children from infancy through age 12 in a variety 
 
 
 
of settings with varied and diverse populations.  The course includes 32 field experiences and 32 lecture 
hours each week. 2 lab field experience hours must be conducted weekly to equal 32 hours for the semester. 
Lab fee. 
 
TECA 1318 – Wellness of the Young Child. 3 credit hours. A study of the factors that impact the well-
being of the young child including healthy behavior, food, nutrition, fitness, and safety practices. Focuses 
on local and national standards and legal implications of relevant policies and regulations. Course content 
must be aligned as applicable with State Board for Educator Certification Pedagogy and Professional 
Responsibilities standards and coincide with the National Association for the Education of Young Children 
position statement related to developmentally appropriate practices for children from birth to age eight. 
Requires students to participate in field experiences with children from infancy through age 12 in a variety 
of settings with varied and diverse populations. The course includes 32 field experiences and 32 lecture 
hours. 2 lab field experience hours per week must be conducted weekly to equal 32 hours for the semester. 
Lab fee. 
 
TECA 1354 – Child Growth & Development. 3 credit hours. A study of the physical, emotional, social, 
language, and cognitive factors impacting growth and development of children through adolescence. 48 
lecture hours.  
 
TECM 1301 – Industrial Mathematics. 3 credit hours.  Math skills applicable to industrial occupations.  
Includes fraction and decimal manipulation, measurement, percentage, and problem-solving techniques for 
equations and ratio/proportion plications. 48 lecture hours. 
 
VNSG 1138 – Mental Illness. 1-hour credit. Study of human behavior with emphasis on emotional and 
mental abnormalities and modes of treatment incorporating the nursing process. 16 lecture hours. 
 
VNSG 1219 – Professional Development. 2 credit hours. Study of the importance of professional growth. 
Topics include the role of licensed vocational nurse in the multi-disciplinary health care team, professional 
organizations, and continuing education. 32 lecture hours. Prerequisites: VNSG 1226, 1304, 1361, 1330, 
1331, 1362, 1405, 1423, and 1429. Corequisites: VNSG 1238, 1334, 1432, and 1363. Specialty exam fees. 
 
VNSG 1226 – Gerontology. 2 credit hours. Overview of the normal physical, psychosocial, and cultural 
aspects of the aging process. Addresses common disease processes of aging. Exploration of perceptions 
toward care of the older adult. 32 lecture hours. Prerequisites:  RNSG 1208. Corequisites: VNSG 1304, 
1405, 1423, and 1361.  
 
VNSG 1230 – Maternal-Neonatal Nursing. 2 credit hours. A study of the biological, psychological, and 
sociological concepts applicable to basic needs of the family including childbearing and neonatal care. 
Utilization of the nursing process in the assessment and management of the childbearing family. Topics 
include physiological changes related to pregnancy, fetal development, and nursing care of the family 
during labor and delivery and the puerperium. 32 lecture hours. Lab and specialty exam fees. 
 
VNSG 1234 – Pediatrics. 2 credit hours. Study of the care of the pediatric patient and family during health 
and disease. Emphasis on growth and developmental needs utilizing the nursing process. 32 lecture hours. 
 
VNSG 1238 – Mental Illness. 2 credit hours. Study of human behavior with emphasis on emotional and 
mental abnormalities and modes of treatment incorporating the nursing process. 32 lecture hours. 
Prerequisites: VNSG 1226, 1304, 1330, 1331, 1361, 1362 1405, 1423, and 1429. Corequisites: VNSG 1219, 
1334, 1432, and 1363. Specialty exam fees. 
 
 
 
 
VNSG 1304 – Foundations of Nursing. 3 credit hours. Introduction to the nursing profession including 
history, standards of practice, legal and ethical issues, and role of the vocational nurse. Topics include 
mental health, therapeutic communication, cultural and spiritual diversity, nursing process, and holistic 
awareness. 48 lecture hours. Corequisites: VNSG 1226, 1361, 1405, 1423, and 1304. Prerequisites:  RNSG 
1208. Specialty exam fees. 
 
VNSG 1330 – Maternal/Newborn Nursing. 3 credit hours. A study of the biological, psychological, and 
sociological concepts applicable to basic needs of the family relating to childbearing and neonatal care. 
Utilization of the nursing process in the assessment and management of the child bearing family. Topics 
include physiological changes related to pregnancy, fetal development, and nursing care of the family 
during labor and delivery and the puerperium. 48 lecture hours. Prerequisites: VNSG 1226, 1304, 1361, 
1405 and 1423. Corequisites: VNSG 1133, 1136, 1331, 1362, and 1429. Specialty exam fees. 
 
VNSG 1331 – Pharmacology. 3 credit hours. Fundamentals of medications and their diagnostic, 
therapeutic and curative effects. Includes nursing interventions utilizing the nursing process. 48 lecture 
hours. Prerequisites: VNSG 1238, 1304, 1361, 1405, and 1423. Corequisites: VNSG 1330, 1331, 1362, and 
1429. Specialty exam fees. 
 
VNSG 1334 – Pediatric Nursing. 3 credit hours. Study of the care of the pediatric patient and family 
during health and disease. Emphasis on growth and development needs. 48 lecture hours. Prerequisites: 
VNSG 1331, 1429, 1330, and 1362. Corequisites: VNSG 1219, 1238, 1432, and 1363. Specialty exam fees. 
 
VNSG 1360 – Clinical Nursing. 3 credit hours. A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Placement in summer session, following first year nursing curriculum 
– Lufkin campus only. 288 clinical hours. Prerequisites: RNSG 1205, 1215, 1309, 1262, 1301, 1341, 1363 
and current CPR card. Corequisite: VNSG 1570.   
 
VNSG 1361 – Clinical Nursing. 3 credit hours. A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. 256 clinical hours. Prerequisite: A current CPR card. Corequisites: 
VNSG 1226, 1304, 1304, 1226, and 1423.  Lab fee. 
 
VNSG 1362 – Clinical Nursing. 3 credit hours. A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Placement in second semester. 256 clinical hours. Prerequisites: 
VNSG 1304, 1405, 1423, 1361 and a current CPR card. Corequisites: VNSG 1331, 1429, and 1330. Lab 
fee. 
 
VNSG 1363 – Clinical Nursing. 3 credit hours. A health-related work-based learning experience that 
enables the student to apply specialized occupational theory, skills, and concepts. Direct supervision is 
provided by the clinical professional. Placement in third semester. 256 clinical hours. Prerequisites: VNSG 
1331, 1330, 1429, and 1362. Corequisites: VNSG 1219, 1238, 1334, and 1432. Lab fee. 
 
VNSG 1423 – Basic Nursing Skills. 4 credit hours. Mastery of basic nursing skills and competencies for 
a variety of health care settings. Using the nursing process as the foundation for all nursing interventions. 
80 lecture hours. Prerequisites:  RNSG 1208. Corequisites: VNSG 1304, 1361, and 1405. 
 
VNSG 1429 – Medical-Surgical Nursing I. 4 credit hours. Application of the nursing process to the care 
of adult patients experiencing medical-surgical conditions in the health-illness continuum in a variety of 
 
 
 
health care settings. 64 lecture hours. Prerequisites: VNSG 1226, 1304, 1423, 1361, and 1405. Corequisites: 
VNSG 1330, 1331, and 1362.  
 
VNSG 1432 – Medical-Surgical Nursing II. 4 credit hours. Continuation of Medical-Surgical Nursing I 
with application of the nursing process to the care of adult patients experiencing medical-surgical conditions 
along the health-illness continuum in a variety of health care settings. 64 lecture hours. Prerequisites: VNSG 
1226, 1330, 1331, 1362, and 1429. Corequisites: VNSG 1219, 1238, 1304, 1361, 1405, 1432, and 1363. 
Specialty exam fees. 
 
WLDG 1313 – Introduction to Blueprint Reading for Welders. 3 credit hours. A study of industrial 
blueprints. Emphasis placed on terminology, symbols, graphic description, and welding processes. Includes 
systems of measurement and industry standards, also includes interpretation of plans and drawings used by 
industry to facilitate field application and production. Define terms and abbreviations; interpret views, lines, 
dimensions, detail drawings and welding symbols; identify structural shapes; demonstrate the proper use 
of measuring devices; calculate dimensions; and develop bill of materials. 48 lecture hours.  
 
WLDG 1337 – Introduction to Welding Metallurgy. 3 credit hours. A study of ferrous and non-ferrous 
metals from the ore to the finished product. Emphasis is on metal alloys, heat-treating, hard surfacing, 
welding techniques, forging, foundry processes, and mechanical properties of metals including hardness, 
machineability, and ductility. The student will describe technical terms used in the various phases of 
metallurgy, from early history to classification of steel; will discuss ferrous and non-ferrous metals and how 
they are processed and used in industry; and describe mechanical and physical properties, surface 
treatments, and heat treatments of metals. 48 lecture hours. Lab fee. 
 
WLDG 1391 – Special Topics in Welder/Welding Technologist. 3 credit hours. Topics address recently 
identified current events, skills, knowledge, and/or attitudes and behaviors pertinent to the technology or 
occupation and relevant to the professional development of the student. This course was designed to be 
repeated multiple times to improve student proficiency. The student outcomes/objectives are determined 
by local occupational need and business and industry trends. Prerequisite: Work Keys test sections for 
Applied Math Level 4 and Reading for Information Level 4. Must have completed 32 credit hours of 
welding. 48 lecture hours. 
 
WLDG 1428 – Intro to Shielded Metal Arc Welding (SMAW). 4 credit hours. An introduction to 
shielded metal arc welding (SMAW) process. Emphasis is on power sources, electrode selection, oxy-fuel 
cutting, and various joint designs. Instruction provided in SMAW fillet welds in various positions. The 
student will select electrodes and amperage settings for various thicknesses of materials and welding 
positions; define principles of arc welding; and interpret electrode classifications. The student will perform 
SMAW operations in various positions using selected electrodes and different joint designs. 32 lecture and 
64 lab hours. Lab fee. 
 
WLDG 1435 – Intro to Pipe Welding. 4 credit hours. An introduction to welding of pipe using the shielded 
metal arc welding process, including electrode selection, equipment setup, and safe shop practices. 
Emphasis is on weld positions 1G and 2G using various electrodes. The student will describe equipment 
and required pipe preparation and perform 1G and 2G welds using various electrodes. 32 lecture and 64 lab 
hours. Pre or corequisite: WLDG 2443. Lab fee. 
 
WLDG 1457 – Intermediate Shielded Metal Arc Welding (SMAW). 4 credit hours. A study of the 
production of various fillets and groove welds. Preparation of specimens for testing in all test positions. 
The student will identify principles of arc welding; describe arc welding operations of fillet and groove 
joints; explain heat treatments of low alloy steels; and explain weld size and profiles. The student will 
prepare test plates; perform fillet welds in the overhead position; perform air carbon arc weld removal; 
 
 
 
perform bevel groove welds with backing plates in various positions; and demonstrate use of tools and 
equipment. 32 lecture and 64 lab hours. Pre or corequisite: WLDG 1428. Lab fee. 
 
WLDG 2288 – Internship Welder/Welding Technology. 2 credit hours. A work-based learning 
experience that enables the student to apply specialized occupational theory, skills and concepts. A learning 
plan is developed by the college and the employer. As outlined in the learning plan, apply the theory, 
concepts, and skills involved in specialized materials, tools, equipment, procedures, regulations, laws, and 
interactions within and among political, economic, environmental, social and legal systems associated with 
the occupation and the business/industry; and will demonstrate legal and ethical behavior, safety practices, 
interpersonal and teamwork skills, and appropriate written and verbal communication skills using the 
terminology of the occupation and the business/industry.  128 hours of practical experience.  Prerequisite:  
Student must have completed 36 hours of welding courses.  
 
WLDG 2355 – Advanced Welding Metallurgy. 3 credit hours. A study of metallurgy as it applies to 
welding, including structure, identification, and testing of metals; temperature changes and their effect on 
welded metals; properties of metals, and factors affecting weldability of ferrous and non-ferrous metals. 
The student will identify the structure and properties of metals and describe changes that occur when welds 
are made. The student will perform various metallurgy tests of ferrous and non-ferrous metals. 48 lecture 
hours. 
 
WLDG 2406 – Intermediate Pipe Welding. 4 credit hours. A comprehensive course on the welding of 
pipe using the shielded metal arc welding (SMAW) process. Position of welds will be 1G, 2G, 5G, and 6G 
using various electrodes. Topics covered include electrode selection, equipment setup, and safe shop 
practices. The student will describe equipment and required pipe preparation. The student will perform 1G, 
2G, 5 G, and 6G welds using various electrodes. 32 lecture and 64 lab hours. Pre or corequisite: WLDG 
1435. Lab fee. 
 
WLDG 2413 – Welding Using Multiple Processes. 4 credit hours. Instruction using layout tools and 
blueprint reading with demonstration and guided practices with some of the following welding processes: 
oxy-fuel gas cutting and welding, gas metal arc welding, flux-cored arc welding, gas tungsten arc welding, 
or any other approved welding process. The student will identify proper safety equipment and tools and 
identify and select the proper welding process for a given application. The student will demonstrate the 
ability to analyze situations and make decisions using skills as taught concerning safety and electrode 
selections; and select the most economic and practical welding process for the given tasks. 32 lecture and 
64 lab hours. Pre or corequisite: WLDG 2453. Lab fee. 
 
WLDG 2432 – Welding Automation. 4 credit hours. Overview of automated welding and cutting 
applications.  Special emphasis on safe use and operation of equipment.  Set up, program, operate, and 
troubleshoot various automated welding and/or cutting equipment. 32 lecture and 64 lab hours.  
Prerequisite: 16 hours of welding courses. Lab fee. 
 
WLDG 2443 – Advanced Shielded Metal Arc Welding (SMAW). 4 credit hours. Advanced topics based 
on accepted welding codes. Training provided with various electrodes in shielded metal arc welding 
processes with open V-groove joints in all positions. The student will describe effects of preheating and 
post weld heating; explain precautions used when welding various metals and alloys; distinguish between 
qualification and certification procedures; and discuss problems of welding discontinuities. The student 
will perform open groove welds with mild steel and low alloy electrodes. 32 lecture and 64 lab hours. Pre 
or corequisite: WLDG 1457. Lab fee. 
 
WLDG 2451 – Advanced Gas Tungsten Arc Welding (GTAW). 4 credit hours. Advanced topics in 
GTAW welding, including welding in various positions and directions. Demonstrate proficiency in various 
 
 
 
welding positions; describe safety rules and equipment used; and describe the effects of welding parameters 
in GTAW; weld various joint designs; diagnose welding problems; and perform visual inspection. 32 
lecture and 64 lab hours.  Pre- or corequisite: WLDG 2453. Lab fee. 
WLDG 2453 – Advanced Pipe Welding. 4 credit hours. Advanced topics involving welding of pipe using 
the shielded metal arc welding process. Topics include electrode selection, equipment setup, and safe shop 
practices. Emphasis is on weld positions 5G and 6G using various electrodes. The student will describe 
equipment and required pipe preparation and perform 5G and 6G welds using various electrodes. 32 lecture 
and 64 lab hours. Pre or corequisite: WLDG 2406. Lab fee. 
 
 
 
